* 1700678
* SCME: Scaling Microsystems Support
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2023
* John Wood, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,947,659.00

Microsystems, also known as Micro Electro Mechanical systems (MEMS), are
becoming prevalent in daily life (e.g., wearable sensors, gaming consoles,
sporting gear, smart phones, medical devices, and autonomous vehicles). This
trend is driven by increasing functionality, decreasing device costs, and the
Internet of Things (IoT) that need billions of sensors, actuators and
communications devices. Given this increasing demand for microsystems, which has
been growing at double-digits annually, there is both a jobs gap and a skills
gap for such technologies, as well as STEM at large. The Southwest Center for
Microsystems Education (SCME) will transition to a Support Center to work with
community colleges and professional organizations to infuse microsystems
educational materials into standardized job training and educational systems
across several STEM disciplines. The STEM students benefit by being presented
with alternative high technology microsystems career paths and having the
knowledge to pursue them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCME has built a large portfolio
of microsystems-based STEM educational materials and the supporting delivery
infrastructure that have benefited hundreds of educators and thousands of their
students. As a support center, SCME seeks to increase this impact several fold
by providing asynchronous online and hands-on adaptable resources and the
technical mentoring support needed for educational organizations to adopt and
adapt SCME materials into their traditional STEM curricula. The SCME support
center will provide a vehicle for partners to share their integration
experiences and curricular modifications through conferences and online sharing
opportunities. UNM will partner with the Lone Star College (LSC) system
initially to pilot the introduction of microsystems into STEM courses.
Historically, SCME has provided targeted professional development and
microsystems courses to both Hispanic and Native American serving secondary and
post-secondary institutions. SCME, with LSC and its Office of Diversity
Initiatives, and student and industry professional associations, will provide
scaled MEMS education, mentoring and career advisement targeted at
underrepresented groups. This effort will inform SCME as it extends its reach
using the standard of "Scaling Educational Innovations", and illustrates
possible career pathways for technician students in the expanding microsystems
arena.