* 1700236
* Research Initiation Award: Mathematical Modeling On the Geometric Optics Problem of Refraction
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Henok Mawi, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 02/28/2023
* USD 275,509.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Howard
University has potential broader and societal impact in a number of areas. The
project seeks to investigate mathematical models that originate from geometrical
optics. The research crosses the fields of mathematics, engineering and physics
and has potential applications in the synthesis, design and manufacturing of
optical systems in an efficient and cost effective manner. Undergraduate
students will gain research experiences and the research will be integrated in a
number of mathematics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The refractor problem is an
inverse problem in geometric optics that is related to modeling of interface
surfaces between two media that have different optical properties. The goal of
this work is to obtain and analyze surfaces which are capable of redirecting
light rays emanating from a point source located in one of the media into a set
of directions or onto a specific target located in the other media, in such a
way that the input and output intensities of the rays are prespecified. The
application of the laws of geometric optics and conservation of energy
principles to formulate the mathematical model will naturally lead to second
order nonlinear partial differential equations of Monge - Ampère type. The
determination of the surfaces will incite problems of existence, uniqueness and
regularity of solutions to nonlinear partial differential equations and mass
transport problems. The specific objectives of this project include: developing
a computational algorithm for the near field refractor problem in isotropic
media, formulating mathematical models of geometrical optics problems in
anisotropic media such as crystals, finding numerical and analytical solutions
for near field and far field refractor problems in anisotropic media and
investigating the regularity of analytical solutions for near field and far
field refractor problems in anisotropic media. The consideration of anisotropic
media will advance the mathematical theory of geometric optics problems to media
of propagation that are more general and will make it more amenable to several
optics applications including optical devices, design of freeform refractive
beam shapers and laser optics.