* 1700404
* Characterization of Trace Spaces and Differential Structures on Subsets of Euclidean Space
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Arie Israel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 152,998.00

This research project is focused on applications of extension theory to problems
in geometry, partial differential equations, computer science, and data
processing. In the machine learning paradigm, one typically observes a
collection of data that represents the measurements of a physical process. The
data may be represented in terms of a large number of variables. To learn the
physical structures inherent to the data, one looks for a small number of latent
variables that describe a low-dimensional manifold which contains or "passes
close to" the data points. Whereas classical statistical regression looks for a
linear relationship in the data, manifold learning allows for possibly non-
linear descriptions. The principal investigator plans to develop practical
manifold learning algorithms using techniques from extension theory. Consider
for instance the problem of interpolating a set of data by a smooth, convex
hypersurface. Whereas all currently available solutions to this problem require
that the data points be sampled uniformly from the entire surface, the principal
investigator proposes an approach which would work even when there are no
sampled data on large pieces of the surface. The proposed research will
introduce new connections between the fields of harmonic analysis and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past few decades have witnessed the
development of abstract notions of differentiation and curvature on nonsmooth
spaces. To study singular solutions to mean curvature flow, for instance, it is
important to develop a generalized notion of curvature. Another achievement has
been Cheeger's theory of differentiation on metric measure spaces. Cheeger's
spaces carry a notion of distance and volume, but surprisingly, they lack the
structure of local coordinate charts usually required to define a differential
calculus. One shortcoming of this approach is its inherent limitation to first
order theories. That is, one can define a first order differential operator, but
the notion of a second order operator, such as the Laplacian or heat operator,
is meaningless at this level of abstraction. The principal investigator proposes
an alternate perspective: Assume the space is embedded as a subset of a
Euclidean space. One can take the differential calculus on the Euclidean space
and push it forward to define a calculus on the subset. This simple technique
allows one to define high-order tangent and cotangent bundles on subsets of
Euclidean space. An issue with the approach is that the computation of the
bundles is highly nontrivial. The first order tangent bundle can be defined by a
standard blow-up argument, but the higher order "paratangent bundles" are
difficult to understand. By focusing on a class of explicit examples of
algebraic varieties with cuspidal singularities, the principal investigator will
find new methods for computing with these abstract spaces. The principal
investigator will develop a notion of divided difference quotients on algebraic
and semialgebraic sets.