* 1700855
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Plant response to water availability and drought in a changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Jennifer Powers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 16,276.00

Drought has been increasing in frequency and severity worldwide for the last 60
years, and the increase is expected to continue over the next several decades.
Extreme drought events are already taking their toll on trees and other woody
plants all over the world, leading to widespread forest mortality. As greenhouse
gas emissions continue to rise on a global scale, the importance of forests
increases, as trees can take up carbon dioxide and store it for centuries in the
form of wood. However, the death of trees during drought reduces how much can be
taken up and increases the amount of carbon dioxide released back into the air
when dead trees decompose. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant will
provide funds to evaluate which kinds of plants are more susceptible to drought,
and the mechanisms that determine plants? vulnerability to extreme drought
events. This research has the potential to reveal characteristics that make
woody plants more or less tolerant to drought and may increase the ability to
predict species? responses to extreme drought events. The results will inform
local land managers and policy-makers on which tree species are more tolerant to
drought and therefore improve plans for restoration and management of forests in
the face of increasing drought severity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
use novel methods to determine the resistance of woody plants to extreme drought
using plant anatomical features and physiological measurements. The major cause
of tree mortality from drought is embolism accumulation in the water-conducting
pipes of plants that obstruct proper water movement from the soil up to the
leaves. The researchers will study which anatomical traits make plants more
susceptible to embolisms. This work will be conducted in both dry and wet
temperate and tropical forests to provide information on how plants growing
under different rainfall environments respond to drought. The project will
include workshops with public primary school teachers in rural Northwestern
Costa Rica, which is an area with a history of extreme droughts that have
resulted in widespread forest mortality. These workshops will enhance Costa
Rican primary school curriculum through active learning of how plants obtain and
use water and the impact of drought on native forests.