* 1700406
* Research Initiation Award: Uncertainty Modeling, Probabilistic Models, and Life-cycle Reliability of Floating Offshore Wind Turbines
* EHR,HRD
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Doeun Choe, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 299,995.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at her home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Prairie
View A&M University has potential broader and societal impact in a number of
areas. Floating offshore wind turbines (FOWTs) have been considered as one of
the most promising alternatives to access energy resources with vast available
space and fewer restrictions and regulations. The project seeks to analyze
floating offshore wind turbine uncertainties that arise due to the ocean
environment and hydrodynamic calculations, as well as due to uncertainties in
the structural and mechanical systems, which threaten the reliability and the
feasibility of FOWTs. Undergraduate students, high school students and students
from community colleges will gain research experiences through this project.

The current floating offshore wind turbine technologies have challenges to be
resolved in order to produce sustainable and cost-effective power. Semi-
submersible type FOWTs are known to be one of the most promising options with
construction and maintenance cost problems yet to be solved. This project
focuses on identification of the uncertainties and on estimating the structural
safety factors. The research objectives of this project are to: understand the
uncertainties that exist in FOWTs; predict the structural behavior and life-
cycle structural reliability of FOWTs; and obtain safety factors for structural
design of semi-submersible-type FOWTs that uniquely consider the uncertainties
and coupled dynamics of aerodynamics of the wind turbine and hydrodynamics of
the floating body under extreme environmental loads. By considering the
uncertainties found, the probabilistic capacity and demand models for structural
components of FOWTs will be developed using a Bayesian Method. Lastly, the
developed models will be used to estimate the life-cycle structural reliability
and to obtain the safety factors for the base tower moment and shear forces of
FOWTs. The results of this research may eventually reduce the current challenge
of the high cost of FOWTs.