* 1700967
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Proof of Concept Multifunction Micro-drone and Weather Surveillance System
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Michael Zink, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 215,930.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on demonstrating the use of
low-cost radar systems for micro-drone and severe weather surveillance in urban
and airport settings. The Federal Aviation Administration forecasts sales of
seven million drones in 2020 following recent regulations allowing routine use
of drones in the national airspace. While a vast majority of drone operators
will likely follow the regulations and drones will be successfully monitored,
non-cooperative drones or drones that have lost communication with their
operators, will pose a significant threat to airport facilities where no
intrusions should be allowed on the air field, critical infrastructure such as
military bases or power reactors, and stadiums and arenas where drones can
disrupt activities, endanger lives and cause economic losses. These facilities
also risk similar outcomes when severe weather unexpectedly disrupts operations.
This project will demonstrate the feasibility of a single radar-based
surveillance system that can simultaneously provide early warning of drone
intrusions and impending severe weather. The development of a multi-function
surveillance system with multiple applications, could help make installations
economical, with the costs shared between various agencies in new public-private
partnership models of infrastructure acquisition, operations and data sharing.

This project proposes the use of dual polarized phased array radars that can
conduct rapid electronic scanning of the atmosphere to identify and discriminate
between different hard targets such as micro-drones and birds and atmospheric
targets such as hydrometeors, whose characteristics help determine the type of
weather. This project will help develop an understanding of dual polarization
radar signatures of various micro-drones, signal processing algorithms that help
distinguish such targets from clutter in the low atmosphere, and new tracking
algorithms tuned to the 'stop, hover and rapidly accelerate' movement of micro-
drones. While the use of phased array radars to track severe weather has already
resulted in early commercial prototypes, this project will result in design and
operational strategies to conduct micro-drone and weather surveillance using the
same system.

Graduate students involved in this project will benefit from direct interaction
with industry stakeholders and end users such as airport managers. This includes
industry mentoring and participation in commercialization activities such as
patent searches, intellectual property protection, and participation in business
plan competitions. Teams of undergraduate students will be involved in systems
engineering activities. The proof of concept demonstration to potential
investors, manufacturers and customers, will lead to the specification of user
requirements, development of commercial prototypes and eventually tenders and
sales that result in installations. Partners includes firms such as Raytheon
Company and Scientific Systems Company, Inc. that will help guide
commercialization activities and end users such as Dallas Fort Worth
International Airport that will provide end user needs and validate the proof-
of-concept demonstration results.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships and the Division of Engineering Education; reflecting the alignment
of this project with the respective goals of the two divisions and their
programs.