* 1700585
* City Career College - C3
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Donald Pohl, Ranken Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2022
* USD 826,159.00

The City Career College (C3) project forms a partnership between Ranken
Technical College, the St. Louis Public Schools, and industry to create clearly
defined, accelerated career pathways to employment in advanced manufacturing and
information technology. Over the next decade, over half of nearly 3.5 million
manufacturing jobs are expected to remain unfilled due to retirements, changing
technology, global competition and the relatively low number of students
pursuing science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) careers. The talent
shortage impacts two fields in particular: Advanced Manufacturing and
Information Technology (IT). In a study recently conducted by the Manufacturing
Institute, 82% of manufacturers reported a moderate or serious skills gap, and
74% of manufacturers reported that the skills gap had a negative impact their
ability to expand. A similar gap exists in the IT industry. To bridge this gap,
apprenticeships offer a promising method for ensuring that students have the
skills required needed to transition into high-demand professions. They offer a
viable alternative to a four-year college degree. Traditionally associated with
the construction trades, apprenticeships are evolving to include high-growth
industries such as IT, advanced manufacturing and healthcare, enabling
students/employees to "learn while they earn" and study first-hand under the
guidance of more experienced practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3 serves the
national interest by creating a pipeline to these high-demand professions.
Students will enter the pipeline through informal summer STEM learning
activities at secondary schools to engage them in the targeted career paths. C3
will assess and prepare students to participate in the City Career College,
where they will attend classes at Ranken Technical College and earn degree
credit throughout their senior year of high school. Career counselors, mentors
and tutors will guide the students and connect them directly with employers
though paid internships, job shadowing and on-campus microenterprises. By the
end of the first year of college, participants will have earned an associate
degree and be ready for employment. C3 will evaluate the impact of cultivation
and acceleration on student recruitment and retention practices and efforts,
examine techniques to attract minority and under-represented students, and
assess the impact of frequent interaction of students with faculty and industry
advisors/mentors. C3 will create a model that has the potential to transform
workforce preparation on a broad scale.