* 1700703
* Promoting the Development of STEM Tech Employability Skills: A Review of Practices and Needs in the ATE Community
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Louise Yarnall, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 03/31/2020
* USD 359,984.00

Recognizing the importance of a highly qualified technician workforce, industry
and education leaders look to community and technical colleges' technician
programs for innovations, lessons learned, best practices, and guidance on
cultivating critical academic and career skillsets (non-technical skills) that
contribute to the health and security of the nation's Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) infrastructure. Practitioners in the
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) community and policy makers face an
urgency to re-envision learning and environments and workplaces to better
support individuals in building critical and complex non-technical employability
skillsets. Based on a review of the research and practitioner literature, the
cognitive employability skills associated with problem solving appear to enjoy a
relatively robust level of investment and visibility, but the employability
skills associated with interpersonal skills and the intrapersonal skills of
coping and maintaining a positive "mindset" (e.g., positive attitude,
persistence, and flexibility) are likely to occur informally and under the
radar. However, unlike technical skills, employability skills are ill defined.
Findings from the qualitative research study will yield research-based guidance
for practitioners in education, policy makers, and employers to make informed
decisions on how to promoted the development of employability skills and to
advocate for needed resources. Addressing a gap in the literature on academic
and career development in technician education, the targeted research project
addresses will feature a qualitative research study that examines and
synthesizes the literature and expert knowledge on employability skills. Three
questions are investigated in the exploratory empirical research study. What are
the employability skills? learning principles identified in the research and why
are they important in technical contexts, such and Information Technology (IT)
and Advanced Manufacturing (AM)? What are the practices used to develop ad
measure employability skills in IT and AM and how do the specifically support
the needs of underrepresented groups? What are the most promising directions for
future development and evaluation o employability skills in workforce
programming practice, research, and policy? Three qualitative research methods
will be used to answer the research questions. This overall approach replicates
the approach one taken in a previous investigation into general programs for
supporting chronically unemployed and underemployed individuals and
underrepresented minority adult students in post-secondary education and entry-
level employment. The narrative research synthesis is informed by the
conceptualization of research syntheses proposed by Cooper (1998, 2006) and
Campbell and associates (1992). The Interviews with expert informants in
workforce development, technician education, and the industry selected industry
sectors will deepen an understanding of employability skills. The systematic
examination and iterative refinement of the synthesis of the research and expert
knowledge will assess data saturation (e.g., knowing how many interviews are
needed to provide sufficient codes and themes for replicable findings) and
ensure support the development of stable data categories.