* 1700083
* Support of the Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2018
* USD 95,000.00

The National Academies' Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics (CATS)
is a primary interface between the research enterprise and federal agencies that
rely on the statistical sciences. The Committee provides objective and
authoritative advice on how best to apply the tools and perspectives of
statistics to practical problems of national importance. In so doing, CATS
strengthens the policy-making process; increases the visibility of, and
appreciation for, the statistical sciences; and identifies growth areas for the
discipline. CATS increases the visibility of the statistical sciences among
agencies of the federal government and within the policy community and enables
statisticians to play larger roles in science policy. It does this by involving
leading statistical scientists in workshops and studies that help federal
decision-makers address their technical challenges. Through its execution of
this function, CATS strengthens and broadens the interface between the
statistics research community and widespread users of those research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CATS consists of pro bono experts from across the
range of statistical sciences, particularly those with expertise related to data
science, physical sciences, Earth sciences, engineering, biomedical research,
and health care. CATS meetings provide opportunities to build the interfaces
noted above and to help design and oversee CATS activities, which are funded
separately. Its position as part of the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine enables CATS to also strengthen links between the
statistical sciences and other fields of science, engineering, and medicine by
involving statisticians in multidisciplinary studies, workshops, and
conferences.