* 1700551
* Visualizing Molecular Dynamics in Large Molecules using Intense, femtosecond, Pump-Probe Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Nora Berrah, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 454,998.00

This research program will make "molecular movies" that will be used to study
fundamental physical and chemical processes induced in molecules by laser light.
The goal of this investigation is to determine the time it takes for light-
induced transformations to occur in large molecules. This is important because
light-induced processes occur continuously in our environment, for example from
sunlight shining on earth's atmosphere, plant leaves, and human skin. This team
will record "molecular movies" by using strong table-top laser pulses. One pulse
will be used to initiate the ionization of the molecular valence electrons
orbitals, and then a second pulse and an ion detection system will be used to
capture the time-evolution of the transformation. The molecules that will be
studied, including ethanol and endohedral fullerenes, are relevant for
industries and can serve as test-pieces for the measurement protocols developed
by this team. The molecular movies that this project will produce are important
because they will reveal physical and chemical processes that drive specific
reactions with these molecules. Students and postdocs that get trained on this
project learn skills that they will use for future jobs in academia and
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will focus on
investigating the time-resolved photo-induced isomerization of alcohol and the
time evolution of endohedral fullerenes (M3N@C80) in the long-wavelength (IR)
multiphoton ionization and the tunneling regimes. The goal for the latter
experiment is to understand the role of excited super atomic molecular orbital
(SAMO) states in these two different energy regimes. The experiments will be
carried out using table-top laser pump-probe technique and the resulting charged
fragments will be detected using an electron-ion-ion coincidence monitor known
as a Cold-Target Recoil Ion Momentum Spectroscopy (COLTRIMS) system. The
underlying dynamics will thus be revealed by coincident ion-momentum imaging.
This team's contribution to advance science stems from their advanced approach
to probe, in real time, and at the femtosecond scale, physical and chemical
processes. This is achieved by using intense femtosecond table-top laser with
twin optical parametric amplifiers which will enable 2-color pump-probe
experiments and will push the current limit of fundamental femtosecond time-
resolved large molecular dynamics investigations. This work will be done in
partnership with theorists, which will allow this team to understand
quantitatively the complexity of the physical processes and which will validate
or push forward the calculations/modeling in cases of disagreements between
experiment and theory.