* 1700985
* Homological Aspects of Commutative Algebra and Applications to Modular Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Srikanth Iyengar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,999.00

One of the myriad functions of mathematics is to provide language to formulate,
and tools to solve, equations that describe the physical world. Often these
equations are algebraic in nature, such as those describing lines, circles, and
parabolas. Typically, the equations have infinitely many solutions -- think
about the equation defining a circle -- and it is usually not possible to write
down a complete list of solutions. Rather, the objective is to find ways to
study the structure of the collection of the solution set, which is called a
variety. A fruitful approach has been to consider the (algebraic) functions on
the variety. One part of this research project addresses questions that have
emerged in this endeavor. Mathematics has also been remarkably successful in
describing and studying phenomenon related to symmetry. This leads to a
mathematical structure called a group. Intriguingly, in certain contexts, there
is a way to attach a variety to a group, and in the past few years various
researchers, including the investigator, have been able to solve problems
related to groups using tools that had been developed to study varieties. A part
of the current project deals with these aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is rooted in commutative algebra, with applications also to the
representation theory of finite group schemes in positive characteristic. The
first part of the project concerns the homological aspects of modules over
commutative rings. The problems posed range from those that have arisen from the
internal developments in the subject to ones inspired by recent advances in the
broader mathematical context, notably the representation theory of algebras and
homotopy theory. The focus in the second part of the project is on the
Hochschild cohomology of commutative algebras. Classically, Hochschild
cohomology has been of interest for it is one of two main cohomology theories
that capture properties of the diagonal morphism. A different aspect of
Hochschild cohomology has begun to play an increasingly important role: Its
action on derived categories, and various triangulated categories. The problems
proposed in the second part of the project address both aspects. In recent
years, notions and techniques from commutative ring theory have proved to be
remarkably effective in solving problems in, and shedding new light on, the
representation theory of finite groups over a field of positive characteristic.
This project will develop these connections in new directions.