* 1700044
* Support for US Participants at CIRM, March 13-17, 2017  Conference: Scattering, Resonances and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Tomasz Przebinda, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2018
* USD 14,393.00

The workshop "Resonances: Geometric Scattering and Dynamics," taking place at
the Centre International de Recontres Math√©matiques (CIRM) in Luminy, France,
from March 13 to 17, will gather researchers working on the different aspects of
the geometric theory of resonances (spectral geometry, representation theory,
harmonic analysis, microlocal analysis, analytic number theory, mathematical
physics, microlocal analysis, quantum dynamics, geometric scattering theory) as
well as Ph. D. students and junior researchers from different countries. Its
objectives are to present and discuss the latest results on the geometric
aspects and dynamics of resonances, share points of view and ideas, and to
strengthen or promote interactions. The conference will give Ph.D. students and
young scientists the opportunity to meet some of the prominent researchers in
the fields related to resonances and to exchange ideas with them. To make the
more specialized talks accessible to the participants, some experts will give
tutorial and survey talks. Moreover, two afternoons will be devoted to talks of
junior participants. This will give the Ph.D. students and the postdocs the
possibility of presenting their work, which is an essential step for entering in
the world of research and for building scientific collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notion of resonance was introduced in quantum
mechanics to study metastable states of a system, that is long-lived states from
which the system deviates only with sufficiently strong disturbances.
Mathematically, resonances appear either as discrete eigenvalues of the
quantization of a classical Hamiltonian or as the eigenvalues of the transfer
operator of the classical flow. Their study, initially aimed at Schroedinger
operators on R^n, was extended to more geometric situations. Because of the role
they play in various physical contexts there has been a considerable progress in
understanding the geometry and the analysis of classical and quantum resonances
in the last years. Nevertheless, many important and basic questions are still
open. Many difficulties preventing to use classical arguments arise because of
the non-self-adjoint nature of resonances. Also, in the geometric case of
(locally) symmetric spaces, very little is known when the rank of the spaces is
bigger than 1. Partial advances have been obtained, with several different
approaches, using either harmonic analysis and representation theory, or
microlocal analysis and techniques from scattering theory such as complex
scaling. To study resonances in higher dimensional and higher rank geometric
situations, a joint effort of different mathematical communities is therefore
needed, and young researchers should have contacts with experts from the various
aspects of the theory to make significant progress. The webpage listing of the
conference: http://scientific-events.weebly.com/1604.html