* 1700091
* EAGER: Nanoparticle Enhanced Near-IR Photobacterial Conversion of Organic Waste to Hydrogen
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Doo Young Kim, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Bacteria provide many useful functions in nature and in industrial sector
ranging from degradation of wastes to production of methane to synthesis of
pharmaceuticals. Some photo-active bacteria with proper food source and light
activation can synthesize high-energy content fuel, such as, hydrogen. In
addition, nanoparticles have lot of beneficial uses which range from transparent
sunscreens to self-cleaning windows to smarter surfaces. This high risk-high
payoff research project integrates nanotechnology, photoactive bacteria, and
appropriate light source to convert waste organic acids to highly valuable clean
energy. The transformative approach localizes light with enhanced intensity to
maximize the production of hydrogen from waste organic acids. This EAGER award,
with high impact in energy, environment and global economy involves the
integration of photonics, biology, and nanostructured materials for clean fuel
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aspects of the project involve
the combination of photoresponsive bacteria, plasmonic nanoparticles, and
selective membranes to produce hydrogen from waste materials. The approach will
involve the understanding of hydrogen production from purple non-sulfur bacteria
(PNS) illuminated by light sources matched with bacteria's absorption spectrum.
More specifically, it is expected that narrowband illumination of R. Palustris
in the near-IR will enhance both hydrogen production and light conversion
efficiency. The innovative approach employs nanoparticles with localized surface
plasmon resonances immobilized on a polymer membrane surface to enhance the
intensity and scattering of light. The research will establish that if the
bacteria on top of the nanoparticles are immobilized with a thin dielectric
layer in between, it will highly enhance the overall process efficiency. There
is clearly a need for a "high risk-high reward" approach to dramatically
increase light-conversion while maintaining high substrate- conversion
efficiency with the goal of combined waste remediation and renewable energy
generation.