* 1700796
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Influences of Aerosols on Low-level Cloud-precipitation Properties over Land and Ocean using Ground-based Observations and WRF Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Timothy Logan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 85,163.00

Aerosol generation resulting from natural and anthropogenic activities is
expected to have considerable, far-reaching effects on cloud development and the
hydrologic cycle. Though the aerosol direct effect can simply be thought of as a
reduction of incoming solar radiation reaching the Earth's surface, the aerosol
indirect effect (AIE) involves a complex set of aerosol-cloud-precipitation
interactions. These indirect effects include the alteration of cloud
microphysical properties such as cloud lifetime, droplet size distribution,
liquid water content and path, optical depth, and albedo. Precipitation
processes will certainly be affected in numerous and at times, detrimental ways.
Hence, there is a major impact to society as a whole due to a heavy dependence
on the distribution of available water over a given region for public
consumption, agriculture, and industrial purposes.

Intellectual Merit: This research adopts a synergistic approach that uses the
long-term ground-based observations and retrievals from the Southern Great
Plains of the United States and Eastern North Atlantic Ocean regions to
investigate the seasonal and diurnal variations of aerosol and clouds under the
continental and maritime conditions, as well as compare their similarities and
differences. Air parcel trajectory modeling will be conducted to identify the
sources of air masses for the selected cases to investigate the AIEs over these
two regions with additional WRF simulations. This study is important because it
will aid to improve aerosol and cloud parameterizations as well as provide an
in-depth understanding of aerosol-cloud-precipitation interactions in typical
maritime and continental conditions. The following three scientific questions
(SQs) will be investigated. SQ1: What are the similarities and differences of
aerosol-cloud properties, as well as their interactions over ocean and land?
SQ2: What are the indirect effects of aerosols on cloud microphysical
properties? SQ3: How does wind shear enhance turbulent mixing and stimulate
drizzle formation?

Broader Impacts: This research will benefit society by helping to provide better
support for the modeling of aerosol-cloud-precipitation interactions which will
aid in researching the long-term distribution of available water by clouds and
precipitation processes. The far-reaching goal of this project is to further
reduce uncertainties in the climate modeling community by providing better
constraints for seasonal and regional aerosol and cloud properties. Moreover,
there will be plenty of opportunities to introduce aerosol-cloud interactions as
"real world" examples in undergraduate and graduate geoscience courses where the
students can not only investigate these examples as interdisciplinary class
projects, but also improve upon current research techniques and develop their
own theses and dissertation areas of focus.