* 1700606
* ATE Regional Center for Semiconductor &amp; Nanotechnology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Robert Geer, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,585,877.00

Semiconductor-derivative manufacturing in the northeast U.S is expanding, and
this expansion is increasing the demand for a highly qualified technical
workforce. The Northeast Advanced Technological Education Center (NEATEC)
proposes to support the education and training of technicians for the
semiconductor and semiconductor-derivative industries (i.e., those industries
based on, or incorporating, substantial Si wafer processing, compound
semiconductor wafer processing or Si polycrystalline film processing) as well as
the broader nanotech-based manufacturing industries in New York State and
Western New England. NEATEC will expand opportunities in support of academic
programs as well as targeted outreach to recruit and engage underserved and
underrepresented populations. All programs will leverage online compatible
learning management systems (e.g., Blackboard) to combine online delivery with
hands-on laboratory and/or experiential learning components at NEATEC training
and lab facilities. This includes a newly proposed ATE user facility at SUNY
Polytechnic Institute which will help promote and sustain NEATEC's
education/training content and the 'institutionalization' of that content at
2-year and 4-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Center will 1) develop
multiple academic certificate programs for technological education for a wide
range of semiconductor-derivative industries (e.g., Photovoltaic Manufacturing
(PVM), LED Lighting Manufacturing (LEDLM), Power Electronics Manufacturing
(PEM), and Integrated Photonics Manufacturing (IPM)); 2) expand commitments from
industrial collaborators for skill-standard analyses and experiential learning;
3) expand community college and technical high-school partners, including a new
NEATEC/Technical High School partnership for at-risk students to adapt curricula
to technical high school programs in Central New York with expansion to
technical high schools in MA and CT; and 4) develop new technological education
programs for underserved and underrepresented groups- specifically newly
separated veterans and international refugee communities (permanent U.S.
residents) in central New York State. NEATEC's core academic development team
includes Hudson Valley Community College, Erie Community College, Jefferson
Community College, Mohawk Valley Community College, Onondaga Community College,
and Fulton Montgomery Community College in New York State, and Fairfield
University in Connecticut. Industry collaborators include GlobalFoundries, Tokyo
Electron, General Electric, SolarCity, Soraa, AIM Photonics, United Technologies
Research Center, and the Interstate Renewable Energy Council (IREC).