* 1700550
* Creating Technical Scholars: A Model for Structured Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* John Floyd, Eastern Shore Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 365,508.00

This ATE project enables Eastern Shore Community College to establish the
Creating Technical Scholars (CTS) program, which will bring together local high-
tech employers, school districts, and four-year institutions to create flexible
career pathways beginning in high school and potentially culminating in an
associate's and/or bachelor's degree. This project addresses a weakness in
short-term training programs that may prepare individuals for immediate
employment, but do not serve students in earning more advanced degrees required
for promotion to higher paying jobs within their chosen trade. As a result of
this project, students enrolling in trade programs will have tracks available in
a Technical Studies associate's degree to efficiently utilize classes already
taken and to progress in clearly laid out pathways towards a degree that is
customized. A key emphasis of the project is also on recruiting and retaining
students who are typically underrepresented in STEM fields. Since the
demographics and employer needs of Eastern Shore Community College align closely
with those of other rural community colleges, and since the service area
conditions of high poverty and unemployment and low levels of educational
attainment are common, the pathways created may serve as a model to impact other
regions nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the Creating
Technical Scholars (CTS) program will create a seamless transition from
secondary through post-secondary education to employment in STEM fields and
high-tech positions. The model will include stacked credentials, internships,
business/industry-designed curriculum, capstone experiences, and articulation
agreements with baccalaureate institutions. The model will increase student
success and boost economic development by increasing the number of workers and
improving skill level, while meeting the needs of employers. There are four
overarching project objectives which include: (1) To design dual enrollment
technical tracks in career and technical education programs, allowing students
to earn simultaneous high school and college credit as well as complete a career
studies certificate in technical and occupational programs (Industrial Tech.,
Computer Tech., HVAC, and Electronics) during their junior and senior years. (2)
To create a Technical Studies associates degree with tracks in Cybersecurity,
Industrial Technology, HVAC, Welding, and Electricity as a means of targeting
dual enrollment and certificate completion student in order to establish a
pathway to upper division studies. (3) To establish articulation agreements with
regional four-year institutions in technical study fields so as to optimize the
educational pathway of students who want to transition from a 2-year degree to a
4-year degree. (4) To devise career tracks for students to begin careers in
technical study fields after receiving a post-secondary credential. In this
regard, the project leverages local business/industry partners, who will work
with Eastern Shore Community College to provide work-based learning experiences,
including internships, job-shadowing, discipline-related conferences, and skills
competitions, in high-demand technical fields.