* 1700191
* Research Initiation Award: Optimization and Enhancement of Hepatic Differentiation for Mesenchymal Stem Cells via Biofunctional Modification
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Bo Wang, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,961.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Alabama State University (ASU)
will conduct research to address the current lack of ideal cell source for the
therapy of hepatocyte transplantation (HT), which is considered as an
alternative "bridge" treatment to liver transplantation until a donor liver
becomes available. This project plans to create a new cell culture platform to
better control stem cell behavior, leading to a possible solution to the
shortage of hepatocytes for hepatocyte transplantation treatment. Non-human
(porcine) hepatocytes will be used as a source of liver cells for this study.
This project will enhance the academic capabilities and outreach activities at
ASU. It will provide new research and educational resources for the newly
established bachelor's degree program in Biomedical Engineering (BME).
Undergraduate students will be afforded the opportunity to participate in
various research projects and obtain training in cutting-edge research. These
experiences will equip them with the skills necessary to become nationally
competitive and prepare them for advanced studies and future careers in STEM.
The proposed research is aligned with the mission of the BME program to produce
high quality graduates with superior technical, professional, and scientific
backgrounds in biomedicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to
develop a novel cell culture microenvironment by combining a structure-
controlled synthetic scaffold with biologically active matrix co-cultured with
nonparenchymal cells to positively manipulate stem cell destiny. The specific
aims of this project are to: 1) functionalize the multi-layered bioplotted
scaffold with liver extracellular matrix (ECM) and signaling peptides to
modulate hepatic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-
MSCs); and 2) characterize the influence of hepatic stellate cells on BM-MSC-
derived hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo. The proposed project combines 3D
bioprinting and matrix remodeling with liver ECM proteins, signaling peptides,
and nonparenchymal cells to create a functionally and structurally natural liver
microenvironment. The findings from this study will provide a great step towards
positively impacting patients with end-stage liver diseases. In addition,
knowledge gained from the proposed research will be applied to the advancement
of liver regenerative medicine, as well as to furthering the understanding of
fundamental bioengineering techniques. This project will be conducted in
collaboration with Northwestern University.