* 1700143
* Applications of Descriptive Set Theory in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Matthew Foreman, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 301,850.00

This project studies dynamical systems from both statistical and qualitative
points of view. The research considers the feasibility of classifying the
transformations that characterize dynamical evolution based on categorizing
systems according to their numerical or algebraic properties. Previous work has
shown that this is impossible for certain common types of concrete dynamical
systems. Such negative results are of interest since they provide additional
evidence of the immense diversity and complexity of transformations studied in
ergodic theory and the theory of dynamical systems. The current project involves
extending these impossibility results to other longstanding classification
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves applying techniques in
descriptive set theory to questions in ergodic theory and dynamical systems.
This investigation expands a long-term project in ergodic theory to explore
questions in differentiable dynamical systems linked to classification problems.
Specifically, the investigator and a collaborator showed that von Neumann's 1932
proposal to classify diffeomorphisms of compact manifolds up to measure
isomorphism was impossible because the equivalence relation is not Borel
(therefore impossible using inherently countable methods). This project aims to
extend that result to show that the topological equivalence relation is
intractable.