* 1700721
* I-Corps: A Platform for Matching Manufacturing Service Companies with Design Enterprises
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Binil Starly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
efficiently match, using intelligent multi-agent software, original equipment
designers to manufacturers who have the necessary capabilities to fulfill those
needed services. On one side, the solution directly empowers small and medium
scale manufacturers to advertise unused machine capacity that can be rented out
to clients who require small lot production of components. The platform may also
provide them the ability to focus their business development efforts to
obtaining short term and long term contracts through the broker system. On the
other end of the solution, the platform directly impacts system integrators by
providing them with a near real-time state of suppliers' performance and
technical metrics. The solution architecture also allows enterprise customers to
update their supplier databases in near real-time states without manual
recurrent processing of supply chain information. The solution intends to make
supplier sourcing, vetting and selection to be more efficient. Ultimately, the
system intends to cut the time between product conception to production and
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the functions
and operations of a manufacturing service selection platform. Real-time
streaming data from machines on a factory floor populates a virtual digital twin
representation of the physical machine and its corresponding factory model in
cyberspace. Utilizing a multi-agent simulation software algorithm, we match
design and manufacturing features of a given product to manufacturers who have
the capacity and capabilities to meet those requirements. The results of the
simulation provide an intelligent decision making tool for original equipment
designers to source suppliers who are best suited to meet both business and
technical requirements. This digital connectivity of machine assets across
job/contract shop factories provides unprecedented visibility into machine
capabilities and capacities within the supply chain for real-time decision
making in supplier sourcing and selection.