* 1700787
* Using Plasma Electrolysis for Efficient Manufacturing of Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/13/2016,08/31/2020
* Qi Fan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2020
* USD 315,598.00

Nanoparticles play a key role in a wide variety of advanced devices, including
batteries, biosensors, and solar cells. The conventional means of synthesizing
nanoparticles is generally inefficient and produces waste materials that are not
easily recyclable. This award supports fundamental research on the chemical and
physical reactions in plasma electrolysis to obtain knowledge that will enable
efficient manufacture of nanoparticles. Plasma electrolysis is a glow discharge
(like Neon light) in contact with liquid. The plasma is confined around an
electrode by the liquid electrolyte, leading to very high energy density. This
high-density plasma facilitates effective formation of nanoparticles from the
working electrode. This research will benefit the scientific community by
advancing knowledge about plasma physics and chemistry at liquid-gas-solid
interfaces. Using cost-effective nanoparticles in photovoltaic devices and
batteries will greatly promote the efficiency of clean energy generation and
storage. The technologies that emerge from this research will not only promote
US competitiveness in nanomaterials manufacturing, but will also ensure a
sustainable economy and address global environmental concerns. This research
will strengthen interdisciplinary research, education, and training in
nanomaterials science and plasma physics by engaging college and high school
students, thereby increasing the participation of underrepresented groups and
expanding the pool of skilled workers.

Plasma electrolysis can be a rapid and efficient process for nanoparticle
manufacturing. All previous studies indicate that plasma electrolysis tends to
create large particles (microns) and irregular electrode surface morphology.
This has led to the conventional belief that multiple chemical and physical
reactions occur simultaneously and that physical reactions dominate plasma
electrolysis. Very little is known about the chemical reactions. To fill this
knowledge gap and realize the full potential of plasma electrolysis for
nanoparticle manufacturing, the research team will 1) establish a particle-fluid
hybrid model to describe the physical and chemical reactions in plasma
electrolysis; 2) use in-situ optical emission spectroscopy to verify the plasma
reactions and the modeling results; 3) decouple the physical and chemical
reactions to test the hypothesis that the electrolyte composition determines gas
evolution (bubbles or a continuous layer), which governs discharge
characteristics and the dominant plasma reactions; and 4) establish the
relationships between plasma electrolysis parameters (electrolyte composition,
magnetic field, and discharge power) and nanoparticle morphology.