* 1700333
* Research Initiation Award: Subatomic Physics at Virginia Union University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Narbe Kalantarians, Virginia Union University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 02/28/2021
* USD 266,431.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs to
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home institution,
and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Virginia Union University (VUU), a private,
liberal-arts HBCU, will conduct research aimed at understanding the neutron
structure function. This project will support the newly-established physics
programs by expanding research opportunities available to students and enhancing
the department's research infrastructure. The education and research experiences
will contribute to VUU's efforts to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in physics and also help prepare students for graduate
school and the Nation's STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed study is to establish a collaborative experimental subatomic physics
program that contributes to the fundamental understanding of the neutron. The PI
will undertake slow controls work for a high-impact and highly anticipated
measurement of the fundamental structure of the neutron. In addition, the PI
will compare published structure function data from charged lepton and neutrino
scattering on heavier targets to better model how nuclei may be observed
differently from electromagnetic charged lepton and electroweak probes.
Specifically, the PI will contribute to slow controls software development
necessary for monitoring and archiving data associated with the gas deuteron gas
target for the planned Barely Offshell Nucleon Structure (BONuS12) experiment.
The PI will also conduct work to refine the structure function for Lead-82.
Overall this program will create a VUU research presence in the international
subatomic physics community as well as elevate the status of this HBCU and
attract more students in physics. This project will be conducted in
collaboration with the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson
Lab).