* 1700562
* CyberSecure: Extended Cybersecurity Education, Curriculum and Workforce Development
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Debra Nakama, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,404.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. In this project, the University of Hawaii Maui College (UHMC) will
build on the work of other NSF Advanced Technological Education (ATE) grantees
to develop a comprehensive, industry-driven program for cybersecurity education
and workforce development. The project team will recruit undergraduate students
from the University of Hawaii's community colleges and other institutions where
cybersecurity education is limited or nonexistent; enable the students to
conduct basic cybersecurity research projects that will develop their confidence
and skills for a global marketplace; expose the students to real-world
cybersecurity exercises, such as the annual Pooihe Cyber Security Exercise
conducted alongside the Hawaii National Guard; and train high school STEM
teachers on core topics in network and computer security, so that they can bring
the knowledge into their classrooms and prepare their students for career
pathways in information technology and cybersecurity.

The project will use problem-based learning and an online environment to educate
students, community college faculty, and high school teachers from diverse
backgrounds. Activities will particularly target underrepresented minorities. In
particular, the project will create new cybersecurity curricula for the Internet
of Things (IoT) and for the accounting, healthcare, and hospitality and tourism
industries, which are important to Hawaii's economy. Outcomes will include new
curricular modules that are compliant with industry standards, an increase in
the number of students who enroll in cybersecurity classes and graduate with a
certificate or degree in cybersecurity at UHMC, and an increase in the number of
college faculty and high school teachers who teach cybersecurity topics.