* 1700094
* Regularity and Partial Regularity for Monge-Ampere-Type Equations, with Applications to Numerics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jun Kitagawa, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

This project addresses theoretical and computational properties of solutions to
a certain class of partial differential equations, which arise in many modeling
problems. These include the following: the design of optical instruments using
mirrors or lenses, market matching in economics, and the optimization of
transportation networks. One very important question concerns the smoothness of
solutions; namely, if solutions of these equations can have sharp corners or
not. The question of smoothness has direct implications in the accuracy of these
equations as models in the aforementioned problems. For example, in designing a
lens with certain refractive properties, failure of smoothness can cause
chromatic aberration (as when a prism splits white light into a rainbow), a
phenomenon that lies outside the scope of the simplified model given by this
class of equations. Nevertheless, this special class of equations is extremely
convenient for modeling purposes, owing to the fact that their solutions often
have simple geometric characterizations. This is especially important in the
example of optical instruments, since in comparison with other models, it is
logistically far simpler and more efficient to manufacture lenses or mirrors
that arise by application of these equations than by using other models.
Smoothness also plays a large role in the development of accurate and fast
numerical algorithms. Effectively translating theoretical results into the
language of computation is vital in creating a bridge between abstract
mathematical results and practical outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
specific terms, the project will be concerned with a subclass of Monge-Ampere-
type equations known as generated Jacobian equations (GJEs). These contain many
problems from geometric optics in the near-field regime, the Monge-Kantorovich
(optimal transport) problem, and the real Monge-Ampere equation. The first
portion of the project focuses on regularity and "partial regularity," by which
is meant the study of singular behavior of weak solutions. Specific goals are to
categorize systematically the structure (size, shape, topological, and
differentiable structure) of singular sets, and to characterize quantitatively
the inhomogeneous data that give solutions that still exhibit regular behavior
when standard conditions in regularity theory fail. The methods used to study
these problems will be a combination of geometric techniques developed to
analyze regularity of degenerate, fully nonlinear elliptic equations, along with
techniques originating in the calculus of variations and optimal transport
theory. The second part of the project focuses on the development of numerical
solvers for GJEs. The intent is to leverage the understanding afforded by
partial regularity to develop numerical schemes that avoid degenerate singular
structures, resulting in fast, accurate algorithms to solve GJE and optimal
transport problems beyond the reach of existing techniques, with a specific aim
of producing algorithms backed with rigorous performance bounds. The two halves
of the project are interrelated, as improved numerical tools can be an effective
tool for visualizing and formulating conjectures on the singular behavior of
solutions, and in turn, improved theoretical understanding of singularities
leads to the development of effective numerical algorithms.