* 1700086
* Operator Algebras, Groups, and Topological Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Marius Dadarlat, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 180,001.00

Three projects concerned with analytical and topological aspects of operator
algebras are to be investigated. Operator algebras is an area of mathematics
that emerged from the matrix mechanics formulation of quantum mechanics
discovered by Heisenberg and further developed by von Neumann. The new (quantum)
variables used in this theory are ensembles of (possibly infinite) matrices that
satisfy suitable regularity properties. They are organized in various algebraic
structures, called operator algebras, that can realized as linear operators
acting on Hilbert spaces. The passage from functions to matrices often involves
a process of quantization/deformation in which geometric structures are
discretized in such a way that important topological spatial relations are
distilled in the form of numerical invariants. The principal investigator will
explore the theory of such deformations in the larger context of operator
algebras. The goal is to exhibit and study new classes of algebraic and
geometric structures which admit special deformations into finite matrices that
capture subtle topological properties. The invariants that are to be
investigated are intimately related to those that arise in the physics of novel
materials such as topological insulators with crystalline
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, the purpose of the first
project is to explore the class of connective C*-algebras. Connectivity is a
homotopy invariant property with significant permanence properties. It has
important consequences pertaining to absence of projections, finite dimensional
approximations such as quasidiagonality, and geometric realizations of
K-homology. The second project is devoted to embeddability into AF-algebras. The
principal investigator will investigate K-theory invariants associated to quasi-
representations and topological obstructions to quasidiagonality. For the third
project, the principal investigator will explore characteristic classes of
continuous fields of strongly self-absorbing C*-algebras in the framework of the
generalized Dixmier-Douady theory that were developed with Ulrich Pennig.