* 1700865
* Collaborative Research: Musculoskeletal Model for Dynamic Manual Material Handling to Prevent Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Yujiang Xiang, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2018
* USD 309,219.00

PIs: Xiang, Yujang/Yang, James &lt;br/&gt;Proposals:
1700865/1703093&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently available safety evaluation tools
for manual material handling are based on static lifting conditions, such as the
NIOSH lifting equation, which gives a subject's maximum lifting weight, distance
and height for static lifting. Another popular method for evaluating injury risk
for manual material handling is to measure the lumbar spine stress for back
pain. However, these methods are all static and cannot accurately reflect
dynamic motion generation and injury prevention. Using biomechanical models
provides relatively new, alternative techniques that allow direct testing and
individualized results. In this collaborative project, the PIs will develop a
predictive lumbar spine musculoskeletal model for a dynamic manual material
handling. The project aims to develop an efficient tool for injury risk
assessment and prediction in dynamic lifting process. Project results will have
potentially wide application in manual material handling ergonomics and will
further advance lifting biomechanics. The project includes education
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students. A two-week summer
workshop will be offered to underserved minority middle and high school students
at University of Alaska Fairbanks in collaboration with the Alaska Summer
Research Academy. Another week-long summer workshop will be offered to local
workers with lifting jobs and Hispanic middle school students at Texas Tech
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing an inverse
dynamics optimization-based (predictive dynamics) method for dynamic manual
material handling using a musculoskeletal model with dynamic strength data.
Dynamic strength data will be developed for key joints, such as the knee, hip,
ankle, elbow and lower spine. The tool developed for predicting injury events in
dynamic lifting systems will advance the current offline procedure to an online,
near real-time optimal motion control and injury prevention system. Injury is
defined in two ways: by measuring lumbar spine compression and shear stresses
using a musculoskeletal model, and, in joint space, by measuring the percentage
of joint torque for key joints to predict injury. Specific objectives are to: 1)
derive a general dynamic strength model and validate the model parameters from
experiments; 2) introduce and experimentally validate a lumbar spine muscle
model; and 3) implement these models with a nonlinear programming algorithm to
optimize the dynamic lifting motion during manual material handling for minimum
injury and experimentally demonstrate proof-of-concept. Muscle intra/inter-joint
coupling will be modeled and the lumbar spine area will be added, thereby
generating a musculoskeletal model to measure lumbar stresses for back pain in
the dynamic lifting process. The dynamic strength parameters in joint space
estimated from active human subjects will provide the model with improved
accuracy and efficient calculations that can be used to evaluate injury for
complex non-periodic functional tasks that may not be experimentally verifiable
by traditional means. The model, which enables near real-time calculations of
dynamic manual material handling as a function of time, can be used to establish
an individual-specific dynamic limiting lifting process, as well as optimal
strategy for lifting. Project results will serve as new guidelines for manual
material handling ergonomic design, considering dynamic effects. In addition,
better understanding of various constraints in optimization formulation inherent
in the human physiological system, as well as motion adaptation to these
constraints, will contribute to the field of human locomotion study and
complement existing design principles for manual material handling.