* 1700980
* PFI:AIR - TT:  DNA-LINKED ECM GELS FOR ENHANCED HEALING IN CHRONIC WOUNDS
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Kristi Kiick, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating new, DNA-
modified collagen dressings to fill the need for improved wound products that
heal chronic wounds. DNA-modified collagen dressings are an important
development because they will address two key shortcomings inhibiting success of
existing treatments for chronic wound management - insufficient
bioactivity/stability and high growth factor dosing - that lead to incomplete
healing and serious side effects. This project will result in a proof-of-concept
DNA-modified collagen dressing with the potential to fill a significant market
need in advanced wound care, a growing segment in which the global market is
projected to approach $15B by the year 2020. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the project uses a unique approach to create gel-based dressings employing
collagen-mimetic "peptide" (CMP) molecules to integrate growth factor-encoding
DNA into collagen gel "scaffolds" (CMPGs). This method for incorporating gene
constructs into collagen scaffolds allows the gene constructs to remain
localized and protected within the wound bed over extended time frames, yet as
healing initiates, the gene constructs are released readily to stimulate further
healing activity. Competing advanced wound dressings, which are largely based on
collagen matrices or topical growth factor (PDGF-BB), have continued to show
wound closure rates of ca. 50%, with concerns over growth factor toxicity. In
contrast, the CMPG-based technology has shown (i) complete healing of 3D model
wounds, requiring only 1/10 the growth factor necessary as compared with
commercial approaches and (ii) sustained activity in a mouse wound model over
periods of multiple weeks. These features indicating its definitive potential to
offer patients improved wound healing with significantly fewer administrations,
lower growth factor dosing, and fewer side effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CMPG design strategy addresses several important technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. Specifically,
multiple reports delineate the clear synergies in wound repair between insoluble
(matrix) and soluble signaling factors, suggesting that dual optimization of
CMPG gene delivery and matrix composition is needed to maximize healing
potential. At the same time, the matrix composition also has clear implications
for clinical usage, as it will impact the ease with which CMPG gel solutions can
be deployed, and the stability of the resulting gels after application. Hence,
new intellectual merit will be generated by evaluating how nanostructure
incorporation affects gel properties, and in turn, by elucidating how gel
properties and cellular gene regulation can synergistically enhance tissue
repair, leading to new materials and therapeutic strategies for a clinically
difficult problem in chronic wound repair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
postdoctoral fellow involved in this project will receive training in
intellectual property, regulatory issues, and market need through participation
in formal University of Delaware courses (e.g. "High Technology
Entrepreneurship") as well as short-courses (e.g. via SBE2 IGERT), which will
afford a team well positioned to transition this technology into the commercial
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engagesÂ the University of
Delaware's Office of Economic Innovation and Partnerships (OEIP), as well as
partnerships with specific healthcare companies to enable further intellectual
property development and large-scale market analysis, while also positioning the
CMPG technology to fill specific needs in wound care technologies.