* 1700852
* Holomorphic functions and some geometric problems on certain Kahler manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Gang Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 31,826.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1406593, Principal Investigator: Gang
Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kahler manifolds are a basic building block in the
string theory model of the universe. This project studies the global structure
of Kahler manifolds. In particular, conjectures on the uniformization of Kahler
manifolds will be addressed. These conjectures generalize the classical
uniformization theorem in one complex variable. In the PI's project, there are
many interactions among several branches of mathematics, e.g. algebraic
geometry, analysis, topology and differential geometry. Wider applications of
the PI's field include the structure of molecules, the large scale structure of
the universe and the liquid gas boundary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes
to work on three projects which involve function theory and geometry on Kahler
manifolds. The first project is to study problems which are closely related to
the uniformization conjecture of Yau. These problems include the finite
generation of the ring of holomorphic functions of polynomial growth, sharp
dimension estimates for holomorphic functions with polynomial growth on
manifolds with nonnegative Ricci curvature, and a conjecture of Ni on the
equivalence between average curvature decay, maximal volume growth and the
existence of holomorphic functions of polynomial growth. In the second project,
the PI will seek obstructions to Kahler metrics with nonnegative scalar
curvature. The PI also plans to show that the Kodaira dimension of compact
Kahler manifolds with nonpositive bisectional curvature is a homotopy invariant.
The main tool is the PI's structure theorem for these manifolds.