* 1700578
* RUI: Network Structure and Controllability in Natural and Engineered   Interacting Dynamic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/29/2016,08/31/2020
* Cesar Aguilar, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 181,889.00

Networks are increasingly becoming a powerful tool to model and analyze the
properties of naturally occurring and engineered interacting dynamic systems. In
a wide range of applications, networked dynamical systems theory provides a
coherent framework to model phenomena such as the emergence of highly structured
or synchronized global behavior, or to analyze the possibility of altering the
natural dynamics in a collection of decentralized interacting dynamic systems.
In both natural and man-made systems, the presence of inherent network
structures may explain the onset of collective behavior or inhibit the
possibility of freely controlling the dynamics of the system. Although such
structures are mathematically rare, they appear widely in real-world networks
such as yeast protein interactions and human B cell genetic networks,
technological networks such as the Western States US power grid, US airports,
the Internet, and social networks such as email and academic collaboration
networks. From a controls design perspective, it is therefore imperative to
fully understand for a networked dynamic system how the local structure of the
network affects the ability to control or alter its dynamic behavior and to
develop algorithms that avoid undesirable control intervention. The proposed
research will provide STEM training for students at a primarily undergraduate
institution that serves a predominantly minority population. Moreover, the
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research will involve students from
several STEM disciplines such as electrical engineering, applied mathematics,
and computer science.

The existing body of knowledge on the relationship between network structure and
the ability to control the dynamics of a multi-agent system has fallen behind in
addressing the need to control ever more complex networks in engineering and
naturally occurring systems. The objective of this research is to advance our
understanding of how the topological structure of a networked multi-agent
dynamic system governs the selection of a group of agents to alter the behavior
of the overall system and accomplish system-level tasks such as state transfer
or regulation. The methods used in the proposed research will blend techniques
from mathematical control theory, algebraic graph theory and matrix analysis,
and scientific computing. Outcomes of the research will include a catalog of new
network structures directly related with the ability to control a given
networked dynamic system, and efficient algorithms to detect these structures
and their demonstration in real-world technological and biological networks. The
expected results will add to the development of a usable theory of the control
of networked multi-agent systems. This research will also make new connections
with control theory and algebraic graph theory. From a practical standpoint, one
of the impacts of this research will be to provide control design engineers and
scientists with a broad overview of the controllability profile of a given
network and its effect on designing decentralized control protocols.