* 1700235
* Catalyst Project: Modeling Count Data with the Conway-Maxwell-Poisson Distribution
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Kimberly Weems, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 185,799.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
North Carolina Central State University will investigate mathematical modeling
with probability distributions and will provide an opportunity for undergraduate
students to enhance their statistical knowledge through research experiences.
The researcher has established a strong collaboration with faculty at Georgetown
University.

Count data arise in a variety of situations and are often modeled with a Poisson
distribution. In many cases, however, the data do not satisfy the Poisson
distribution's property of equal mean and variance. This project will examine
the two-parameter Conway-Maxwell-Poisson (CMP) distribution that accounts for
over-dispersion where the variance is greater than the mean and under-dispersion
where the variance is less than the mean. The CMP distribution captures the
Poisson, Bernoulli, and geometric distributions as special cases. The first goal
of this project is to conduct a simulation study which compares properties of
the CMP distribution to those of mixed Poisson probability distributions, such
as the Poisson-lognormal, Poisson-Lindley and Poisson-inverse Gaussian, that
have traditionally been used to model over-dispersed data. The second goal is to
derive and develop inferential methods for a bivariate CMP distribution. To
demonstrate the flexibility of the CMP distribution and its extensions,
applications to real-world data will be considered. This research will expand
the class of probability distributions that are available to model count data.