* 1700708
* Northwest Engineering and Vehicle Technology Exchange (NEVTEX)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2022
* John Frala, Central Oregon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 925,035.00

The West Coast region of the United States has demonstrated significant business
development and political commitment to the emerging electric drive industry,
which includes electric and hybrid electric vehicles (EV/HEV) and hydrogen fuel
cell vehicles. Worldwide, the market is growing steadily, with Japan leading the
way and the United States coming in second. Oregon, Washington and California
report nearly one-third of all EV/HEV ownership in the United States. There is
wide recognition that current automotive training programs for students and
technicians need to be dramatically redesigned to guarantee mastery of these
emerging, advanced vehicle systems. The investigative team of this ATE project
will address this need by working with selected automotive industry and
community college partners to create a standardized approach for training and
certifying electric drive technicians. Once completed, the proposed training
standards will serve to spearhead a process with the long-term goal of
instituting a licensing process for these highly skilled workers who are working
with high voltage and high-pressure gaseous fuels. The project team will develop
and implement outreach activities aimed at increasing the enrollment of
underrepresented groups, including women, Latinos, and Native Americans, in
automotive technology programs and career pathways at community colleges.
Emphasis will be placed on disseminating and sharing all products and outcomes
at national meetings and through a website that will be developed to highlight
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will identify training
categories for electric drive vehicle maintenance and safety. A template will be
created for each training category that defines the associated training
activities. The overall goal being to develop standardized training for electric
drive technicians. Simultaneously, the investigative team will work with content
area and industry experts to develop a method to validate skills acquisition.
Digital badges will be considered as one way to credential learner outcomes. The
training standards and credentialing system will be vetted by industry and
educator team members and upon approval, the standards and credentialing system
will be tested at 10 businesses and 20 community colleges. Outcomes and training
materials will be shared regionally and nationally with appropriate
organizations and stakeholders. Once a framework for training and credentialing
has been validated by these organizations, the investigative team will meet with
governmental agencies in the Western States to discuss the institutionalizing of
licensing procedures for electric drive technicians. In the United States, there
is currently no standardized credential or licensure requirement for technicians
who work with high voltage systems and high-pressure gaseous fuels. As a point
of comparison, technicians who work with commercial or residential high voltage
or heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems must be licensed by
each State. The same must also be done for EV/HEV technician who work with high
voltage systems and high-pressure gaseous fuels.