* 1700884
* Asymptotics for Rational Points
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jordan Ellenberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

The research scope of this grant lies on the active interface between number
theory and geometry. Geometry is perhaps the oldest part of mathematics, and
number theory, the study of equations and their solutions in whole numbers, is
hardly younger. Yet it is only in the very recent history of mathematics that
researchers have understood just how interrelated these subjects are and how
much they have to offer each other. One example is the "cap set problem,"
related to the popular card game Set. In the game, one asks: how many cards is
it possible to have on the table with no legal play? It turns out that this
problem has to do with the geometry of points and lines in 4-dimensional space,
with equations among numbers and their last base-3 digit, and the relation
between these. In 2016 the PI was part of a major breakthrough on this old
problem, and his proposed research will continue investigating the new ideas
that led to progress as well as other projects mixing number theory and
geometry. The proposal covers several areas in number theory, algebraic
geometry, topology, combinatorics, and applied math, in collaboration with a
wide group of fellow researchers, including graduate students. One of the
central questions of arithmetic statistics is: how many number fields are there
of discriminant at most X? More particularly: how many of these have Galois
group G for a specified subgroup G of a symmetric group S_n? A famous conjecture
of Malle proposes a description for the asymptotic behavior of this count as X
grows. Many of the major themes in contemporary number theory (e.g. Bhargava's
work on counting quartic and quintic extensions, progress on Cohen-Lenstra
conjectures) concern cases of this conjecture. In previous work, the PI showed
that the Cohen-Lenstra conjecture over the function field F_q(t) could be
approached by the methods of algebraic topology, using Grothendieck's theory of
etale cohomology as the bridge between the two subjects. Now the PI proposes to
prove the upper bound in the Malle conjecture in the case K = F_q(t), again
using a combination of topological and arithmetic methods, but now with input
from the theory of quantum shuffle algebras. In another project, the PI proposes
to investigate the analogy between Malle's conjectures and the Batyrev-Manin
conjectures, which study the asymptotics for rational points with bounded height
on algebraic varieties. The height is a natural notion of complexity of an
algebraic point just as the discriminant is for a number field. Here, the
technical bridge is the theory of algebraic stacks; the PI will develop a theory
of rational points of bounded height on Deligne-Mumford stacks, which first of
all requires defining the height of a point on a stack. In particular, the
discriminant of a number field is the height (in the novel sense) of a point on
the classifying stack of a finite group. The PI will formulate a generalized
Batyrev-Manin conjecture for stacks, which specializes to both Malle's
conjecture and the Batyrev-Manin conjecture. The PI will also investigate
properties of the new definition: for instance, the PI will aim to prove that
the Faltings height is actually height on the moduli stack of abelian varieties
in this sense. The PI also proposes problems in additive combinatorics, the
homology of FI-modules, and the geometry of machine learning.