* 1700033
* Support for Analog Modeling of Tectonic Processes Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Jacqueline Reber, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 33,069.00

ThisThis project provides funding for travel support for U.S. researchers and
students to attend a workshop on "Analog Modeling of Tectonic Processes" to be
held in Austin, Texas, in early May of 2017. The workshop builds on a successful
workshop on this topic held in 2015. Analog model experiments contribute
substantially to the understanding of tectonic processes. In these experiments,
weaker materials (sand, clay, etc.) take the place rocks and are deformed at
high strain rates under controlled conditions thus producing scale models of the
development of earth structures (faults, folds) and large-scale tectonic
features (mountain belts, rift systems). The aim of this workshop is to bring
together the tectonics analog modeling community to discuss future directions in
the field, build collaborations with computer-based modelers, and develop
curriculum materials. The workshop participants include experimentalists,
computer modelers, students, and instructors who use analog models in their
classrooms. The workshop will promote the analog modeling skills of early career
researchers, thereby developing the future workforce in tectonics. The workshop
will promote the participation of students, early career scientists, and
researchers from underrepresented groups in the earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past 10 years have seen a revolution within
analog modeling of crustal deformation spurred by systematic rheological testing
of analog materials and use of laser and image processing techniques for data
analysis leading to a strengthening of the quantitative aspect of analog
modeling. The vanguard of this revolution has been in Europe where laboratories
have been implementing new approaches that permit greater control on
experimental conditions, more accurate scaling of deformation and improved
insights into the evolution of deformation and deformation processes. This
multi-day workshop gathers leading US and international geoscientists who use
analog and numerical modeling to discuss techniques that are revolutionizing
experimental modeling, as well as challenges for performing and analyzing scaled
experiments. This workshop provides a unique and largely informal opportunity
for researchers to share some of their best practices. As a mechanism to foster
idea-sharing, a half-day physical experiment followed by a half-day numerical
analysis will be performed to encourage the entire group to engage in
experimental set-up, trouble shooting, data gathering and analysis and to
sensitize each community to the needs of the other. Curriculum material
developed for the workshop will be freely available through the Science
Education Resource Center.