* 1700628
* I-Corps: High Temperature Thermometric Materials for Power Generation
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Na (Luna) Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to discover
the commercial opportunity for high temperature thermoelectric materials and
devices. A total of ~2600 trillion BTU/year of wasted heat energy are generated
during US industrial processes, which can be directly converted into 16GWh of
electricity using the outlined high temperature thermoelectric device. The value
of this generated energy is estimated to be $14 billion/year using current
electricity pricing, $0.10/KWh. During the course of this program the team will
investigate the potential market to determine customer?s needs and the key
requirements for a viable solution. Our customer discovery will begin with the
target industry power generation. If this market offers limited potential, we
will explore other potential markets, such as portable electronics and chemical
processing, to explore their needs and requirements.

This I-Corps project uses structured hypothesis-validation approach to develop
commercial translation plan of high temperature thermoelectric materials and
devices. This will include determining: value proposition; customer/user-case;
demand creation; channel development; revenue model; partnership strategy; and
resource development. The fundamental knowledge to be used includes: 1) tuning
the thermoelectric properties of nitrides and oxides through controlling
nanostructure length-scale and 2) developing cost-effective materials processing
technology for nanostructure thermoelectric materials. As a result, a market
specific prototype of a non-toxic and cost effective thermoelectric device may
be developed to enable large-scale waste heat harvesting in the high temperature
regime.