* 1700501
* Innovate, Design, Engineer, and Accelerate Career Pathway
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Rhonda Hodges, Patrick Henry Community College Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 179,037.00

The Advanced Manufacturing industry, which has a high rate of research and
development investment and is fueled by innovation, continues to expand and grow
regionally and nationally. Because manufacturing in the United States has
transitioned from traditional models to advanced manufacturing, community
college manufacturing programs must evolve to meet these changing industry
environments. Working collaboratively with industry partners to determine
advanced technical education needs, this project at Patrick Henry Community
College (PHCC), a rural two-year college in the Virginia Community College
System, is designed to advance knowledge and understanding within community
college advanced manufacturing programs. It will provide a model for working
innovatively with an entrepreneurial mindset and review, revise, and update
advanced technical education curricula by engaging college faculty and industry
representatives in a collaborative effort to promote teaching, training, and
learning. The participation of the rural and low-income population in the region
will be broadened, and the project results will be widely disseminated to
enhance scientific, technological, and educational understanding and to serve
students from under-represented groups. The project builds on its successful
AACC MentorLinks project, which helped to grow the use of college Fab Lab for
advanced manufacturing education and training. The primary goal of this project
is to develop and implement an Innovate, Design, Engineer, and Accelerate (IDEA)
Career Pathway with embedded certifications. It will equip individuals with a
career pathway that prepares them with college credit, certifications, and
skills recognized by the advanced manufacturing industry and entrepreneurial and
design skills proven to assist in building basic skills identified by industry
leaders. Evaluation activities will focus on which activities work best for
students and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IDEA program will introduce
new curriculum infused with education and training in entrepreneurship and core
skills needed in most advanced manufacturing technician positions. It will
prepare participants for technician positions and spur innovation and new
business development within the advanced manufacturing sector. The IDEA Career
Pathway will also provide dual enrolled high school students in career and
technical training a pathway from high school to an associate degree program to
a baccalaureate degree and towards a career with predicted growth regionally.
Students will have the potential to earn up to 24 credits while in high school,
along with embedded credentials, all of which credits can be applied to
Associate Degree in General Engineering Technology (GET) at the college, which
is transferable to four year degree pathways. This project will be conducted in
collaboration with the New College Institute, the Institute for Advanced
Learning and Research, three regional high schools, and in close collaboration
and with ongoing feedback from regional industry leaders. This project will
provide professional development to college faculty so that they can
successfully implement curriculum for the IDEA program. The project will also
strengthen the knowledge base of college students through revised curricula that
support critical thinking, scientific reasoning, and innovative design.