* 1700394
* Aspects of Unipotent Dynamics on Homogenous Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Nimish Shah, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 184,000.00

Many questions in number theory and geometry involve multiple infinite groups of
symmetries in their structures. Exploring the interactions between these groups
of symmetries using ideas from dynamical systems, applied to suitably created
algebraic models, is at the core of mathematical work involved in this project.
The primary goal of the project is to make new observations that relate, and to
develop new techniques applicable for solving, a variety of dynamical, number
theoretical, and geometrical problems. The work combines concepts from several
different areas of mathematics, and it is anticipated that the project will
build conceptual bridges between these different disciplines. Graduate students
and post-doctoral researchers will participate in the research project,
preparing them to work on some of the forefront areas of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his graduate students
will study a wide range of dynamical questions on unipotent flows on homogeneous
spaces that arise from number theoretic or geometrical questions. The project
investigates four types of problems: (1) Describe closures of unipotent orbits
and totally geodesic immersions in infinite-volume geometrically-finite
hyperbolic manifolds; (2) Control the non-divergence rate of unipotent
trajectories or expanding translates of short unipotent curves under suitable
Diophantine conditions on the base point; (3) Find geometric conditions under
which expanding translates of a curve in a homogeneous space are uniformly
distributed in the limit; (4) Compute Hausdorff dimensions of the sets of points
with specified excursion rates for flows on non-compact homogeneous spaces. This
study will combine techniques from various areas of mathematics, including
dynamical systems, Lie groups, representation theory, algebraic geometry,
probability theory, number theory, and combinatorics. The research aims to
obtain new results and develop new techniques of dynamical, number theoretical,
and combinatorial nature.