* 1700682
* Moduli of Stable Log Maps and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Qile Chen, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2021
* USD 157,974.00

This project lies in the area of algebraic geometry, a branch of mathematics
studying algebraic varieties, namely, the set of solutions of polynomial
equations. The topic of this project is closely related to string theory from
physics, where algebraic varieties are used to describe a piece of our universe.
An amazing fact is that collections of varieties of certain type inside another
bigger one are themselves varieties. The study of such collections of varieties
provides not only powerfully tools to study problems in geometry in mathematics,
but also useful methods to extract invariants interesting to physicists. The
main topic of this project is aimed at developing a mathematical tool to
calculate these invariants from string physics. Other topics of this project
focus on using the above developed tool to solve problems from geometry and
number theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major topic of this project is to study
Gromov-Witten invariants via logarithmic smooth degenerations. The short term
goal is to develop the theory of punctured maps which are, roughly speaking,
stable logarithmic maps with "poles". The long term goal is to prove an
effective degeneration formula which expresses Gromov-Witten invariants as a
combination of invariants from punctured maps as the basic building blocks.
Further topics of this project include (1) studying Teichmuller dynamics via the
logarithmic compactification; and (2) studying density problem of integral
points over function fields of algebraic curves. Both topics are further
applications of the theory of stable logarithmic maps.