* 1700328
* Research Initiation Award: Fast Solvers for Variable-Coefficient Poroelastic Models
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mingchao Cai, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,331.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Morgan
State University has potential broader and societal impact in a number of areas.
The project focuses on the development of numerical methods arising from many
important applications. The research crosses the fields of mathematics,
computational physics and material sciences. Undergraduate and graduate students
will gain research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
development of numerical methods for variable-coefficient poroelastic models.
The research will propose, analyze and implement several fast, optimal and
scalable numerical algorithms for poroelastic models under the spatial
discretizations including the finite element method, finite volume method and
immersed interface method. Specifically, novel numerical approaches, such as
preconditioning methods, Multigrid methods, domain decomposition methods, and
the acceleration techniques for the conventional iterative methods, will be
developed and investigated. The numerical algorithms will greatly improve the
efficiency of poroelastic solvers. The research has the potential of improving
the linear and nonlinear solvers for the conventional Finite Difference and
Finite Element methods for poroelastic models in various applications. As an
example, the developed numerical algorithms can be used in simulating energy
storage in subsurface, which requires large-scale numerical computations;
furthermore, the developed numerical methods can be applied to simulate a brain
swelling model and therefore quantify brain edema assessment. Combined with
image data and patient-specific data such as cerebral blood flow conditions, the
numerical methods can be used for simulating brain swelling under ischemic
conditions or after traumatic brain injury. The algorithms will be implemented
as open source software packages.