* 1700629
* The Northwest Network for Application Development and Technology Connections (AppConnect NW)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Suzanne Ames, Lake Washington Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2022
* USD 866,882.00

The Northwest Network for Application Development and Technology Connections
(AppConnect NW) project is a faculty-led coordination network across five
colleges. AppConnect NW will engage with information technology (IT) industry
leaders, regional employers and local high school teachers and counselors to
develop and support a technician pathway from an associate's degree to a
Bachelor of Applied Science (BAS) degree in Software Development. Data produced
through AppConnect NW activities will inform states and community colleges that
are creating new BAS degrees in software development. Best practices will be
disseminated nationwide through the ATE network including college consortium
collaboration strategies that meet industry expectations, curriculum development
strategies that prepare under-served students with technical and soft skills to
succeed in a competitive, fast-changing industry, and recruitment strategies
that successfully support bringing under-served students into software
development programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AppConnect NW serves the national
interests by growing a diverse software development BAS student body, preparing
the students to succeed upon graduation, and expanding regional recognition of
an emerging applied degree. The project will educate and engage regional
employers on the value of Bachelor of Applied Science (BAS) degrees and BAS
graduates to meet high-demand software development, programming and web
development workforce needs in the greater Seattle area. AppConnect NW will
create a professional network that brings together BAS software development
faculty members and industry to develop, enhance and validate industry-relevant
BAS technical training curriculum and standards ingrained with the philosophy
that intelligence and talent are traits that can be fostered to achieve success
rather than being inherited and static traits. This approach has the potential
to enable non-traditional students to understand IT culture and thrive within
the industry. Finally, the project will educate and engage local high school
faculty and counselors to encourage students who would benefit from earning a
bachelor's degree in software development at lower cost than a traditional
computer science baccalaureate program and in a smaller-classroom setting. This
project network will engage stakeholders in the pipeline from K12 through post-
secondary education and industry to support student success in software
development.