* 1700499
* SDI-CSCS: Collaborative Research: S2OS: Enabling Infrastructure-Wide Programmable Security with SDI
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Hongxin Hu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 04/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Traditionally, many of our critical systems have been developed with security as
a reactive add-on, rather than a by default design. As a result, existing
security mechanisms are often fragmented, hard to configure or verify, which
makes it difficult to defend against various cyber attacks. This project will
build the "holy grail" for enterprise/cloud/data-center security management with
software-defined infrastructure (SDI): a unified framework for security and
management of disparate resources, ranging from processes to storage to
networking. Cloud computing is now an essential part of our national
cyberinfrastructure; the proposed work will lower the total cost of ownership
for clouds - further unlocking economic and environmental benefits - as well as
improving the security of today's clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes S2OS (SDI-defined Security Operating System), which abstracts security
capabilities and primitives at both the host Operating System (OS) and network
levels and offers an easy-to-use and programmable security model for monitoring
and dynamically securing applications. This project will explore new techniques
to transparently compose software into a unified enterprise, even if the
individual pieces were never explicitly designed to inter-operate, similar in a
way a traditional operating system managing various hardware resources for
upper-layer user applications. Further, this project will contribute new ways to
leverage global information for making effective local security management
decisions. Finally, this project enables new innovations in programming dynamic,
host-network coordinated, and intelligent security applications to protect the
entire infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make significant
contributions to how enterprise, data centers and cloud computing are securely
built and managed. The project's PIs will engage in educational and outreach
activities to train the next generation talent. In particular, the PIs plan to
integrate the interdisciplinary research ideas into courses spanning networking,
systems and security. The project will also actively encourage participation
from underrepresented groups and transfer technology to industry partners.