* 1700603
* Regional Additive Manufacturing Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Antol, Harford Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 239,998.00

Additive manufacturing (AM), also known as 3-D printing, is the process of
producing a three-dimensional object from a digital file. This process is of
growing importance as the creation and manufacturing of complex 3-D products
ranging from custom prosthetics and medical implants to warfighter engine parts
becomes individualized and on-demand. Technicians working in 3-D printing must
be highly skilled and adaptable to leverage this evolving technology across
industries. Because of this growing demand, this project at Harford Community
College (HCC) entitled the Regional Additive Manufacturing Pathway (RAMP) is
designed to create an AM career pathway to increase the number of AM technicians
in the rural region of northeast Maryland. To ensure that training is aligned
with the needs of the regional manufacturing industry, RAMP will work with
industry, the United States Military Base-Aberdeen Proving Ground (APG), the
Regional Additive Manufacturing Partnership of Maryland (RAMP MD) and the
NSF/ATE National Resource Center for Materials Technology Education (MatEdU).
RAMP will focus on developing AM technicians with versatile 21st century skills
in 3-D printing by collaborating with RAMP MD, a network of more than 150
manufacturers, scientists, educators and entrepreneurs in AM, with the
collective goal of building the AM manufacturing base and educating the AM
workforce. RAMP will place particular emphasis on a crosswalk of AM core
competencies with the knowledge and skills required to work in the
defense/military industry as an alignment of AM technician competencies needed
in the defense/military industry has not yet been done. Project evaluation will
track progress on technician training and its impact on the technician
workforce. Dissemination strategies will include presentations at the annual
RAMP MD Symposium to share project information and to expand the industry base
of support. HCC will also share materials developed with MatEdU to be accessed
on the Technician Education in Additive Manufacturing &amp; Materials (TEAMM)
website. Deliverables include the additive manufacturing certificate program,
with a military/defense skills crosswalk that can be replicated by other
colleges. RAMP will also engage rural students in AM technician training and
21st century problem solving skills. As a result, this project will provide a
model of program development for other colleges in rural areas, who are
considering dual enrollment in AM technician education and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAMP targets several ATE tracks including Program
Development and Improvement, Curriculum and Educational Materials Development,
and Professional Development for Educators. To achieve its goals RAMP will: 1)
Develop and implement the AM certificate dual enrollment program; 2) Provide
professional development to postsecondary faculty; and 3) Expand opportunities
for rural high school students to engage in AM technologies. Dual enrollment
will strengthen the AM career pathway from secondary to postsecondary education
or directly into the workforce. Professional development will provide college
faculty with access to the latest developments in AM pedagogy and technology
from MatEdU. Rural high school students will be engaged through AM summer
seminars, visits to industry, and 3-D printing kits. RAMP will work with Harford
County Public Schools (HCPS) and partners to build a dual enrollment AM
curriculum. It will use the DACUM process to determine local AM skills and
competencies required by academia and industry, and then crosswalk the DACUM
profile with AM core competencies created by MatEdU. The college is committed to
the long-term success of AM technician training by maintaining sustainable
partnerships with regional AM business and industry, APG, and MatEdU.