* 1700278
* Large systems with repulsive interactions in statistical mechanics, condensed matter physics and PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Sylvia Serfaty, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2020
* USD 194,998.00

Nature is governed by interaction forces between particles, such as the
electrostatic and gravitational forces. Some of these forces are attractive,
some are repulsive. For instance, the formation of crystals, which are periodic
arrangements of atoms, can be very roughly explained via repulsive forces
coupled with a binding force. This project takes a mathematical and general view
on a class of such phenomena: given a system of N points (or particles) with a
specific repulsive interaction (typically the Coulomb repulsive force
encountered in electrostatics, or other interactions which are in inverse power
of the distance between two points), together with a confining force, one would
like to describe the typical macroscopic and microscopic behavior of the system
as the number of points N gets very large, and possible thermal effects are
included (temperature being expected to add disorder to the system). The
research of the PI is concretely related to important physics models: the
arrangements of vortices in superconductors, the study of energy-levels of large
atoms (spectrum of large random matrices), theoretical physics models related to
magnetism, but also more loosely connected to questions in biology,
astrophysics, plasma physics, Bose-Einstein condensates, atomic clusters or
hydrodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first topic of the project is the
statistical mechanics of Coulomb gases in an external potential and related
models. This is motivated by random matrices, the fractional quantum Hall
effect, and even approximation theory. One is interested in describing the
macroscopic (mean-field) and microscopic arrangements of the many particles as
their number N tends to infinity, and how they depend on temperature and the
potential, and in particular whether some features are universal (i.e.
independent of the potential) and whether there are phase transitions as the
temperature varies. Recent works of the PI and collaborators have given insight
into these questions with a proof that the fluctuations of the distribution of
particles in a two-dimensional Coulomb gas converge to a Gaussian Free Field,
and a Large Deviation Principle result which characterizes the limiting point
processes at the microscopic scale as minimizing a certain rate function. With
these results, one expects that the system should "crystallize" into a
triangular lattice as the temperature tends to 0.The methods previously
developed open the way to treating several important related questions: the case
of higher-dimensional Coulomb gases, the case of more general interactions, the
universality of the local statistics, the existence of a limiting point process,
and the description of its long-range correlations. The second topic is that of
vortices in the Ginzburg-Landau model of superconductivity, with pinning terms
that introduce disorder and the final topic is to advance the analysis of mean-
field dynamics for the simplest setting of many particles interacting via a
repulsive singular interaction, a notoriously difficult question.