* 1700771
* Disentangling the dynamics of shear banding in entangled polymer solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xiang Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 357,399.00

Plastics are ubiquitous to modern society, used in food packing, electronic
devices, transportation, sports equipment, and medical devices. The precursor to
all formed plastics is a polymer fluid. Polymer fluids are a unique type of
fluid, as the chain-like polymer molecules act like springs, and within a
collection of fluid molecules, the polymer springs become entangled. Unlike
water and many other fluids, this complex fluid does not respond to the forces
of stress and shear in a manner that is proportional to the applied force. This
non-proportional response is classified as Non-Newtonian. Non-Newtonian fluids
have not been adequately described by general engineering models of fluid flow.
Without general models, prediction of flow in industrial processing is limited
to trial-and-error. Under some circumstances, such as slow flow or low
concentration, many of these complexities can be ignored. However, these are not
the most industrially relevant conditions, where high concentration and fast
flow are prevalent. This project supports a fundamental experimental study on
the fast flow of concentrated polymer fluids, and uses state-of-the-art imaging
techniques to directly image single polymer molecules to reveal the microscopic
dynamics of complex fluid flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge in
understanding the dynamics of concentrated polymer fluids is the nonlinear
viscoelasticity of entangled polymer solutions, particularly the formation of
shear-banding in concentrated polymer solutions at high shear rates. These
phenomenon are difficult to probe experimentally. This research project combines
high-speed confocal microscopy with a custom shear cell to investigate the
origin of shear-banding flows of a model system, namely, concentrated DNA
solutions. The applications of these unique experimental tools to the problem
will resolve a controversy regarding on shear-banding in polymer fluids. The
phase diagram of the shear-induced dynamics of concentrated DNA solutions is
being mapped. The project aims to establish a direct link between the
microscopic dynamics of DNA molecules and the macroscopic flow behavior of
polymer fluids. The project is elucidating the dynamics of single polymer
molecules in concentrated solutions under fast shear and experimentally
validating competing theories on shear banding of polymer fluids. These results
are uncovering the missing theoretical understanding of concentrated polymer
fluids under fast flows and, ultimately, practical engineering models for
polymer fluids under the most industrially relevant conditions. Increased
control and prediction of polymer flow will increase throughput and efficiency,
and therefore greatly impact the U.S. manufacturing sector. This research
project also involves K-12 outreach programs with local high school students,
especially those underrepresented in science and engineering.