* 1700652
* Mechatronics Technology Institute
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Paul Carr, Alamance Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,592.00

Because manufacturing in the United States has transitioned from traditional
models to advanced manufacturing, community college manufacturing programs must
evolve to meet these changing industry environments. Increasingly industries
require a multi-skilled technician such as those with a Mechatronics degree,
which blends mechanical and electrical engineering technology with computer
control and information technology. To address these current and emerging needs,
Alamance Community College (ACC) will partner with local high schools and
advanced manufacturing industries in North Carolina to prepare a qualified
mechatronics trained workforce through an initiative called the Mechatronics
Technology Institute (MechTech Institute). This project is designed to build a
mechatronics workforce pipeline by increasing the awareness of and preparation
for opportunities in mechatronics of high school students. The concept and
design of the MechTech Institute was inspired and informed by successful NSF-
ATE-funded models addressing student recruitment into and preparation for career
opportunities. Through impacting Alamance-Burlington School System instructors
and counselors and approximately 720 students, the MechTech Institute will
contribute to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education
and teacher development.. It will also help address the need for stable, well-
paid employment in Alamance County and surrounding regions by working with
industry partners and county high schools to build a sustainable pipeline of
qualified students from public high school through college into the mechatronics
workforce. It will serve as an integral piece of a larger mechatronics
technician education initiative at the college involving curriculum development,
capital expansion, and student recruitment and support. An experienced evaluator
from UNC-Greensboro SERVECenter will determine the impact and effectiveness of
the project. Information and products will be freely disseminated with
educational institutions, training providers, and economic and workforce
development stakeholders to benefit the advanced technological education
community in the country.

The project goals will be achieved by providing professional development to high
school STEM instructors and counselors through: 1) one-day workshops during the
school year and a week-long summer workshop, each providing participants with
mechatronics materials and equipping them to integrate mechatronics-based lesson
plans, project kits and hands-on activities into their STEM classes, 2) exposure
to the mechatronics workplace through industry tours, speakers, and makers-guild
events, and 3) an online resource community providing participants with ongoing
support. The Institute will incorporate into each component the best practices,
lessons learned, and data gathered from similar NSF-ATE projects. Proven
elements of these models such as hands-on and activity-oriented learning,
STEM/mechatronics content integration, the leveraging of technology for
educational engagement, and real-world industry experiences will be adapted and
employed to serve the needs of students through the development of these skills
in high school instructors. The industry-exposure component is also based on
similar recent and current NSF-funded project models which have reported
significant benefits to participant and student awareness and interest from
features such as guided workplace tours and demonstrations and face-to-face
interactions with members of the current workforce. The MechTech Institute will
seek to adapt these features to the particular business and industry environment
and student populations in the county to maximize the impact of this component
to increase student awareness and interest in mechatronics education and career
paths. The online resource community to be established as part of the MechTech
Institute follows well established NSF-funded precedents which have already been
integrated into Alamance County Schools policy in the form of Professional
Learning Communities. The MechTech Institute online resource community will have
an even greater impact as part of a larger teacher-development initiative
designed to meet the critical need for on-going participant support, a forum for
sharing best practices, and a direct means for gathering and implementing
feedback.