* 1700176
* RUI: Embeddings of Discrete Metric Spaces into Banach Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Mikhail Ostrovskii, Saint John's University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 178,000.00

This project deals with embeddings of finite sets into spaces with well-
understood geometry. Such embeddings form a well-established tool in theoretical
computer science. Their usefulness can be seen in the following example:
Analysis of large sets of data is important in many contexts. Usually data is
endowed with a natural distance (degree of dissimilarity) of its elements. One
of the useful approaches to analysis of such sets of data is to use some low-
distortion embeddings of the set into a space whose structure is well-known, for
example into a two-dimensional or three-dimensional space. One can subsequently
employ algorithms available in computational geometry and tools from classical
mathematics. In some cases one can even visualize the structure of the set, for
example, see its clusters. Another application of embeddings is to construction
of approximate algorithms in cases where the algorithms for finding the exact
solution of a combinatorial optimization problem are not practical (consume too
much time) and we seek not necessarily the optimal solution, but a solution that
is close (in some sense) to being optimal. In many cases the best known
approximate algorithms are based on metric embeddings. The project aims to
deepen understanding in this important area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal
of the proposal is to study embeddings of discrete metric spaces into Banach
spaces. The existence of a low-distortion embedding into a plane is rather rare
in applications. In many contexts, for example for applications in topology,
weaker types of embeddings are useful, and even embeddings into high-dimensional
or infinite-dimensional Banach spaces lead to important insights. This project
will contribute to the following general question: Find new classes of
embeddings of finite and locally finite metric spaces into Banach spaces and
find new types of obstructions to such embeddings. The three main directions of
the work are: (1) determine to what extent expanders and graphs with large girth
resist nontrivially good embeddings; (2) find characterizations of well-known
classes of Banach spaces in terms of embeddings; and (3) analyze structures that
create obstructions to coarse embeddings of spaces with bounded geometry into a
Hilbert space. The project is expected to employ a mixture of methods of
geometric functional analysis and graph theory, with some use of methods of
probability theory and geometric group theory.