* 1700556
* Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Los Angeles: CSU-LSAMP-BD Cohort 14
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Margaret Jefferson, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance site for this LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate Activity is California State University, Los Angeles, one of the 23
California State University campuses included in the California State
University-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP). The
project provides a Master's level "bridge" to doctoral-level study for a cohort
of 12 graduates of LSAMP undergraduate programs. The Master's-level experience
is designed to increase participant persistence and competencies in STEM and
their advancement to Ph.D. programs following completion of the Master's degree.
In addition to providing substantial financial support to enable students to
focus full time on a two-year program of Master's-level course work and
research, the project provides an integrated set of activities designed to
advance BD students toward completion of doctoral level studies. Activities
include: (1) monthly and semester meetings with the BD Project Director to
monitor student progress and provide comprehensive advisement; (2) a workshop
series focused on information/tools needed for adjustment to and success in
graduate school; (3) writing support; (4) weekly professional seminars; (5)
community building activities; (6) "connecting" Fellows to doctoral programs
through collaborations with faculty and programs at Ph.D. institutions; and (7)
assistance with applications to Ph.D. programs, financial aid and fellowship
programs.