* 1700869
* Fifteenth Annual Symposium of the NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellows
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Darcy Barron, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 11/30/2017
* USD 23,388.00

This award will provide support for the attendees and invited speakers for the
fifteenth Annual Symposium of the NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellows, to be held in conjunction with the winter meeting of the American
Astronomical Society in January 2017, in Grapevine, Texas. The purpose of the
Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowships (AAPF) Program is to support
integrated research and educational activities at the postdoctoral level to
better prepare its fellows for positions of distinction and leadership in the
scientific community. The Annual Symposium provides a forum for the Fellows to
discuss their research and education projects while increasing their visibility
within the astronomy and astrophysics community. The Symposium represents a key
component of the AAPF Program and is a very effective mechanism to facilitate
the transfer of knowledge from experiences that the Fellows have acquired
through their postdoctoral training to a broad audience.

As with previous symposia in this series, the 2017 AAPF Symposium will promote
interactions among astronomers with diverse research interests and backgrounds.
By creating a forum in which discussions can occur across traditional research
boundaries, the Symposium will provide Fellows great opportunity to gain new
insights and pursue interdisciplinary collaborations. The Symposium will also
provide a venue for discussing major issues that are important to early-career
astronomers. In addition, the Symposium will (1) provide a forum for discussing
integrated research and educational activities, (2) facilitate collaborations
between Fellows on both research and education, and (3) provide greater exposure
for the Fellows and the AAPF Program within the astronomical community.