* 1700961
* Collaborative research:   The effects of fluid flow on flagellar mechanics and microbial motility
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Arezoo Ardekani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 255,736.00

Swimming cells including plankton, sperm, and bacteria play a crucial role in
the environment, in human health, and in industrial systems. These cells
breakdown pollutants and waste products, transport DNA during reproduction, and
provide a promising source of renewable biofuel. Swimming is a fundamental
strategy of many single cells, which use hair-like flagella to swim toward
nutrients and mates, and away from toxins. However, sometimes cells must ?swim
upstream?, and overcome ubiquitous currents and ambient flow of the fluid in
which they swim. The role of fluid flow on flagellar mechanics and the
spontaneous movement of cells is not well understood. This research project is
studying how fluid flow modifies flagellar motion through a combination of
direct imaging and mathematical modeling. This work has broad implications for
the development of medical devices and medical treatments, the improvement of
bioreactors and biofuel production efficiency, and understanding ecosystem
dynamics in oceans, lakes, and groundwater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ambient
velocity gradients are known to lead to strong accumulations of cells in flow
regions characterized by high shear rates, and the nature of the cell
accumulation is strongly dependent on cell motility, shape, and flagellation.
This research project uses a synergistic approach incorporating microfluidics
and high-speed imaging with state-of-the-art numerical simulations to: (1)
Determine the hydrodynamic effects of flow on the flagellar beating of single,
tethered cells; (2) Determine how externally-imposed flow affects the
hydrodynamics and transport of free swimming cells through flagellar
deformation; (3) Establish how flagellar mechanics couple to collective, self-
generated flows in dense suspensions of active cells. This project is opening a
new, rich research direction in single cell hydrodynamics, where the role of
fluid flow has been largely neglected, despite its many implications for
biology, ecology and medicine. The researchers on this project are establishing
unique empirical data sets and numerical models that map the effects of external
fluid forces on active force generation inside flagella, and such information
will be an asset to microbiologists, ecologists, and biophysicists interested in
modeling cell locomotion. The project is also extending existing methods to
quantify flow-structure interactions by characterizing the deformation of
flexible appendages having internal force generation, i.e. flagella. Graduate
and undergraduate students supported by this project are receiving unique
interdisciplinary training in fluid dynamics and microbial biophysics. A hands-
on high-speed imaging interactive exhibit at the Indiana State Museum is
incorporating these research themes, which will reach middle school students who
attend the museum.