* 1700127
* Dynamics of Nonlinear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Andrew Lawrie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 149,999.00

The world is ruled by wave equations: the electricity on a circuit board, the
light in fiber-optic cables, and even the black hole in the center of the galaxy
propagate by wave dynamics. Though ubiquitous, wave equations are far from
understood. The goal of this project is to understand how the dynamics of waves
change in the face of interference with themselves or with their environment.
The research seeks to learn when and why some waves disperse, while other waves
persist, and still others collapse. Knowing how waves behave in critical
conditions drives technological progress -- smaller microchips, faster data
transmission, and deeper insights into the formation of the universe.

This project will study dynamical properties of solutions to nonlinear wave and
dispersive equations in geometric settings where the nonlinear structure is
intimately tied to classical geometric notions such as curvature. Such equations
arise in a myriad of physical models, ranging from Einstein's equations of
general relativity, to the interactions of particles in nuclear physics.
Particular examples of interest include the wave maps systems, the Yang-Mills
system, semilinear versions of Skyrme's equation, and power-type nonlinear wave
and Schrodinger equations. In many of these problems, solitons (coherent
solitary waves) are thought to be the basic building blocks of global-in-time
dynamics: as the solution evolves, it decomposes into a finite number of weakly
interacting solitons plus a remainder term exhibiting linear dynamics. This is a
loose formulation of the soliton resolution conjecture, which is of central
importance in the field. Progress towards the proof of soliton resolution is the
underlying motivation of several of the specific problems to be addressed in
this project. The dynamics of solitons are also fundamental to singularity
formation, often playing the role of the universal profiles for singularities
that form via a concentration of mass or energy. The project will study the fine
mechanics of singularity formation, and will seek to characterize the possible
dynamical properties of the solution from the profile of the energy that has
radiated away from the point of concentration.