* 1700688
* Research Coordination Network:  Fostering Cross-Disciplinary Research on Energy Development
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jeffrey Jacquet, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 211,504.00

SES-1528422&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey Jacquet &lt;br/&gt;South Dakota State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid proliferation and intensification of
energy development across North America has generated new research about social
and economic impacts to host communities from a diversity of academic
disciplines. This diversity represents the multi-dimensional nature of social
impacts from energy development but demands coordination and integration among
social science perspectives. This research network expands the capacity of
social scientists to measure and analyze the impacts of energy development in
host landscapes and communities through the development of shared conceptual
frameworks and metrics. Based at South Dakota State University and supported by
Montana State University, the Research Coordination Network (RCN)features a
steering committee of leading energy development experts from multiple social
science disciplines. Using in-person and virtual forums, the network will
support researchers in discussing, evaluating and coordinating social science
energy research. The network will deliver a cluster of curricular resources
directed at non-expert audiences such as high school and university
undergraduate students, local officials, and affected residents. The RCN will
provide policy makers, community officials, and energy company officials with an
integrated social science approach to understand and mitigate adverse effects of
energy development, while specific protocols are identified to encourage
participation of diverse and underrepresented populations. A strategic project
advisory board drawn from industry and government will help the network consider
how research can be more relevant and defensible to decision makers, enabling
better informed, more effective energy development planning and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN is driven by the following hypothesis: The
measurement and analysis of social impacts can be coordinated across diverse
forms of energy development and academic discipline, and doing so will increase
the utility of social science and improve societal capacity to address the
unprecedented opportunities and challenges of the current energy transformation.
The goals of this research network are to 1) foster a diverse cross-disciplinary
research community; 2) develop and promote a set of data collection standards,
framing concepts, and longitudinal design to allow for comparison of data
acquired across energy landscapes; and 3) disseminate syntheses and data and
design standards to inform policy dialogues and undergraduate curricula. This
project will advance scientific understanding in the following ways: (1)
Networked scholars will foster the compatibility of currently disparate social,
economic and geographic energy-impact theoretical frameworks through new
synthetic, conceptual work. (2) Strategic planning of new data collection and
analytical techniques will achieve novel discoveries across multiple settings
and fill chronic gaps in social science energy research. (3) Appropriate
standardization of research design across regions and disciplines will increase
compatibility and comparability of data and results, reducing redundancy and
increasing robustness of collected data and reliability of results.