* 1700568
* Applying Geospatial and Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Amber Ignatius, University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2022
* USD 609,739.00

An increasing percentage of the nation's technician workforce will use
geospatial technologies in their occupations. An important need has therefore
emerged for well-qualified technicians who possess geospatial skills. To meet
this emergent need, the University of North Georgia (UNG) will collaborate with
industrial partners to develop new programs focused on geospatial and
engineering technology to prepare highly-skilled technicians for success in
applicable science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professions.
The curriculum will promote an integrated understanding of areas such as
geographic information systems, computer-aided design techniques, surveying, and
spatial analysis. In addition, the project will create course materials that
incorporate elements of geospatial and engineering technologies into traditional
science classes such as biology, geology, and physics to also enhance student
learning in these courses. The project will offer students the opportunity to
obtain employer-recognized credentials, expand pathways toward technician
careers, and enrich the scientific and engineering technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a strong partnership of education and
industry, the project will develop curricula for two new academic programs at
the UNG-Gainesville campus: an Associate of Science degree in Geospatial and
Engineering Technology and a certificate in Land Surveying. Innovative courses
will be developed to integrate aspects of geospatial technology courses, such as
spatial environmental variability, and aspects of engineering technology courses
such as numerical and design case studies. The coursework will focus on
applications to distinctive technical areas including agricultural science and
engineering, forestry and conservation, environmental science and engineering,
surveying and mapping, geology, and civil engineering. The project will develop
articulation agreements that link high schools and technical colleges to
associate and bachelor level degrees to offer seamless transition pathways. The
intellectual merit of this project is manifested by introducing and combining
geospatial and engineering technologies to enhance career pathways in many
applicable fields. The impact of the collective efforts on student learning will
also be assessed. The project will disseminate course materials, processes,
methodologies, outcomes, and best practices to the STEM education community.