* 1700339
* Research Initiation Award: Environmentally friendly high performance perovskite solar cell with fortified stability
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Liqiu Zheng, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2023
* USD 305,160.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at her home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Albany
State University has potential broader and societal impact in a number of areas.
The project focuses on contributing to the knowledge in solar energy science by
studying the instability and toxicity of perovskite photovoltaic cells, while
maintaining competitive efficiency. Undergraduate students, as well as high
school students and teachers will gain research experiences. The project will be
a first step in building a sustainable solar cell research program at the
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
concurrently address two critical issues of perovskite solar cells, instability
and toxicity, without compromising performance. To achieve this,
environmentally-friendly novel perovskite Cex(CH3NH3)1-xGeI3 will be synthesized
with a facile, low cost approach to realize fortified&lt;br/&gt;stability and
enhanced performance. A simple device with p-i-n planar architecture will be
constructed. Lead will be replaced with germanium to minimize toxicity, and
cesium partially incorporated to fortify stability. Meanwhile, the fundamental
operative mechanism of perovskite solar cells will be elucidated by
investigating cells with various configurations. The findings gained in the
project will enrich knowledge in the photovoltaic field, facilitating the
process of various practical applications and commercialization of perovskite
solar cells. Particularly, the comprehensive understanding of the operative
mechanisms will have a far-reaching impact on rational device design and
optimizing device performance. The research will be integrated into introductory
physics courses as well as analytical chemistry courses more appropriate for
senior undergraduate students.