* 1700833
* PFI:AIR - TT: Development of a universal protein and peptide cleanup kit
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Jonathan Minden, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translatingÂ the
development of novel technologies for the field of proteomics. Proteomics is the
high throughput study of proteins produced by organisms, tissues or cells.
Proteomics methods enable biomedical researchers in industry and academia to
discover the following knowledge: what proteins differ between normal
development and diseased states, what proteins are affected by exposure to
different drugs or treatments, and what proteins potentially serve as disease
biomarkers. Proteomics methods have been applied to a wide range of organisms
under an enormous number of conditions. It a relatively new field that has
numerous technological hurdles to cross in order to meet its full potential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists working in the field of proteomics have
indicated that protein and peptide sample preparation is one of the greatest
experimental hurdles they face. More than a million of such proteomics samples
are prepared for analysis per year in the U.S. and reproducible, reliable and
automatable sample preparation is important. Currently, the existing sample
preparation methods lack universality, they are biased towards particular
classes of proteins and peptides that results in significant sample loss, and
the current methods are difficult to automate for industrial applications. This
award develops a prototype of a "Universal Protein and Peptide Isolation and
Cleanup Kit" (UPICK) that targets a ubiquitous feature of all proteins and
peptides, thus it is universal and unbiased. UPICK is amenable to automation,
enabling adoption into high-throughput, industrial workflows, while minimizing
handling errors and environmental contamination. UPICK will allow researchers to
perform their proteomics experiments with far greater reliability, repeatability
and standardization, thus enhancing biomedical discovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. Two novel
reagents will be developed for the protein cleanup kit. One is the development
of a completely reversible protein/peptide tag that is capable of chemically
coupling to the second novel feature, which is ultra-high capacity magnetic
beads. Together, these reagents will be used to first tag all proteins or
peptides in solution and then covalently bind the tagged proteins/peptides to
magnetic beads. The beads will then be washed to remove endogenous and exogenous
non-protein contaminants, such as DNA, RNA, salts, detergents and denaturants.
The goal is to create a UPICK prototype to distribute for beta-testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students and a team of undergraduates will be
involved in developing the kits and testing the efficacy and ease of use of the
kits both in-house and with beta-test partners. In addition, the students will
have the opportunity to participate in Carnegie Mellon?s Tepper School of
Business Innovation Scholars Program that develops the entrepreneurial skills of
non-business school, graduate students.