* 1700408
* Catalyst Project: The Construction of the Inscribed Polygonal Periodic Functions
* EHR,HRD
* 04/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Sandra Rucker, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 211,722.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Clark Atlanta University will formulate the construction of the inscribed
polygonal periodic functions and will provide an opportunity for undergraduate
students to engage in research in mathematics. The researcher has established a
strong collaboration with faculty at Pacific
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the research is to
formulate the construction of the inscribed polygonal periodic functions. These
functions have not been explored and are not documented in the literature.
Specific objectives are to generalize the unit circle inscribed n-sided
polygonal periodic functions and to derive properties for the inscribed square
and inscribed triangle functions. Because these functions&lt;br/&gt;are periodic
in nature, an analysis of their behavior might provide new insight into such
concepts as Fourier series, Laplace transforms, and Hilbert transforms. The
educational goal is to develop active student researchers who will use multiple
scientific investigative techniques and critical thinking skills to form ideas
and communicate them effectively.