* 1700755
* Southwest Local Algebra Meeting 2017
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* David Jorgensen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 12/31/2017
* USD 15,130.00

This award supports participation in the Southwest Local Algebra Meeting 2017,
held at University of New Mexico on March 4-5, 2017. This conference will
facilitate interactions between students and faculty with interests in ring
theory, broadly interpreted, from institutions in the Southwest. Algebraists in
the Southwest region pursue research on a variety of topics under the umbrella
of pure and applied ring theory. The geographical distances in the region are
such that interactions between people at different institutions rarely happen
spontaneously. The meeting will bring together students and faculty from a
variety of institutions for inspiring talks, with ample time for scientific
interaction, providing opportunities for participants to begin new
collaborations and catalyzing new research projects. About 80 participants are
expected, including students and both junior and senior faculty from throughout
the Southwest and South. The participation of students from underrepresented
minority groups, women, untenured faculty, and faculty at non-PhD granting
institutions is particularly encouraged. Six experts will deliver hour-long
talks on topics within their areas of specialty; the lectures will be accessible
to graduate students. The meeting will also feature three hour-long poster
sessions in which the participating students will present their research. More
information can be found at the conference webpage:
http://www.math.ttu.edu/~lchriste/slam2017.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
of rings, in the broadest sense, is crucial to many branches of mathematics,
including commutative and non-commutative geometry, group representations,
number theory, coding theory, and cryptography. Our speakers are specialists in
characteristics p techniques in commutative algebra and geometry, arithmetic
geometry and number theory, numerical algebraic geometry, combinatorial
commutative algebra, Lie Theory and Rees Algebras. This wide variety of
interests among our speakers should bolster new algebraic interactions between
all participants.