* 1700847
* Synthesis of Doubly-Threaded Interlocked Macromolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Stuart Rowan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2018
* USD 179,946.00

Prof. Stuart Rowan of the University of Chicago develops synthetic methods that
allow access to new polymer architectures and studies how these architectures
impact polymer properties. This research has potential societal benefit with
regards to design and preparation of novel polymeric materials with desirable
unique properties. The project involves graduate and undergraduate students,
high school students from a local girl's high school, and students of under-
represented groups from the inner city Cleveland Municipal School District
(through the Envoys program). The integrated approach of this research provides
students at all levels with an exciting learning environment and broad research
experiences. In addition, Prof. Rowan and his research group design new
demonstrations for the outreach program entitled "Natures Materials", which is
part of the Cleveland Museum's "Winter Discovery Day" on Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr. Day. This program aims (i) to expose the local community to polymers and how
Nature's materials can help us create a sustainable planet, and (ii) to train
current graduate students on how to communicate and educate the general public
and younger students about science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project, which is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, encompasses synthetic and
metal-coordination chemistry, computational modeling, as well as polymer science
and characterization. It focuses on the design, synthesis and characterization
of polymers with doubly-threaded architectures where two chains are threaded
through one macrocycle. The new synthetic methodology utilizes metal-ligand
coordination as the thermodynamic driving force for the polymerization step and
either dynamic covalent chemistry (in the form of ring closing metathesis) as
the covalent fixing step to access the poly[n]catenanes or high yielding thiol-
ene chemistry to access the doubly threaded poly[3]rotaxanes and slide ring
gels. The polymers will have the ability to expand/contract without
significantly altering bond or torsion angles and as such it is predicted they
will exhibit unusual viscoelastic properties.