* 1700848
* PFI:AIR - TT:  High Throughput Plasma Water Purifier
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2019
* John Foster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research on
plasma interaction with liquid water for the purpose of water purification. This
approach to water purification will address the need for technologies with the
capability of removing toxic chemicals such as pharmaceuticals, chemical waste
products, and pesticides that can not be effectively removed using conventional
means.  This high throughput water purifier is important because it has the
potential to remove most organic contaminants from water as well as to disinfect
the water of harmful viruses and bacteria. The technology can be used in water
reuse applications where wastewater can be treated with this plasma method to
reduce contaminant levels well below maximum allowable concentrations so that it
can be utilized for both potable (drinking) and non-potable applications (such
as boiler water, car washing and firefighting). This capability makes
communities resilient against drought and even chemical spills. The technology
also has the potential to reduce industrial costs and associated environmental
damage by treating highly toxic wastewater to the point where it can be reused
at the factory.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a prototype
high throughput plasma purifier and will test the plasma purifier at actual
municipal and industrial wastewater plants to demonstrate function and
scalability in a real setting. The high throughput plasma purifier has the
following unique features: 1) scalability, 2) it does not require consumables to
operate, and 3) it drives a multitude of chemical processes in water that
rapidly reduce contaminants to carbon dioxide and water. These features provide
the advantages of performance, e.g. rapid decomposition of contaminants and cost
savings, does not require consumables such as toxic chlorine or peroxide, offers
high electrical and chemical conversion efficiency, and provides ease of
implementation ranging from point-of-use applications to integration as modules
into an actual water treatment plant.  Conventional advanced oxidation methods
supporting water treatment applications require the use of toxic consumables to
drive specialized reactions to generate oxidants as well as the infrastructure
to house and apply the chemicals. The high throughput purifier produces plasma
for water treatment using regular air thereby eliminating the need for costly
consumables and the associated expense of infrastructure to store and apply such
chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the technology gap of
scalability as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application. Though plasma-based water treatment has been investigated in the
past, with impressive decomposition efficiencies, its widespread application has
remained elusive. This is due largely to the difficulty in scaling up beyond
laboratory demonstration of 10s of ml in fixed volumes to the 10s of liters/min
in once-through, flowing water applications. The key innovation of this reactor
is the geometrical deconstruction of water into a form such that plasma coverage
of water flowing through the reactor is maximized. The surface plasma reacts
with the water generating radicals that subsequently treat the core water. In
the course of executing this proposed effort, undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained in applied science, technology translation, product
development, and entrepreneurship. This effort will also administer a hands-on
technical workshop aimed at K-12 students with focus on women and under-
represented minorities that explores advanced water treatment and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages a number of key
partners. These partners include the a municipal waste water plant, a municipal
drinking water plant, a semiconductor manufacturing company, and two engineering
consultancies that actually design drinking and waste water plants, and the
National Sanitation Foundation. In this manner, municipal drinking water and
wastewater, industrial wastewater, and advanced water testing facilities will be
made available to this project supporting piloting in a relevant test
environment and assessing the effectiveness of treatment based on accepted
standards in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality.