* 1700546
* The Thirteenth International Conference on Substorms (ICS13); Portsmouth, New Hampshire; September 24-29, 2017
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 02/28/2018
* USD 29,419.00

This is a travel support for students, and some senior researchers from less
developed countries, along with a small contribution to supplies and publication
costs for a five-day international conference on geomagnetic substorm research.
This meeting entitled, "International Conference on Substorms (ICS13)" will be
held in Portsmouth, New Hampshire during 24-29 September 2017. The ICS13 will be
the 13th in a series of carefully-designed substorm conferences that build on
past advances while incorporating the latest new development. The venue is aimed
at creating a forum to bring together a worldwide cadre of substorm researchers
(and students) to focus their combined talents as well as theoretical and
observational assets on accelerating progress towards a fundamental
understanding of substorm physics. Such an environment, which intermixes a wide
variety of viewpoints and diverse participants, provides a known incubator for
new and innovative approaches that have the potential for enabling
breakthroughs. This environment is also a valuable educational experience for
students and an opportunity for international networking. The dates for the
workshop were selected so that scientific team meetings for several operating
scientific missions making relevant measurements might be organized to overlap
with the conference. As many as 150 participants are anticipated with an
estimated 35 participants requiring travel support - half of this participant
support is requested from NSF, the other half from NASA. Following the event, a
peer-reviewed conference proceedings will be published in an open-access,
electronic-only periodical to enable broad dissemination of the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geomagnetic substorms, the topical focus of the
conference, are explosive energy releases in geospace that have disruptive
consequences in regions from near-Earth space, where weather, communications and
national security satellites orbit; to the underlying upper atmosphere and
ionosphere, where associated mega-ampere currents flow endangering vulnerable
assets both in low-earth orbit and on the ground. There is even evidence to
suggest that effects of this disruption may penetrate into the middle atmosphere
through chemical-dynamical processes with potential, but so-far elusive, effects
on ozone and climate variability. The triggers of these explosive energy
releases are still not fully resolved and debates over the underlying mechanisms
fuel one of the most long-lived controversies in geospace research. The
complicated nature of the phenomenon and the associated difficult progress
toward understanding are creating impediments to developing modeling and
predictive capabilities, a situation that highlights the importance of
international workshops for focusing global knowledge towards a resolution.