* 1700751
* Birational Geometry and Bridgeland Stability Conditions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Emanuele Macri, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Manes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 65,004.00

The notion of stability conditions on derived categories emerged from high
energy physics literature in the study of Dirichlet branes in string theory.
Besides its original motivation, the theory of stability conditions has a much
further reach, with connections to counting invariants, representation theory,
homological mirror symmetry, and classical algebraic geometry. This project lies
at the nexus of these areas; the theme is to apply Bridgeland stability
condition techniques to solve questions arising from birational geometry and
mathematical physics. A stability condition identifies a class of objects in the
derived category, called stable objects, in an intrinsic way. Understanding if
certain objects are stable or not gives important information on the geometry of
algebraic varieties. A stability condition depends on the choice of certain
parameters. Understanding how stable objects change by varying these parameters
is the key to many applications of the theory and is the technical core of this
project.

There are three main goals in the project. The first is to investigate the
existence problem for Bridgeland stability conditions. A general framework for
constructing Bridgeland stability conditions on threefolds was introduced by the
investigator and collaborators, via certain conjectural inequalities. The new
viewpoint is to look at fibrations in particular products, and to deduce such
inequalities from the positivity of a certain divisor class on the base of the
fibration. The second goal is to study stability conditions on non-commutative
K3 surfaces and to use Bridgeland's theory to reinterpret and generalize
geometric constructions, for example for cubic fourfolds, by using moduli spaces
of Bridgeland stable objects. The third goal is to investigate whether such
moduli spaces are "well-behaved" projective varieties in general and to study
their local structure in the case of K3 surfaces. Applications include
investigation of a conjecture on derived equivalences of birational irreducible
holomorphic symplectic varieties.