* 1700909
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Hot Electron Nanophotonic UV/IR CMOS Quanta Image Sensors and Photodetectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Jifeng Liu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
nanophotonic ultraviolet(UV)/infrared(IR) photodetector structure onto existing
silicon-based image sensors, such as those used in cell phone cameras, to
greatly extend their vision well beyond the visible light.  These Nanophotonic
UV/IR Quanta Image Sensors (UV/IR QIS) are important because they can be
seamlessly integrated with the cameras in our cell phones and other devices to
"see" things that are outside of the visible spectrum and thus invisible to
human eyes. This feature opens the door for low-cost, large-arrayed image
sensors to enter the billion-dollar market of UV/IR imaging, including powerline
inspection, vehicle driver vision enhancement, biomedical imaging, and
environmental monitoring. 

The project will result in a proof-of-concept prototype of nanophotonic UV/IR
QIS with the following unique features: (1) ultrahigh sensitivity allowing
single photon detection; (2) compatibility with existing image sensor array
fabrication technology; and (3) ease of miniaturization. These features provide
the following advantages when compared to the leading competing technologies:
(1) Significantly extended detection spectral range well beyond human vision
compared to existing silicon image sensors; (2) Higher sensitivity and larger
pixel array than existing GaN (Gallium Nitride)-based UV detectors and InGaAs
(Indium Gallium Arsenic)-based IR detectors; and (3) Drastic cost and weight
reduction (up to 10-100x) compared to existing solar-blind UV (based on GaN) and
short wave IR cameras (based on InGaAs).

This project addresses the following technology gap(s) through the following
tasks over the course of the project: (A) Optimized device design integrating
hot-electron internal photoemission mechanism with existing silicon QIS device
structure; (B) Choosing adequate oxide and metallic nanostructures compatible
with silicon nanoelectronics for spectral extension into the IR regime (i.e.
metal/oxide interfacial barrier engineering); (C) Device fabrication for overall
integration. By successfully demonstrating this proof-of-concept prototype, the
team will develop techniques to address all these issues. In addition, personnel
involved in this project, especially the graduate students, will receive
innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences through the
development of market-entry prototypes and potentially founding their own start-
up company.

The project engages LaXense, Inc. to expedite the commercialization of the
nanophotonic IR photodetectors in this technology translation effort by
providing a market-entry application in their existing photonics platform.