* 1700496
* Geospatial Technology Center of Excellence: Growing the Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Vincent DiNoto, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 4,682,038.00

The National Geospatial Technology Center of Excellence (GeoTech Center) is a
collaborative effort of two-year colleges, universities, and industry to
accomplish the vision of increasing the number and diversity of learners and
workers who possess industry-defined geospatial technology (GST) skills and
competencies. The need for a GST workforce that possesses current industry-
defined skills and competencies is expanding at a rapid rate. Today, GST is
becoming an essential tool in fields including (but not limited to) emergency
response, sustainability, agro-science, energy, and a variety of STEM
disciplines. These occupations require a skillset in the analysis of spatial
data and geo-visualization. One impact of this project will be the national
expansion and diversification of a GST workforce that possesses relevant and
current industry-defined GST skills and competencies. GeoTech Center research
has identified a lack of educational materials to meet the needs of the broad
geospatial community of users. Curricula that are standardized and contextual,
and that can be used in traditional college learning environments, as well as by
individuals for self-improvement, is desperately needed. The GeoTech Center will
design and develop industry-aligned educational materials that can be used in a
modularized format and portable to different learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GeoTech Center has four integrated Goals:
1) Research emerging trends and uses of GST; 2) Develop industry-aligned
curriculum for new and incumbent users of GST; 3) Investigate best practices to
increase (and retain) the number of underserved and underrepresented populations
(including veterans, women, minority groups, and persons with disabilities) into
GST and STEM fields; and 4) Develop and implement professional development
opportunities and resources for secondary and post-secondary faculty. In order
to successfully accomplish its Goals, the Center will build on strong,
documented relationships with professional GST organizations and provide new and
current workers access to educational resources to assist them in filling any
gaps in their GST skillset (and for them to receive recognition of those skills
through micro-credentials and professional certifications). The Center will
expand its Community of Practice and address specific educational needs of
targeted audiences, including underserved and underrepresented students,
veterans, and faculty in STEM disciplines. The efforts of the Center to
accomplish its Goals will provide the optimum framework and resources to
increase the number and diversity of learners and workers who possess industry-
defined GST skills and competencies.