* 1700704
* Developing 2+2+2 Pathways in Agribusiness to Meet the Needs of California's Agriculture Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Ganesan Srinivasan, Reedley College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2023
* USD 239,960.00

Madera Community College Center, as part of Reedley College, will undertake
"Developing 2+2+2 Pathways in Agribusiness to Meet the Needs of California's
Agriculture Industry". This project will develop new pathways and credentials in
agribusiness education to train the next generation of farmers, leaders, and
professionals. The project also aims to increase workplace diversity by
recruiting under-represented students into agriculture. The State of California
ranks first in the nation for agricultural production, an industry that
contributes over $50 billion annually to the economy. A diverse and well-trained
workforce is critical to the success of California's and the nation's
agricultural industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create seamless
2+2+2 pathways from high school, to two-year community college, and to four-year
institutions for students interested in pursuing an education in agriculture
business and related fields. Students will work towards a certificate, Associate
of Science degree, and/or transfer to a four-year college and university. High
school students will take college-level classes through dual enrollment
pathways, thereby giving them a head start to a college education. An intensive
two-week Summer Academy in Agriculture Sciences and Technology will expose
students to educational and career opportunities in agriculture. Taken together
these various academic pathways underpin the intellectual merit of the project
and its focus on improved recruitment, retention, completion, and success
through excellent classroom instruction, academic counseling, dedicated tutorial
services, modified curriculum/course rotation, and internship opportunities.
Finally, improved course articulation with undergraduate institutions will allow
students the opportunity to transfer to four-year programs in agriculture.