* 1700383
* Bridging the Gap in Automated and Connected Vehicle Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2022
* Thomas Freels, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 903,575.00

Profound developments in research and resources are feeding technological
advancements that will soon make self-driving vehicles commonplace. Today's
leading-edge, semi-autonomous connected vehicles utilize technology that
includes radars, cameras, lidar, multi-domain controllers, wireless vehicle-to-
vehicle communications, and software applications, to name a few. The proposed
postsecondary faculty professional development project, focused on automated and
connected vehicle technology, will serve the NSF's mission of promoting the
progress of science by creating industry-supported workshops and college-level
educational resources to academically strengthen postsecondary automotive
technician degree programs. Project activities such as summer institutes and
professional development webinars for faculty will be designed to advance the
field of vehicle technology education across the country by informing the
educators of future technicians about the new generation of vehicles that are
radically changing the automotive and transportation industries. In addition to
professional development, the autonomous vehicles and other materials purchased
through the grant will also be used to provide outreach activities in secondary
schools, including creating a toolkit comprised of interactive demonstrations
designed to orient secondary school students, teachers, and counselors to
automotive technician educational pathways and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Auto technician education must keep pace with the
complexity of vehicles that incorporate aspects of robotics, machine learning,
computer vision, and mechanical engineering. The goal of the proposed project is
to increase the autonomous vehicle technology experience and knowledge of
automotive technology educators throughout the nation and address the growing
need for qualified, knowledgeable technicians with capacity to maintain and
repair autonomous vehicles. The project will provide a week-long professional
development session, webinars, and other learning events for 40 community
college faculty annually. The project will also conduct outreach activities in
secondary schools to impart information about the high wage, high-tech nature of
the work of automotive technicians, important since many secondary school
students skilled in science, math, and technology are not choosing automotive
technician careers due in part to their misconceptions about what the work
entails. The project will also monitor and document the skills and knowledge
needed by the future automotive technician who will repair and maintain vehicles
using a new set of skills not taught today. The project outcomes will be useful
to other institutions with automotive technician education programs that need to
update their curriculum to meet the changing needs in the industry or are
struggling to diversify their student population interested in automotive
technology careers.