* 1700810
* CAREER: Beyond Virtual Hardware: VMM/OS Co-Design for Lightweight, Flexible Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/23/2016,05/31/2017
* Donald Porter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2017
* USD 51,955.00

Virtualization is an increasingly popular strategy for users to run applications
designed for one platform on another platform---the holy grail of write once,
run anywhere. The caveat for virtualization is that 'anywhere' has to be a
powerful system with resources to spare. In a virtual machine, users can bundle
an application with all of its operating system dependences in an easily-
migrated environment---as long as users are willing to drag along duplicate
networking stacks, CPU schedulers, virus scanners, swapping heuristics, and so
on. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a radical restructuring of
the operating system in order to reduce these redundancies and
overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is driven by a vision of the future
where each application and system service runs in a dedicated virtual machine;
moreover, the operating system is no longer a single piece of software running
on bare hardware, but its functionality is decomposed into several independent
layers between the virtual machine monitor and the unmodified application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates previously unstudied classes of
applications and host services, as well as new system layers for hardware
management and storage, with the end goal of making per-application virtual
machines practical on mobile devices. If successful, this research will
establish a richer scientific understanding of the trade-offs in computer system
design and dramatically improve the efficiency and flexibility of modern
computer systems.