* 1700014
* Nanoscale Phase Transition in Free-Standing Dielectric Thin Foils
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Xiaoli Tan, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 396,171.00

Non-technical description: Capacitors are essential elements in electronics. A
group of oxide materials responding to electric fields by changing their atomic
packing arrangements can display excellent properties for capacitor
applications. This project utilizes advanced electron microscopy techniques to
reveal the underlying microstructural mechanisms responsible for the electrical
responses of the oxides at the nanometer scale in real time. The impact of
mechanical stresses to such responses are examined. A new imaging technique is
developed and applied to contrast the material's original and changed atomic
structures. The outcome of the work is expected to be helpful in designing new
materials for efficient capacitors, which are urgently needed in renewable
energy sources and electric cars. In this project, educational activities are
included to integrate undergraduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, into the research. In addition, the research team
presents demonstrations on capacitors in smart phone chargers to high school
students visiting Iowa State University for the annual Science Bowl regional
competition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Ultrahigh energy
capacitors are possible with antiferroelectric materials as dielectric layers.
It is believed that implementation of such antiferroelectric capacitors in the
next generation power electronics could improve their structural stability and
energy efficiency. The ultrahigh energy density in antiferroelectric capacitors
is achieved through repeated antiferroelectric - ferroelectric phase transition,
which has only been investigated through macroscopic characterization of
polarizations and strains so far. This research effort aims to directly
visualize the nucleation and growth evolution of the new phase during this
critical phase transition at nanometer spatial resolution in free-standing thin
foils of antiferroelectric oxides using a unique in situ transmission electron
microscopy technique developed by the PI's group. The influences of
crystallographic orientation and structural defects, such as dislocations and
grain boundaries, on the nucleation process are examined. In addition, electron
holography technique is applied to determine the polarization direction of the
polar ferroelectric phase, and to compare it with the nonpolar antiferroelectric
phase. Such fundamental understanding of the phase transition is of critical
importance for the successful implementation of antiferroelectric capacitors in
future power electronics.