* 1700660
* Technician Training in Gene Editing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Virginia Balke, Delaware Technical & Community College Stanton-Newark Campus
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 895,279.00

The rapid expansion of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing into every subdiscipline of
biomedical research requires concomitant training of qualified technicians. The
Technician Training in Gene Editing (TTiGE) project addresses this need through
a collaboration between instructors at Delaware Technical Community College
(DTCC) and scientists at the Gene Editing Institute (GEI). Through this
partnership, the latest techniques and applications of gene editing being used
in the research settings of GEI will be integrated into student-centered
curriculum in several courses in the DTCC Biotechnology program. These
activities will then be disseminated nationally to community college instructors
through workshops with instruction in gene editing techniques. Training will
also be provided in using high impact instruction in the classroom which has
been proven to have significant impact on retention in STEM programs. By
training instructors, the number of students receiving training in CRISPR gene
editing techniques has the potential to support the increase use of gene editing
in bioscience companies and research laboratories throughout the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the TTiGE project is to increase the
number of biotechnology technicians knowledgeable in CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing
and associated skills. A GEI technician will be supported to transfer gene
editing technical knowledge and advances to DTCC faculty who will create high
impact curriculum to be incorporated into several classes in the Biotechnology
program. This program further enhances the Biotechnology program which was
strengthened by incorporation of active learning and undergraduate research
(Award # 1003649). Two and five-day workshops will be developed to train
community college faculty in gene editing techniques in yeast and mammalian
cells and the use of student-centered curriculum. Follow-up communication will
provide workshop attendees with technical and educational support and
disseminate the latest technical advancements in the field. Project evaluation
will measure the impact on Delaware Tech students and track incorporation of the
materials into courses by workshop attendees. The teacher training in student-
centered pedagogy will build teacher confidence to expand these practices into
other courses with the goal of increasing retention and graduation rates of
bioscience students. The gene editing focus of the TTiGE project insures that
technicians are graduating with critical entry-level skills enriched with
employability skills.