* 1700202
* Infinite dimensional variational problems and their dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Wilfrid Gangbo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 183,998.00

In optimal transportation theory, one looks for the best strategies to
transport, say, a pile of dirt, to an excavation, where optimality is measured
against a prescribed cost function. In his earlier research, the principal
investigator (PI) created new tools for optimal transport theory, a theory which
has experienced a mathematical renaissance over the last twenty-five years by
weaving together threads from analysis, geometry, partial differential equations
(PDEs) and dynamical systems. Motivated by his work on systems with large
numbers of particles, the PI, with collaborators, has discovered some
connections between optimal transportation, games with a large number of
players, and Mean Field Games. These unexpected connections open doors to
several new avenues of research, some of which being described in this proposal.
The goal of this project is to advance knowledge in various other related
topics. This includes the geometry of the space of closed differential forms
with the non--linear factorization of differential forms. This proposal involves
training students, mentoring postdocs and organizing learning seminars for
graduate students. The PI will remain involved in national as well as
international activities. These, constitute the broader impacts of the proposed
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI studies the mathematical aspects of
Density Functional Theory (DFT), as well as certain geometric clustering
problems originating in combinatorial optimization. What many of these problems
have in common, and what is sometimes novel in the approach for studying them,
is their formulation on infinite dimensional ``manifolds'' equipped with metric,
differential, and symplectic pseudo-structures. This infinite dimensional
setting often lead to a new outlook and --at least on the formal level-- to
novel and simpler approaches to otherwise complex problems. A typical example is
how Otto's calculus turns many nonlinear PDEs into gradient flows of
geodesically convex functionals. In a similar fashion, our searching for
geodesic of minimal lengths on the set of differential forms, leads to a new
concept of ``quasiconvexity," that looks like an extension of the concept
originally introduced by C. Morrey and used extensively in non--linear
elasticity theory. Part of the challenge, however, includes turning formal
arguments into rigorous ones to yield new results. The intellectual merit of the
research is that the problems to be studied have the potential of revealing
principles which can be extended to a more general context.