* 1700036
* Fourier analysis in geometric tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Alexander Koldobsky, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2021
* USD 219,000.00

Geometric tomography is the area of mathematics in which one investigates
geometric properties of solids based on the information about sections and
projections of these solids. One of the examples, x-ray tomography, has numerous
applications in science, medicine, and engineering. Within mathematics,
geometric tomography overlaps with convex geometry and functional analysis. The
principal investigator has recently discovered that important problems in the
area of geometric tomography can be solved using the most popular tool of
harmonic analysis, the Fourier transform. This tool allows one to decompose data
into a simple combination of harmonics (i.e., into functions with periodically
repeating values) and, by doing this, to reduce geometric problems to
computations related to the harmonics, the theory of which is well developed.
This approach has led to analytic solutions of several longstanding problems in
the area, including the Busemann-Petty problem, the Shephard problem, and the
slicing problem for sections of proportional dimensions. In this project, the
principal investigator plans to apply the Fourier approach to several types of
problems. Volume comparison problems ask what kind of data about sections or
projections is necessary to conclude that the volume of one body is greater than
the volume of another body. Volume difference problems ask how errors in the
data related to plane sections or projections of a solid affect the computation
of the volume of this solid. Slicing problems are concerned with bounds for the
volume of a solid in terms of the areas of its slices through the center. The
principal investigator expects that methods developed in this project will also
be applicable to several problems in functional analysis and probability, in
particular to the study of stable random processes (i.e., random laws inheriting
the self-reproducing property of the normal law). Stable laws are frequently
used in statistics. An important part of the project is the involvement and
training of graduate students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems
considered in this project belong to several areas of mathematics: geometric
tomography, convex geometry, functional analysis, and probability. However, the
strategy of solution is common for most of the results: the question is
translated into the language of the Fourier transform and then treated as a
problem from harmonic analysis. In geometric tomography the principal
investigator plans to apply Fourier methods to stability and separation in
volume comparison problems, namely, volume difference and slicing inequalities
for the section, projection, and curvature functions. In particular, he plans to
study quantitative versions of the Busemann-Petty problem, which asks whether
convex bodies with uniformly smaller areas of central plane sections in all
directions necessarily have smaller volumes. He also plans to continue his work
on the slicing problem of Bourgain. Another direction of research in the project
is a connection between convex geometry and functional analysis. The principal
investigator has recently found that intersection bodies, one of the main
objects of interest in convex geometry, can be considered as the unit balls of
certain Lebesgue spaces. He plans to apply this connection to the problem of
duality between intersection and projection bodies, as well as to the problem of
estimating the distance from an arbitrary convex body to the classes of
intersection and projection bodies. Yet another direction of research is related
to a problem in probability theory going back to Levy. The problem is to
characterize random vectors having the property that all linear combinations of
their coordinates have the same distribution, up to a constant. A conjecture is
that the only vectors with this property are mixtures of stable random vectors.
The principal investigator has already made several contributions in this
direction, including a solution of a 1938 problem of Schoenberg, but the main
question remains open.