* 1700438
* Development of a Competency-Based Education Program in CyberSecurity
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Frank Marsaglia, Lincoln Land Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,999.00

To address the demand for highly skilled workers who are prepared to protect the
critical national cyber infrastructure as well as the call for greater student
completion rates of a postsecondary degree or certificate, this project at
Lincoln Land Community College (LLCC) in Illinois is designed to create a
competency based education (CBE) program in cybersecurity. Working with industry
and education partners, LLCC will plan, develop and implement this learner-
focused CBE program that will increase completion rates while potentially
reducing the time and the cost to students. The program will build upon the
current knowledge base of each individual student and eliminate unnecessary time
and effort on learning objectives already mastered. Because there is limited
research for CBE programs developed within existing higher education structures,
this project includes a comprehensive evaluation component. Because many
institutions in postsecondary education and especially community colleges are
looking for innovators who have paved the path in CBE and are seeking advice for
best practices and program implementation to better serve their students, LLCC
will be positioned to share best practices and data regarding participation and
completion to both state and national organizations. Deployed military can use
the CBE program to build upon their current knowledge and complete the program
entirely off campus as a result of virtual technology. Since LLCC serves a large
rural population, this competency-based program will address the barriers faced
by rural students wishing to participate in opportunities related to this vital
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to provide an alternative
delivery model for attaining a cybersecurity certificate by: 1) developing
curriculum based on competency driven assessments to deliver a CBE cybersecurity
certificate program, 2) developing an effective student admission process for
evaluating student skills and behaviors needed to be successful in a competency-
based program, 3) developing support services for students including advising,
financial aid, and coaching to ensure success and completion in the program, 4)
implementing the CBE cybersecurity certificate, and 5) evaluating the process
and outcomes of the CBE cybersecurity certificate program. LLCC will contribute
course content to the ATE Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance
(CCSIA) at Moraine Community College and the ATE National CyberWatch Center at
Prince George's Community College as well as adapt many of their materials for a
rural audience. Completion pathways for this program will include a certificate
and upon completion of the certificate the student can enter the workforce or
continue their educational endeavors. The certificate is a building block to
receiving an associate degree, which the student can use to transfer to a four
year institution to complete a baccalaureate degree. This program will provide
promising opportunities for students (both local and rural), not only at the
post-secondary level, but also at the secondary level through dual credit
offerings or dual enrollment at the community college.