* 1700989
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effects of sexual dimorphism on morphological diversification of Musteloidea
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Rita Mehta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 19,189.00

Uneven diversity in both numbers of species and anatomical variability
represents one of the more perplexing evolutionary patterns across the Tree of
Life. Although an increasing number of researchers have begun to understand what
drives uneven diversity between species, few researchers have examined how
differences within single species can affect these broad scale evolutionary
patterns. One source of variation lies in the difference between the sexes. The
primary goal of this research is to build upon evolutionary theory by examining
how sex differences contribute to species and phenotypic diversity. This
research fills a critical gap in our understanding of how variation within
species may drive larger patterns of species diversity. Through this research
program, scientists will contribute to training the next generation of students
through their mentorship of high school students through the UC Santa Cruz
Science Internship Program (SIP), undergraduate student training in the Small
Mammal Undergraduate Research in the Forest (SMURF) program, public talks
through the Santa Cruz Public Library, and undergraduate teaching in Comparative
Vertebrate Anatomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The skulls of musteloids (badgers,
otters, raccoons, skunks, and weasels) will be used as a model to examine the
effects of sexual dimorphism on phenotypic disparity at the macroevolutionary
scale. Musteloids are a taxonomically rich and phenotypically disparate clade
whose lineages exhibit uneven patterns of diversity. The researchers will use 3D
geometric morphometrics and develop new comparative methods to test the
hypothesis [H1a] that incorporating the effects of sex will reveal increased
cranial disparity. Males and females in each species are predicted to occupy
mostly non-overlapping parts of cranial morphospace; furthermore, the inclusion
of both sexes will fill morphospace that was previously unoccupied when the
analysis focused on a single sex. The researchers will then quantify the rates
of cranial disparity through time in males and females separately and pooled
together (species means) to test the hypothesis [H1b] that incorporating sex
enhances the pattern of adaptive radiation (i.e. rapid increases in evolutionary
rates near ecological opportunity followed by a slowdown in rates). A rate shift
in cranial evolution is predicted to occur just after the onset of the Mid-
Miocene Climate Transition when using the pooled male and female dataset.
Lastly, the researchers will examine an ecological basis for sexual dimorphism
by testing the hypothesis [H2] that the degree of carnivory corresponds with the
evolution of sexual dimorphism in cranial shape and size across Musteloidea.
Therefore, hypercarnivorous musteloids are predicted to exhibit the highest
degree of cranial sexual dimorphism. We suspect that this disparity in
hypercarnivores is present to mitigate competition between the sexes.