* 1700994
* Modular Manufacturing Workshop; Arlington, VA; January 17-18, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Dionisios Vlachos, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 11/30/2017
* USD 39,742.00

The project will support a workshop on Modular Manufacturing of Chemicals that
will be held near the National Science Foundation on January 17 and 18, 2017.
The workshop will bring together technology leaders to develop a roadmap for
basic research supporting development of small-scale, modular, chemical
manufacturing facilities as an alternative to conventional huge-scale chemical
plants. The modular alternative offers potential advantages for the utilization
of chemical feedstocks that are remotely located and cannot be economically
transported to centralized processing facilities. Successful development and
implementation of modular manufacturing facilities will ensure sustained
competitiveness of the U.S. chemical industry while also addressing
environmental challenges and promoting clean energy
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid emergence of large reserves of
natural gas derived from shale oil fracturing operations has created a challenge
in utilizing the gas. Much of the so-called stranded gas produced in remote
locations is burned because of poor economics for transporting it to power-
plants or chemical plants. Modular, scalable, processing units that can be
installed at the well-head, offer a means of converting these hydrocarbon gases
to transportable liquid fuels and chemicals. The modular units can only be
successfully deployed if heretofore unrealized levels of process intensification
and integration can be achieved. This, in turn, will require unprecedented
collaboration among engineers and scientists across disciplines involving
catalysis, reactor engineering, separations, energy utilization, and systems
engineering. The workshop will explore the most efficient mechanisms for
achieving such collaboration. Benefits of the technology will include improved
process technologies for implementation across all manufacturing scales, and
societal benefits including reduced carbon dioxide emissions, safer chemical
processing, workforce training, and continued world-wide competitiveness of the
U.S. chemical industry.