* 1700765
* Data Handling and Analysis Infrastructure for Gravitational-wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Joshua Smith, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 7,199,963.00

Gravitational waves and black holes are among the most dramatic predictions of
Einstein's General theory of Relativity. The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
wave Observatory (LIGO) is an ambitious NSF-funded project designed to directly
detect gravitational waves and to use these waves to explore the universe. LIGO
forms part of a world-wide network of gravitational-wave observatories poised to
probe black holes, neutron stars, supernovae and the early universe using
gravitational waves as a new astronomical tool. The construction of Advanced
LIGO (aLIGO) was completed in early 2015 with the first observing run (O1) from
12 September 2015 to 19 January 2016. With the first observation of
gravitational waves from a binary black hole merger by LIGO on 14 September
2015, we entered the era of gravitational-wave astronomy. The scientific goals
of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) rely on a substantial computational
infrastructure, which spans astrophysical data analysis, detector and analysis
middleware, software sustainability, and computational hardware support. Cyber-
infrastructure is as essential to gravitational-wave astronomy as the detectors
themselves. This award to sustain and enhance aLIGO's cyber-infrastructure will
enable the transformational new science that future gravitational-wave
observations will bring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIGO Data Grid (LDG) is a
distributed computational facility that hosts the middleware and support
personnel needed to turn a collection of computer clusters into a powerful data
analysis engine for gravitational wave science. This award provides funding for
the skilled personnel who will continue to support and maintain the LDG and
deliver the substantial improvements in services, scalability and reliability
needed to sustain the scientific return from aLIGO. The primary goals of this
project are: to allow the LSC to complete the analysis of early aLIGO
observations, to deliver the software infrastructure and services to support
gravitational-wave astronomy with aLIGO and its international partners, to
provide the cyber-infrastructure needed to bring gravitational-wave astronomy
together with the broader astronomical community, and to prototype tools for
open access to LIGO data for the scientific community and the public. This
research program will train students and postdocs to be experts in next-
generation cyber-infrastructure, push the boundaries of LIGO's geographically
distributed, locally-available computational data grid, and sustain the
operation of this cyber-infrastructure to support LIGO's science mission.
Proposed collaborations with external partners (including Internet2, Globus,
Condor and Pegasus) will have significant impact outside the LSC.