* 1700391
* Research Initiation Award: Towards Realizing a Self-Protecting Healthcare Information System for the Internet of Medical Things
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Qian Chen, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,991.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at her home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Savannah
State University has potential broader and societal impact in a number of areas.
The project seeks to develop an autonomic security management framework and
apply the framework to realize a self-protecting Healthcare Information System
(HIS). The comprehensive self-protection system will enable HISs to autonomously
assess their potential security risks, initiate prevention mechanisms, detect
realtime intrusions and react to cyber attacks, thus maintaining normal
performance and enhancing patient data security and privacy. Undergraduate
students will gain research experiences and the research will be integrated in a
number of cyber security courses.

The research seeks to adopt computing technology to realize a Self-Protecting
Healthcare Information System (SPHIS) that can autonomously assess system
security risks, initiate prevention mechanisms, detect real-time intrusions and
react to cyber attacks with little or no human intervention. Eventually the
SPHIS will maintain the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) ecosystem's normal
performance and enhance patients' data security and privacy. An Internet of
Things cyber security lab and Healthcare Information System cloud testbed will
be built to validate the SPHIS autonomous feature and functions using real-world
cyber attacks. The research will determine cyber attacks and use time series
forecasting methods to initialize early warning modules and send attack alerts
based on the variation of power utilization of IoMT devices. Power consumption
of IoMT devices thus will be collected offline when the system is under normal
and known cyber attack situations. The power data will be used to set up the
IoMT ecosystem's normal behavior region by data mining techniques, and help to
identify abnormal behaviors and detect cyber attacks using unsupervised learning
techniques. The power data of IoMT devices will be collected online when the HIS
is compromised by unknown attacks, and the power data will be analyzed by a
network of forensics analysis tools. The attack patterns will be added to update
the intrusion detection module. A dynamic intrusion response system will be
developed to select the optimal prevention and protection mechanisms for
mitigating cyber attacks. The research promises to change the current HIS cyber
security state from poorly prepared to well defended against emerging cyber
attacks. This research will also contribute to development of the cyber security
workforce and enhance security awareness in healthcare organizations.