* 1700899
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Examining Evidence for Phenotypic and Genetic Convergence in the Guppy (Poecilia reticulata)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 17,310.00

Convergent evolution refers to the origin of similar traits in different
species, such as flight in birds, bats, and insects. It is often thought that
the genes underlying convergent evolution within species are similar, but this
is still an open question. This proposal uses a nucleic acid sequencing method
to which genes are turned on or off at any time. This information is then
compared with tail color patterns of guppies. Tail coloration is highly variable
trait and plays a key role in mating displays. The project will identify color
genes in different fish at different locations to understand if the same genetic
signatures result in similar patterns. The study will advance scientific
knowledge by answering questions concerning the predictability of evolution, and
will provide research opportunities for undergraduates at one of the most
ethnically diverse universities in the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal focuses on convergent evolution. Specifically, the researchers address
two questions: 1) How similar are visible color patterns among individuals from
genetically diverged populations? and 2) Will genes differentiating extreme
color patterns within a population be convergent among individuals from
genetically diverged sites, and if so, which ones? For the first question, the
researchers will analyze photographs of male guppies from five sites and sort
the patterns into color categories. The researchers hypothesize that there will
be convergence in the color patterns of males from genetically diverged
populations. The second question will be answered using next generation DNA
sequencing. For each of the five sites, tissues from males with colored and
uncolored tails will be sequenced. The differentially expressed genes between
tail color types at one site will be compared to the differentially expressed
genes between tail color types at the other sites to test for convergence. The
researchers will be able to determine if phenotypic convergence is correlated
with expression of the same genes, different genes within the same pathway, or
different pathways.