* 1700566
* Cyber Pro: Developing Rigorous and Enhanced Academic Modules (DREAMs)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Danis Heighton, Clark State Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 506,103.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge
and skills. In this project, Clark State Community College will work with high
schools to engage students in considering this high-demand career field. In
particular, the investigators will lead the development of approximately 30
hands-on cybersecurity laboratory modules that are specifically designed for
delivery within a high school classroom environment, with its typical time
constraints and limited technical resources. The module development process will
consider appropriate content, timing, methods of delivery, and incremental
development of knowledge and skills. Project teams consisting of college faculty
and students and high school teachers and students will design, develop, and
test the modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lab modules will cover entry-level
cybersecurity knowledge and skills that map to in-demand industry certifications
(specifically, CompTIA Security+ and CISSP), and the modules will also be mapped
to the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity
Workforce Framework. Existing high-quality materials will be adapted when
possible, and the investigators will coordinate with others who are currently
developing cybersecurity curricula to avoid duplications. An advisory board
consisting of college, high school, business, military, and government experts
will provide guidance on the topics, content, coverage, and flow of the modules.
Each module will consist (typically) of a set of PowerPoint slides, a list of
Internet references, a written lab activity, assessment questions, application
software, and a mapping to industry certifications and the NICE Cybersecurity
Workforce Framework. For each content area, a beginning, intermediate, and
advanced cybersecurity lab activity will be developed. The cybersecurity modules
will be initially distributed and beta-tested through a hands-on training
institute for college and high school educators during the summer.