* 1700839
* PFI:AIR - TT: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Guided Robotic Cardiac Catheter System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* M. Cenk Cavusoglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2021
* USD 247,870.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating magnetic
resonance imaging-guided robotics technology to develop a robotic catheter
system for treatment of atrial fibrillation ablation. The developed technology
aims to improve treatment of atrial fibrillation, which has an estimated the
prevalence of 2.7-6.1 million in the United States, with 200,000 new cases
annually. The developed real-time, magnetic resonance, imaging-guided, robotic
catheter technology will significantly improve the accuracy and repeatability of
the atrial fibrillation ablation therapy, compared to the state-of-the-art
manually controlled catheters. This technology will also reduce costs by
decreasing time in the operating room, reducing the need for repeat procedures
due to incomplete treatment, and reducing adverse events and complications. In
this project, the investigators will develop a proof-of-concept prototype of the
robotic catheter system that will be used in subsequent early validation
studies.

This project addresses the technology gaps in synergistically integrating high-
speed magnetic resonance imaging technologies with robotic motion planning and
control techniques, to develop a novel co-robotic system. In the proposed
paradigm, the atrial fibrillation ablation will be performed under intra-
operative magnetic resonance imaging guidance, and conventional manually
controlled intravascular catheters will be replaced with robotic catheters
actuated by the magnetic resonance imaging system. The location of the catheter
tip and the target tissue will be measured by magnetic resonance imaging in
real-time. The robotic control algorithms will then use this information to
actively control the catheter tip. Intra-operative availability of magnetic
resonance imaging, with its superior tissue discrimination capabilities, would
allow real-time evaluation of the substrate depth and lesion created by
ablation.

In addition, personnel involved in this project, in particular, one postdoctoral
and one graduate student, will receive training in innovation and technology
commercialization through participating in technology innovation and
entrepreneurship education programs.