* 1700982
* NSF Center for Selective CH Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Huw Davies, Emory University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000,000.00

With support from the Center for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry at NSF, the Center for Selective Carbon-Hydrogen (C-H)
Functionalization (CCHF) will coordinate and support a highly collaborative
research team advancing new synthetic chemistry methodologies and approaches.
Almost all carbon-based organic molecules contain several C-H bonds. CCHF
researchers are designing advanced catalysts that can promote reaction at
specific C-H bonds. This enables new approaches to making molecules in a
streamlined and sustainable way. These new approaches will have impact on modern
medicine and manufacturing, including drug discovery and materials science. CCHF
will connect to scientists in colleges and companies, large and small, across
the globe, through online symposia as well as traditional conferences. CCHF will
contribute teaching materials to facilitate the inclusion of C-H
functionalization into curricula and engage with the public in a broad range of
activities, including large public science festivals, across the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the CCHF is to revolutionize organic synthesis
by developing chemistries for C-H Functionalization. While the ubiquity of C-H
bonds in organic molecules is a key advantage in the CCHF approach, the
similarity in bond energy makes selective product formation a challenging and
stimulating problem. To date, the most effective strategies have relied on
properties inherent to the substrate, either through steric and electronic bias,
or through reagent-chelation and direction to specific C-H bonds. Moving
forward, the CCHF will also explore catalyst control of selectivity through
sophisticated reaction design. These efforts will be focused on three strategies
to impart selection; 1) catalyst-controlled site selection: employing small
molecule catalysts with ligand frameworks capable of controlling substrate
trajectories to selectively form single products, 2) substrate coordination
assisted site selection: designing a suite of catalysts and ligands that can
weakly assemble around a substrate and deliver reagents to specific C-H bonds,
3) bio-inspired catalyst site selection: employing and repurposing enzymes to
selectively functionalize an expanded scope of substrates. The Center will
demonstrate the power of these distinct strategies in the context of natural
products synthesis, drug discovery and preparation, creation of organic
materials, and the preparation of agrochemicals. Immersion in a collaborative
environment such as the CCHF will provide an excellent forum to prepare Center
members for future participation in interdisciplinary team science, and the
Center will deliver programming to enhance this experience. CCHF will also
educate the broader scientific community on how to best deploy C-H
functionalization strategies and tactics to solve synthetic problems via
activities such as the Virtual Frontiers of C-H Functionalization virtual
symposia and the Organic Pedagogical Electronic Network (OPEN) which distributes
educational materials related to C-H functionalization. The CCHF is committed to
be actively engaged in broadening participation, offering programs such as the
Network for Diversity in Chemical Research (NDCR). The primary goal of the NDCR
is to assist faculty in their early career by offering research and networking
opportunities with CCHF scientists.