* 1700095
* Model Theory and Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* James Freitag, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 147,108.00

This project centers on algebraic differential equations and model theory.
Differential equations are at the heart of modern mathematics and its
applications in other sciences. Model theory is a part of mathematical logic in
which objects known as definable sets are studied. The notion of a definable set
is flexible, changing as one works in different mathematical settings. In the
area of differential algebra, definable sets are closely linked with
differential equations, providing a connection between the two subjects. This
project plans to exploit that link to advance the knowledge of both fields. The
project also seeks applications in other areas of mathematics, primarily number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses problems in the
model theory of fields with operators. First, the investigator will generalize
his work on the differential algebra of the j-function to understand the
differential equations satisfied by analytic covering maps associated with
various Shimura varieties. This line of work is expected to have number
theoretic consequences related to special-point conjectures as it did in the
case of modular curves. The project will also investigate several finiteness
results in differential algebra; this line of work is expected to have
consequences on effective bounds in number theory and in computational
differential algebra. The project aims to develop various aspects of the model
theory of supersimple and superstable groups as a generalization of recent work
in differential algebraic and difference algebraic groups. The project will
investigate the classification of disintegrated strongly minimal sets in
differentially closed fields. This work seeks to answer a fundamental question
about differential equations: what are the possible structures given by the
differential algebraic relations between solutions to a fixed differential
equation? Finally, this project aims to adapt and generalize results from
algebraic foliations and vector fields for application in differential algebraic
geometry.