* 1700821
* DATING THE CENOZOIC INCISION HISTORY OF THE TENNESSEE AND SHENANDOAH RIVERS WITH COSMOGENIC NUCLIDES AND 40Ar/39Ar IN MANGANESE OXIDES
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Darryl Granger, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2022
* USD 508,894.00

While most accounts hold that the Appalachian Mountains should have eroded away
long ago, they remain standing more than 200 million years after they were
formed. There are two possible explanations to this classic problem: either they
eroded extremely slowly, or they were uplifted again in the geologically recent
past. Granger and his colleagues propose to test these two scenarios by using
state-of-the-art methods to date scattered remnants of an ancient landscape
preserved throughout the southern Appalachians, from manganese ores mined during
World War I to a fossil-rich sinkhole uncovered during road construction in East
Tennessee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use 40Ar/39Ar to date the
formation of potassium-bearing manganese ores that form in the weathering zone
near the ground surface, traditionally identified as relicts of an ancient
landscape. Cosmogenic 26Al and 10Be will be used to date terraces along the
Tennessee and Shenandoah Rivers to determine river incision rates, and also to
date fossil-bearing deposits at a sinkhole deposit at Gray, Tennessee. This work
represents new collaborations between Granger and graduate student Odom at
Purdue University with researchers at East Tennessee State University and dating
specialists at the U.S. Geological Survey and the University of Queensland,
Australia, and directly involves a STEM teacher to bring geoscience to the
classroom.