* 1700723
* SHF: Small: The Loop Chain Abstraction for Balancing Locality and Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 08/16/2016,01/31/2018
* Catherine Olschanowsky, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2018
* USD 259,994.00

Title: SHF: Small: The Loop Chain Abstraction for Balancing Locality and
Parallelism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational science, which involves modeling
and simulation of phenomena such as combustion in engines, has become the third
pillar of science and engineering research. Computer simulations test design
parameters much more cheaply than physical experiments. Also, computer
simulations participate in a fortuitous cycle with theory by enabling
inexpensive experimentation of theoretical models. Mapping computer simulations
to high performance computer architectures is a challenging computer science
problem; constraints include achieving high performance and effective use of
computing resources while not overburdening scientific programmers. This
challenge is becoming more severe as architectures continue to evolve in ways
that make them ever more difficult to use. In this project, the PIs will remove
programmer burden by developing a programming abstraction called loop chaining,
which enables architecture-specific program optimizations by compilers. This
work enables scientists to spend less time dealing with annoying performance
programming details and more time evolving their scientific models that help
push science and engineering forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exposing
opportunities for parallelization while explicitly managing data locality is the
primary challenge to porting and optimizing existing computational science
simulation codes. The most popular programming models used in these codes such
as MPI (Message Passing Interface) require that programmers explicitly determine
the data and computation distribution. This has led to good scaling between
compute nodes, but parallelism and locality are needed within a node as well.
There are many approaches for implementing shared memory parallelism, but with
most of them it is the programmer's responsibility to group computations to
improve data locality. This project focuses on the development of the loop chain
abstraction to provide compilers with sufficient information to automate the
parallelism versus data locality tradeoff. Preliminary results show that using
the loop chain abstraction can significantly improve parallel scalability. The
intellectual merits are that the loop chain abstraction will enable existing
codes to maintain their software modularity while exposing information critical
to performance optimizations that improve parallel scalability. Some important
contributions of this research are the re-casting of existing program
optimizations to use the loop chain abstraction as input and the eventual
incorporation of the loop chain abstraction into parallel programming languages.
The broader impacts include reducing the burden on scientists developing
computational simulations, sharing the developed compiler prototypes as open-
source software, and providing tutorials for doing source-to-source loop chain-
based tiling transformations in C++ and Fortran code. The testbed for loop
chaining will include atmospheric science, materials, and combustion codes,
therefore tunable versions of these applications will be released. Additionally,
a new course module will be developed, through which students will be trained in
computational science and specifically, on how to expose loop chains within
simulation software.