* 1700261
* Some Analytical Aspects of the Theory of Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Alexander Its, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2020
* USD 180,765.00

The term, "Integrable Systems," usually refers to mathematical objects, most
often differential equations, with special symmetry properties that allow them
to be studied in a very detailed way and sometimes even to solve them in a
closed form. The class of integrable systems includes several fundamental
equations of nature and the mathematical foundations of integrable systems go
back to classical works of Liouville, Gauss, and Poincare. Currently, the theory
of integrable systems has become an expanding area which plays an increasingly
important role as one of the principal sources of new analytical and algebraic
ideas for many branches of modern mathematics and theoretical physics.
Simultaneously, it provides an efficient analytical tool for the study of some
of the fundamental mathematical models arising in modern nonlinear science and
technology. In addition to the traditional domain of differential equations,
integrable techniques are becoming common in such diverse fields as orthogonal
polynomials, string theory, enumerative topology, statistical mechanics, random
processes, quantum informatics, and number theory. Many of the problems
considered in the project have direct connections with these disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project continuous the principal
investigator's long term research efforts in the theory of integrable systems.
The principal goal of the project is to address the following two directions
which have emerged from recent developments in random matrix theory and in the
theory of exactly solvable quantum models: (a) The study of the isomonodromic
tau functions, their asymptotics, Fredholm determinant representations and their
relations to the conformal field theory; (b) The asymptotic analysis of
Toeplitz, Hankel, and Fredholm determinants arising in the study of critical
phenomena in random matrices and statistical mechanics. Each of these directions
is represented by a collection of concrete problems, and they will be
investigated within the same analytical framework, viz., the Riemann-Hilbert
method. The main focus of the first direction is on the long standing question
of evaluation the asymptotic connection formulae, including the constant pre-
factors, for the generic families of Painleve tau functions. The principal
concern of the second direction is various types of double scaling and
transitional limits - topics which are among the principal questions in both the
theory of random matrices and in statistical mechanics.