* 1700632
* Effectively Delivering Networking and Cybersecurity Education in a Rural Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Laura Berry, North Arkansas College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,341.00

The United States economy is increasingly reliant on highly skilled information
technology professionals who not only have excellent foundational computer
knowledge, skills, and abilities, but also possess the cybersecurity skills
required to protect and defend the critical national cyber resources on which
business and industry rely. To address the demand of business and industry for
these professionals, North Arkansas College (Northark) has designed this project
to increase the number of skilled technicians who are trained in network
technology with a cybersecurity focus. The project team will enhance and expand
their program by infusing the existing Information Technology/Network Systems
Administration curricula with cyber security components. The Business/Industry
Leadership Team (BILT) at the college will play an active role in setting the
direction of the IT program as they have an increased need for more highly
trained skilled technicians in IT/Cyber. The project will assist in diversifying
the workforce and growing the economy in rural areas by providing access to
high-tech jobs for low income students. The results of this project will be life
changing and will provide a pathway out of poverty for many students and their
families. Northark will share all aspects of the project, including newly
developed methods of engaging Business and Industry (the BILT model), methods to
offer course materials remotely, strategies to recruit and provide access to
rural students, and curricular improvements, on a website devoted to this
project and at in-state, regional, and national conferences. A comprehensive
evaluation will determine which components of the project are most effective and
where modifications are needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because many residents in
the service area of the college and other parts of Arkansas, especially those in
rural areas, do not have access to the resources required, Northark will utilize
technology to support remote delivery of course content through web and virtual
options, as well as expanded face to face opportunities at satellite locations
and high schools. It will also create a concurrent credit track to allow high
school students to complete an IT/Cyber Certificate of Proficiency, actively
recruit rural and high school students to enter this high tech field, and add an
Academic/Career coach who will provide support that will increase retention,
degree completion, and job placement. Using available NSF-ATE curriculum and
open source materials, faculty at the college will adapt and enhance the
existing IT program with Cybersecurity topics and adapt all curricula for
distance delivery. Northark will pilot test distance delivery of this high tech
coursework to rural students who do not otherwise have access to such curricular
opportunities. The program will be promoted by BILT members and current students
and the college will utilize recruiting strategies adapted from other ATE
projects to attract more students to this updated flexibly-delivered program.