* 1700838
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Canopy hydraulic redistribution: Tree water uptake via canopy roots in epiphytic bryophyte mats
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Johanna Cantillo P, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2020
* USD 19,861.00

Trees in temperate and tropical rainforests can sprout roots from branches into
epiphyte mats that occur in the tree canopy. These mats develop a structure
similar to soil through the accumulation of living and dead plants in the
canopy. Whether these roots take up significant water and nutrients, however,
has not been measured or even confirmed. The nutrient and water resources that
are potentially transferred by the roots may offer a considerable benefit to the
health and growth of trees. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant will
provide funds to examine the exchange of water and nutrients between epiphytic
mats and host trees that grow roots underneath the canopy soil. Temperatures in
the Pacific Northwest are likely to continue to rise, and drought to become more
severe. Canopy roots and epiphytes may be crucial to maintaining plant
biodiversity in critical habitats, and convey an advantage, especially under
conditions where trees become heat-stressed. Results from this project will
significantly improve the effectiveness of ecological restoration plans. In
addition, students including those from underrepresented groups will be involved
in this project, gaining valuable experience in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess canopy root activity, canopy
water redistribution and physiological and ecological roles of adventitious
roots. Three approaches will be used to accomplish these objectives: lab,
greenhouse and field experiments. (Need to mention the lab experiments)
Greenhouse trials are designed to simulate plant water relations (in a
simplified system) between epiphytes and host trees via canopy roots using
poplar trees (Populus trichocarpa). Preliminary data show that there is water
uptake by canopy roots in this poplar system, and suggest potential bi-
directional water flow (i.e. up- and downwards sap flow) within the tree. Data
also suggest that trees with canopy roots can mitigate drought conditions by
taking up water from epiphyte mats. Similar procedures will be applied to
confirm that these activities also occur under field conditions in Olympic
National Park, WA. There the focus will be on bigleaf maple trees (Acer
macrophyllum), which develop canopy roots naturally. Stable isotopes will be
used to track water transport from canopy roots to other parts of the tree
during different seasons, and to understand the physiological and ecological
role of adventitious roots under adverse conditions of water
availability.&lt;br/&gt;