* 1700030
* Crystallographic Gems to Link Materials' Properties: Stannides, Germanides, and Antimonides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Julia Chan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 490,200.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for magnetic and
thermoelectric materials with desired properties relies on the discovery of new
metal-based compounds, and also requires that the materials can be grown as high
quality single crystals. The research strategy of this project, funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, is motivated by magnetocalorics for refrigeration, thermoelectrics for
converting wasted heat to electricity, and magnetic materials for next
generation quantum computing. This project provides training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students in a multidisciplinary environment. They
gain insights into the design of novel materials. The partnership between the
research group and the scientific community fosters continued enhancement in
science learning. The principle investigator's group also works with a high
school team of students and industrial partners as part of the "Young Women in
Science" group and "Nanoexplorers", pursuing materials science projects.
Additionally, the Chan group performs hands-on materials science-related
demonstrations for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovering new metal-based compounds and linking
their chemical structures to magnetic, electrical, and thermal properties for
energy applications is the goal of this research, which is supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research. The growth of large single crystals is necessary to unequivocally
determine the material's innate properties. With this award, the principle
investigator studies several classes of materials containing lanthanide, mid-
transition metals, and Group 14-15 elements. The motivation for this effort is
to correlate the structural details to predict physical properties. The efforts
focus on growing high quality single crystals of the Tb117Fe52Ge112 (Ln = Gd,
Dy) and Ln30Ru4Sn31 structure types, which allows the study of structural
complexity, complex magnetism, and low lattice thermal conductivity. In addition
to studying structural phase stability of stannides and germanides, atomic
displacement parameters are correlated with electrical resistivity as a testbed
for predicting electrical properties of materials. Inspired by the emergence of
spin glass and itinerant magnetism in Pr2Fe4Sb5, the magnetic and electrical
properties of Ln2Fe4-xMxSb5 (Ln = La, Ce, Pr, Sm; M = Mn, Co, Zn) are also
investigated. Compounds of this structure type are of particular interest
because of the Fe-triangular subunits coupled with Sb-square nets, two features
found in several highly correlated systems. Students involved in the proposed
project will also have the opportunity to work with collaborators at other
institutions and national laboratories. The principle investigator's entire
research group is involved in mentoring students at different levels, including
undergraduates throughout the academic year and high school students in the
summer.