* 1700625
* Contextualize to Learn: Preparing Faculty Toward Math Contextualization for Student Success in Advanced Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Xueli Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 05/31/2022
* USD 958,518.00

Competency in mathematics is the cornerstone of educational and career success
in the Nation's established and emerging technical fields in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). At the same time, completing
courses and mastering mathematics remain major areas of struggle for students
who are pursuing degrees and certification in advanced technological programs at
community and technical colleges. Building on findings from a pilot study, the
research team composed of university researchers and faculty and institutional
researchers at 2-year colleges will investigate the adaptation, implementation,
and outcomes of contextualized mathematics, a promising instructional approach
designed to improve teaching and learning mathematics by connecting mathematics
with academic/occupational content and applications in the workplace.
Integrating quantitative and qualitative approaches, the mixed methods research
study examines faculty professional development, adaptation and implementation
of contextualized mathematics in the classroom, and the impact of contextualized
mathematics on students' educational and career outcomes in advanced
manufacturing, engineering technology, biotechnology, construction technology,
and transportation technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using a convergent
parallel mixed methods design, this targeted research study is designed to
investigate faculty engagement with and professional development around
contextualized mathematics and its impact on students. Two critical areas are
examined: a) the development of faculty expertise through faculty development
and communities of practice, and b) the interim and longer-term impact on
student outcomes through the lens of momentum theory, a model of community
college student success. Qualitative data collected by in-depth interviews will
be analyzed using the constant comparative method to assess data saturation and
stability of data categories. Quantitative data include administrative records,
surveys, and classroom observations. Surveys will be piloted and validated using
exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses. Classroom observation data will be
analyzed using social network analysis. In order to adjust for pre-treatment
characteristics of students for establishing balanced comparison groups, the
research study applies propensity score matching to address selection bias
(enrollment in contextualized mathematics courses). Path analysis will be used
to estimate the treatment effect of contextualized mathematics and the potential
causal pathways through which contextualized mathematics works (e.g., increased
cognitive, metacognitive, and motivational momentum). Convergent analysis will
examine the extent to which and the ways in which results from different data
sources converge, diverge, and/or connect within and across faculty and student
threads of the research. Accordingly, the study will provide a complex and
nuanced understanding of the relationships among faculty development, adaptation
and implementation of contextualized mathematics in the classroom, and the
impact of contextualized mathematics on teaching, learning, and career success.