* 1700521
* SDI-CSCS: EP3: A Clean-Slate Software-Defined Approach for Enabling Elastic Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Srinivasan Seshan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,008,000.00

This project explores a clean-slate approach to securing critical services in
emerging Software-Defined computing and networking systems Infrastructure (SDI).
The project explores a new, elastic and flexible security approach as part of a
proposed Elastic Placement, Posture and Performance (EP3) framework. In EP3,
elasticity applies to the amount of processing available to perform security
tasks, as well as to the types of policy and the placement where the processing
occurs. The proposed research addresses flexible security infrastructure in
three ways. First, a research thrust will design a data plane with greater
verifiability and confidentiality associated with in-network computation tasks.
This gives network administrators greater flexibility in moving security
critical processing to anywhere in the network. A second research task will be
to develop a control plane that leverages placement flexibility to dynamically
launch defenses as needed. Finally, the project team will develop a set of novel
SDI-inspired security capabilities that highlight the benefits of elasticity in
placement, posture and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research activity
will develop and disseminate a set of open-source tools, modeling abstractions,
algorithm designs, and prototype implementations that will dramatically reduce
the time to deploy their techniques in current and future SDI deployments. The
project team will also make the research results useful as an educational
resource for students, and plan to integrate the outputs of the
interdisciplinary research in key course projects in multiple classes spanning
security, networking, and systems. The project will actively encourage research
participation from underrepresented groups, and work closely with leading
industry collaborators to evaluate the proposed techniques and deploy the
solutions in operational settings.