* 1700072
* I-Corps: Personalized Water Conservation and Cost Savings Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2017
* James Brumbelow, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to empower
individuals to understand and manage their consumption of utility provided
resources such as water, electricity, and natural gas. Many regions experience
shortages or constraints in delivery of these resources (short and long-term)
with appreciable costs for individual consumers as well as society at large.
Technology that brings high-resolution consumption data in real-time to
consumers allows them to understand the price and effect of individual choices
as well as the benefits to be gained by decisions to reduce, defer, and schedule
consumption. Clear economic incentives exist at this consumer level that will
generate 'bottom-up' benefits for society as a whole through more efficient
infrastructure and resources use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Cyber
Physical Systems project explores commercialization potential and conducts
customer discovery for technology to analyze and communicate end-user utility
consumption and effects on large-scale utility infrastructure systems. This
technology capitalizes on the advent of Advanced Metering Infrastructure, which
allows real-time monitoring and communication of water and other utility
consumption and behavior. It is comprised of a suite of information technology
components for capture, assessment, and presentation of data through multiple
channels, algorithms to analyze usage patterns, and additional algorithms to
translate consumption patterns for system operations and infrastructure
optimization needs. A pilot study implementing this technology at a water
utility has found significant reductions in water usage, leading to lower
customer costs; at the same time, the utility reports higher customer
satisfaction. Advanced metering infrastructure represents a ubiquitous sensing
technology, a class crucial to 'smart' infrastructures and cyber-physical
systems.