* 1700599
* Advancing Photonics and Laser Technician Education in Michigan
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Anca Sala, Baker College of Flint
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 511,944.00

Photonics, the science of light enabled by the invention of lasers and optical
fibers, is advancing rapidly and growing in importance for the US and global
economy. Photonics applications are pervasive in our society and are pertinent
to engineered systems like smart phones, computers, medical devices, defense
technologies, and many others. Photonics technology plays a key role in national
security, health care, manufacturing, information technology, and energy. A
highly skilled workforce is needed to support the growth of the industry and new
technologies. Evidence suggests that a gap continues to exist between the number
of well-prepared photonics technicians needed by industry and the number of
graduates of photonics programs in Michigan, the Midwest region, and across the
United States. This gap persists despite these jobs being in high demand and
offering high wages. This ATE project will increase the number of photonics
technicians in Michigan by expanding the two-year photonics program introduced
four years ago at Baker College to two new campuses - Auburn Hills and Jackson.
The program curriculum will be enhanced by the addition of new course modules
that will focus on photonics applications in emerging areas such as autonomous
driving, integrated photonics, and high power lasers in manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring together diverse organizations and
stakeholders from photonics companies, relevant NSF ATE Centers, and educational
institutions from K-12 to the university level. Such partnerships will help: (1)
to enhance the photonics program and curriculum, (2) to broaden outreach
efforts, (3) to share new developments in the field through an annual photonics
symposium at Baker College, and (4) to provide internships and employment
opportunities to program graduates. As a way to strengthen the pipeline of
incoming students, photonics as a field will be integrated in Career and
Technical Education programs offered in the state of Michigan, and pathways from
high school to two-year colleges to four-year university degrees will be
established in order to showcase multiple career opportunities for students.
Further, faculty will be provided opportunities to advance their knowledge of
photonics through professional development workshops. Project results will be
disseminated in various settings and support will be available for other
colleges to add courses and programs in this growing advanced technology field.