* 1700832
* CHS: Medium: Immersive Recommendation Systems: User-Centric Recommendation Models and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Deborah Estrin, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,199,998.00

This work strives to create a future in which hyper-personalized content,
digital services, and personal information management tools let individuals
benefit from the data they generate more directly, selectively, and
transparently. Individuals will then be empowered to gain insights into their
own behavior, personalize their own experiences, and ultimately more effectively
utilize the services to achieve their goals. Moreover, the systems that engage
end-users with the data they generate can promote local processing and selective
sharing of personal information. Given the pervasiveness of online tools in a
person's work, personal, and social life, the actions they take are increasingly
shaped by recommendation systems. Today's approaches to personalization and
recommendation are provider centric. Society as a whole will benefit from
broader exploration of personalization and recommendation from the consumers'
perspective. Also along these lines, there is increasing concern about the
shifts in expectations for individual control over data sharing. This project's
user-centered and personal-sharing-policy-aware design is a potential solution
to address this tension between providers and users, allowing people to more
directly benefit from their data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is
to develop novel user modeling techniques, policy-aware systems, and rich user
interactions that allow individuals to harness their own diverse digital traces
("small data"), enable novel applications, and receive more personally-relevant
recommendations while limiting privacy exposure. This research will contribute
the novel user modeling and interaction techniques needed to put the individual
at the center of their personalization, in particular: (1) Immersive user
modeling techniques that analyze diverse types of user data, including social
media streams, private text communications, web browsing, geo-location traces,
and personal images, to incorporate users' diverse and idiosyncratic interests.
(2) Novel recommendation models and policy-aware software architecture that
consists of open source building blocks designed to facilitate generalization of
this approach to ingest diverse personal data traces and feed diverse
application targets. (3) Methods to understand and address key human-centered
challenges in immersive recommender systems through participatory design of the
user experience, as well as qualitative and quantitative evaluation of deployed
systems and applications.