* 1700949
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Commercial electrospinning prototype for spider silk
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Justin Jones, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 199,592.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the ability
to produce a device that is capable of continuously electrospinning recombinant
spider silk proteins (rSSp) into yarns and then post-spin processing them. These
fibers, with robust mechanical properties, will solve needs for use in both the
medical device field as sutures as well as a ballistic thread for applications
such as body armor. However, traditional wet-spinning methodologies of rSSp have
yet to yield a method of spinning that scales to industrial levels or results in
fiber mechanical properties that match native spider silk fibers. This project
will result in a proof-of-concept continuous electrospinning device that also
has the ability to post-spin process the fibers, a critical component of
spinning spider silk as the process is well documented to improve fiber
mechanical ability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: 1) No device exists to continuously electrospin fibers and then
post spin process them and 2) There is no method of spinning rSSp that results
in fibers with mechanical properties mimetic to native spider silk that can
scale to industrial levels. Specific knowledge gaps and methods of addressing
them are: a) constructing the electrospinning device by modifying existing
rotating-mandrel equipment to spin continuous yarns. This will be accomplished
by incorporating a rotating bell that will collect the electrospun fibers which
can then be pulled away from the bell in a continuous fashion. b) Incorporating
a means by which to move the yarn outside of the device. An arm will be
engineered that will attach to the accumulated fibers from the bell?s surface
and move that growing yarn outside the shielding. c) Thread the yarn through a
series of godets and stretch baths for processing which is traditionally done by
hand threading. d) Collecting the rSSp yarn on a collection spool. At the end of
the godet and stretch baths, the yarn will be accumulated on a standard spool
that is in-synch with both the electrospinning rate and godets. Producing the
proof-of-concept device will allow the exploration of appropriate conditions
for: i) rSSp dope conditions, ii) electrospinning parameters such as voltage and
needle distance and iii) stretch bath and stretch parameters of the rSSp yarn as
well as rSSp:polymer blends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personnel involved with this
project will include undergraduate and graduate students who will not only
perform the research but will also be involved in the technology translation and
commercial aspects of the project such as patent pathways, customer discovery
and licensing discussions.