* 1700506
* CAREER: Smart Sampling and Correlation-Driven Inference for High Dimensional Signals
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Piya Pal, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Technological advances have driven modern sensing systems towards generating
massive amounts of data, making it increasingly challenging to store, transmit
and process such data in a cost effective and reliable manner. However, the
ultimate goal in many information-processing tasks is to infer some parameters
of interest, that govern the statistical and physical model of the data. This
includes applications ranging from source localization in radar and imaging
systems to inferring latent variables in machine learning. The number of
parameters in such problems is much smaller than the acquired volume of data,
which leads to the possibility of more intelligent ways of sensing high
dimensional signals, that can exploit the statistical model of the signal (with
or without invoking sparsity), and the physics of the problem. The objective of
this project is to develop a systematic theory of smart sampling and information
retrieval algorithms for modern sensing systems that exploit the correlation
structure of high dimensional signals to significantly reduce the number of
measurements needed for inference. The proposed research can lead to deployment
of fewer sensors (than what is traditionally required), as well as more energy
efficient ways to collect and process spatio-temporal data that will positively
impact a number of applications across disciplines, such as, high resolution
imaging, remote sensing, neural signal processing and wireless communication.
The educational component of this project aims at integrating the research
outcomes into innovative teaching platforms such as ''Sense Smarter'', and
''Signals Everywhere'' that will help train the next generation of electrical
engineers, and encourage them to pursue careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical component of the project has three
interconnected goals: (i) designing fundamentally new geometries for
correlation-aware samplers that exploit the statistical as well as physical
signal models, (ii) developing, and analyzing the performance of new correlation
driven algorithms to understand fundamental capabilities of correlation-aware
samplers, and (iii) exploiting the ideas behind correlation-aware samplers to
develop more efficient algorithms for solving bi- and multi-linear problems.
Design of these samplers will provide new theoretical insights into properties
of quadratic samplers, and will help address fundamental mathematical questions
that can be of independent interest. The samplers also facilitate the
development of new inference strategies, and the proposed rigorous theoretical
analysis of these algorithms is expected to fundamentally advance our current
understanding of the limits of parameter estimation from compressed data.
Finally, the ideas behind correlation-aware samplers have strong connections
with problems in machine learning such as dictionary learning, and latent
variable analysis, and they will foster future research advances in these areas.