* 1700772
* GP-Impact: Service Learning Activities Targeting the Earth Sciences (SLATES)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Rob Rohrbaugh, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,701.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;The SLATES (Service Learning Activities Targeting the Earth
Sciences)project will provide opportunities for hundreds of University of Texas-
El Paso (UTEP) and El Paso Community College (EPCC) students (and their
families) to experience how the geosciences may be of benefit to their local
community. UTEP and EPCC are both minority serving institutions whose student
populations (over 80% Hispanic) mirrors the local community. Service learning
provides students with culturally relevant context in a community where
interpersonal relationships are important motivators; it involves multiple
learning styles to appeal to diverse students and develops higher order thinking
skills. Formal evaluations built into the proposed project will allow the
determination of which short- and long-term service learning activities are the
most effective for attracting and retaining Hispanic students in the
geosciences. The research team will examine which long-term activities are the
most successful at developing the professional skills to prepare students for
careers in the geosciences. The team will develop a field guide that describes
the process used to design the most successful short- and long-term learning
activities for the program. The team believes this guide and associated
presentations given at meetings will help other 2-year and 4-year institutions
of higher education develop effective ways to involve students in service
learning in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;The SLATES
(Service Learning Activities Targeting the Earth Sciences)project will provide
opportunities for hundreds of University of Texas-El Paso (UTEP) and El Paso
Community College (EPCC) students (and their families) to experience how the
geosciences may be of benefit to their local community. UTEP and EPCC are both
minority serving institutions whose student populations (over 80% Hispanic)
mirrors the local community. Place based learning and service learning have been
shown to increase the recruitment and retention of minority students in the
geosciences. Service learning provides students with culturally relevant context
in a community where interpersonal relationships are important motivators; it
involves multiple learning styles to appeal to diverse students and develops
higher order thinking skills. The objectives of SLATES are to use a short-term
service learning program to demonstrate how geoscience impacts the local
community, increase the number of students who decide to major in the
geosciences at UTEP and EPCC, and ease the transfer of students from EPCC to
UTEP. Long-term service learning activities will build on this foundation by
improving students' soft and technical skills in the geosciences. The long- and
short-term learning activities will also introduce students to a range of
careers in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal evaluations built into
the proposed project will allow the research team to determine which short- and
long-term service learning activities are the most effective for attracting and
retaining Hispanic students in the geosciences. The team will develop a field
guide that describes the process used to design the most successful short- and
long-term learning activities for the program. The team believes this guide and
associated presentations given at meetings will help other 2-year and 4-year
institutions develop effective ways to involve students in service learning in
the geosciences.