* 1700879
* PFI:AIR - TT: Passive Techniques for Monitoring Industrial Control Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Raheem Beyah, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating industrial
control system (ICS) security techniques to fill the need for methods to secure
the Nation's most critical infrastructure (e.g., the electric power grid,
critical manufacturing plants, water treatment plants, etc.). The industrial
control system security techniques are important because the compromise of these
ICS networks can lead to loss of life, widespread blackouts, environmental
disasters, and financial loss.

The project will result in a prototype of an ICS security and monitoring system.
This ICS security and monitoring system has the following unique features: 1)
the ability to detect malicious network traffic, the ability to detect malicious
programs running on embedded controllers, and 3) the ability to backup programs
transmitted over the network. These features provide the following advantages:
1) defense against Nation State level attackers, 2) minimally-invasive
techniques to detect malware on embedded controllers, and 3) passive program
backups when compared to the leading competing approaches such as standard
intrusion detection systems and hardware add-ons in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application: intrusion detection, access
control, network management, and malware detection for industrial control
systems. Specifically, this project presents new ICS specific fingerprinting
techniques that can be used to supplement traditional techniques for intrusion
detection, access control, or network management. Further, a robust technique
for detecting code modification of programmable logic controllers (which was
done by Stuxnet), using standard programmable logic controller (PLC) diagnostic
information will be developed. Also, a passive method that intercepts and
archives binary PLC programs transmitted from the engineering workstation will
be developed. In addition, personnel involved in this project, graduate
students, will receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation
experiences through requirements and specifications discussions, prototype
development, unit/system/integration testing, prototype deployment, and go-to-
market strategy development.