* 1700950
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Development of Agrochemical Formulations Based on Multi-functional Lignopolymer Dispersants
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Newell Washburn, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating polymer-
grafted lignin surfactants to fill the need for biobased pesticide dispersants
that promote their effectiveness. Polymer-grafted lignin surfactants are
important because pesticide formulations often contain large amounts of added
synthetic polymers and surfactants, which stabilize the formulation and increase
the pesticide activity. However, these are generally derived from petroleum and
can have negative impacts on pollinators as well as soil and water ecology. This
project will result in a plant-derived dispersant with improved sustainability
and biocompatibility that can replace multiple components of commercial
pesticide formulations. This polymer-grafted lignin has the following unique
features: it is a highly effective dispersant, it can improve pesticide
penetration through plant surfaces, and it is biocompatible and biodegradable.
These features allow it to replace multiple components of commercial pesticide
formulations, resulting in cost savings, increased loading of active
ingredients, and reduced environmental toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gap as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. Multi-functional dispersants derived
from biomass could improve the sustainability of agrochemicals, both in reducing
dependence on petroleum feedstocks but also reducing the ecological impact of
complex pesticide formulations. Polymer-grafted lignin both stabilizes
suspensions but also enhances penetration through plant cuticles, and the
challenge that is to be addressed during the project is leveraging these
activities in test formulations of commercial pesticides that will be evaluated
in controlled studies on a diversity of weeds. In addition, the doctoral student
involved in this project will receive technology translation experiences through
leading the development of these formulations and comparing them to those based
on leading commercial dispersants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages the
lab of Prof. Bryan Young at Purdue University to perform greenhouse tests of the
formulations developed in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality, providing critical evaluations of the
effects of polymer-grafted lignin.