* 1700775
* I-Corps: Software/Hardware Controller for Real Time Control of Battery Energy Storage System in a Grid
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Rajit Gadh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 01/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be in the
modernization of the electrical power grid and solving the challenges of
integrating large scale renewable sources to the grid while improving the
reliability, resilience, affordability, and flexibility of the electric power
grid. This project's hardware/software controller turns the battery energy
storage system from a passive component in the grid to an active and smart
component which is able to benefit both grid operators and customers
automatically. This technology will benefit utilities and independent system
operators through providing enhanced grid services and reducing investment cost
of system expansion. The commercial potential of this technology is due to its
capabilities for improving power quality, increasing power system reliability,
decreasing green gas emission, reducing peak demand, and maximizing renewable
energy utilization. This technology will also benefit commercial, residential,
and industrial customers by potentially reducing their electricity bill,
increasing power reliability, and providing them with revenue in the energy
market. The end product is a software/hardware controller panel which will be
integrated with a battery energy storage system consisting of battery modules,
inverter and measurement devices.

This I-Corps project involves a real time hardware/software controller for smart
operation of Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) in the grid. The developed
technology incorporates a novel control algorithm/structure in the form of an
integrated hardware/software device, to control the power flow of BESS. The
control hardware is configured for effective interaction of the controller with
inverter, battery management system, and measurement units. The control software
is structured to manage the communication, safe operation and monitoring of the
system. This product, by employing control, machine learning, discrete signal
processing, and optimization methods, enables BESS as a buffer to dynamically
compensate for the renewable intermittency and load uncertainty in the power
grid. The main advantage of the controller is to minimize the size of allocated
battery for applications such as voltage regulation, renewable compensation, and
load compensation.