* 1700630
* Nanotechnology Professional Development Partnership: A Web-Based, Live-Streaming Approach for Optimizing Impact, Effectiveness, and Cost
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2017,10/31/2022
* Osama Awadelkarim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 10/31/2022
* USD 896,654.00

Workers with nanotechnology skills are rapidly becoming a key to economic
development. Thus, nanotechnology courses are increasingly offered at community
and technical colleges. It is important for these faculty members who teach
nanotechnology to enhance, develop, and continually update their knowledge.
Professional development programs are essential for these educators; however,
face-to-face and "physical" hands-on workshops are expensive and pose time
constraints which can make them inaccessible for many of these educators. To
address the issue, the Center for Nanotechnology Education and Utilization at
Pennsylvania State University will collaborate with community and technical
colleges to form a Nanotechnology Professional Development Partnership (NPDP)
and develop a live-streaming workshop program model in which course and
laboratory training are delivered in a web-based format at very low cost. This
workshop model will enable direct interactions, participation of faculty from
their workplace locations, and attendance flexibility for mobile participants.
Resources and best practices derived from this project will be shared
nationwide. The project will increase access to professional development for
nanotechnology educators at a variety of institutions, help to strengthen the
educator workforce, and subsequently enhance the technical preparation of
students and the nation's nanotechnology technician
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the NPDP collaboration between
Pennsylvania State University, Ivy Tech Community College (IN), Forsyth Tech
Community College (NC), Erie Community College (NY), North Seattle College (WA),
Atlanta Technical College (GA), and Northwest Vista College (TX) will be to
develop a quality live-streaming and fully interactive professional development
workshop model and resources, and apply it to the nanotechnology educator
workforce. The workshops will be delivered via Adobe Connect and Zoom webcasts.
The focus will be training and providing course materials for educators on
nanofabrication processes and tools, nanotechnology applications, and safety and
cleanroom protocols. The workshops will also include laboratory and cleanroom
training featuring web-based remote access to nano-characterization tools, such
as scanning probe microscopy and transmission electron microscopy, as well as
simulated experiments and data analysis exercises. This workshop approach is
optimum since it will offer the direct and instantaneous aspects of interaction
with instructors and peers; the online aspects of session time and location
flexibilities; and the ability to overcome challenges related to cost and
resources. The workshop model will be applicable and adaptable to other STEM
areas. The project will contribute new cost-effective methods to make
professional development and continuing education more readily available to a
wider audience of nanotechnology educators, including secondary school teachers.