* 1700513
* Ensuring workforce readiness for the energy and manufacturing  industries through educational simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Mori Toosi, Excelsior College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 864,846.00

Excelsior and Polk State Colleges are developing simulations to teach and assess
key skills in power generation and advanced manufacturing, improving the
pipeline of technicians into these key economic sectors. Students in this
entirely online program for the first time have the capacity to earn industry
certification. Simulation permits learners to 1) practice a skill repeatedly for
mastery, 2) practice hazardous procedures before hands-on implementation, 3)
prepare for careers in skilled industry regardless of geographic proximity to a
campus, and 4) balance work, family, and community responsibilities with study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations of Safety and Blueprint Reading, Use of Hand
and Power Tools, and Manufacturing Machines prepare work-ready technicians.
Highly qualified industry representatives review and contribute to content,
assuring relevance. Power generation technicians successfully completing courses
enriched with simulation will earn the Center for Energy Workforce Development's
(CEWD) Energy Industry Fundamentals certificate. Advanced manufacturing students
can build skills comprising the Packaging Machinery Manufacturers institute
(PMMI) Industrial Electricity-1 and -2, and Mechanical Components-1
certifications. All simulations are being offered as open educational resources.
Simulations are also being used to recruit youth, women, and minority
populations into high-tech careers.