* 1700228
* Research Initiation Award: Regulation of Gene Expression by the CD44-ICD Signaling Pathway
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Karl Miletti, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 299,994.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Delaware State University (DSU)
will conduct research aimed at addressing a major gap in knowledge in the
regulation of gene expression. This project will be used to enhance teaching and
learning at DSU with a focus on mentoring and training freshman and sophomore
students. The proposed research experiences will provide access for
undergraduate STEM students, mainly from underrepresented minority groups, to
participate in advanced cellular, molecular and biophysical investigations at
DSU. The early involvement of STEM students in active research will increase the
retention and graduation rates in STEM as well as increase the production of
highly qualified students for graduate school and the STEM global
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed study is to understand
the mechanisms by which CD44 regulates gene expression in the cell. The specific
aims of this project are to: 1) characterize protein-protein interactions
between CD44 intracytoplasmic domain (ICD) and transcription factors Runx2
and/or p53 in cells and to assess the CD44-mediated functional expression of
matrix metalloproteinase 9 gene (MMP-9) in the chick embryo model; and 2) map a
CD44-ICD minimal binding domain in the protein-protein interactions with p53
and/or Runx2 and to assess its potential use as a small molecule modulator of
the CD44 signaling pathway. This proposal combines in vitro and in vivo
cellular, molecular and biophysical experimental approaches to investigate how
protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions between the CD44-ICD and
transcription factors and gene promoters, respectively, regulate gene
expression. Detecting details at the molecular level of this gene regulatory
mechanism will provide a potential approach to modulate the expression of such
genes and their effects on cell phenotypes and thus behavior in cellular
physiology and developmental biology.