* 1700493
* North Dakota Welds (NDWelds) Program: Advancing Welding Technician Skills for Students and Training for Educators
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Clinton Gilbertson, North Dakota State College of Science
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 742,567.00

North Dakota State College of Science (NDSCS) will implement the NDwelds Program
with the goal of enhancing welding technician skills for secondary school
students, two-year college students, secondary school teachers, and two-year
college faculty members. Through this ATE project, NDSCS will increase the
number of trained and certified welders possessing essential and advanced skills
to meet the workforce needs of the region and state. This project incorporates
training modules developed through the ATE funded Regional Center for the
National Center of Excellence in Welding Education and Training (Weld-Ed) and
builds upon the success of NDSCS's North Dakota Advanced Manufacturing Skills
Training Initiative (NDAMSTI) funded through the Trade Adjustment Assistance
Community College and Career Training program of the U. S. Department of Labor.
The project will increase awareness among students from under-represented groups
(females and minorities) of the opportunity of Science, Technology, Engineering
and Math (STEM) careers in welding. NDwelds will significantly impact the
regional economic environment by filling a critical employment training need.
This project responds to business and industry needs for welders by building the
pipeline of students from secondary career and technical education programs to
post-secondary welding programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
project will be accomplished through the following five goals: (1) Develop a
welding curriculum at NDSCS by alignment with the curriculum delivered in career
and technical education courses in secondary schools across North Dakota and the
adoption of the American Welding Society's (AWS) Schools Excelling through
National Skill Standards Education (SENSE) program, (2) Conduct outreach
activities targeting female and minority students to increase enrollments in
secondary career and technical education courses, (3) Recruit and train career
and technical education instructors through professional development activities,
(4) Facilitate the certification and testing of welders using national standards
by NDSCS becoming an AWS Accredited Test Facility, and (5) Develop latticed
curricula to establish new degree tracks in advanced skills for welding and
manufacturing students at NDSCS while increasing the number of NDSCS graduates
that participate in 2 plus 2 programs with Minnesota State University-Moorhead
and Valley City State University. These cumulative efforts of curriculum
development, targeted outreach to diversify the student body, faculty
professional development, and building sustainable pathways for welding and
manufacturing have the potential to transform the regional and state landscape
of welding technician education in North Dakota.