* 1700530
* National Convergence Technology Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Ann Beheler, Collin County Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,994,693.00

The National Convergence Technology Center (CTC) Business and Industry
Leadership Team (BILT) and a report from McKinsey &amp; Company on disruptive
technologies note that the Information Technology and Communications (IT)
industry will undergo sweeping technology changes over the next 1-6 years due to
accelerated automation (often linked to "the cloud") and the Internet of Things
(IoT). These changes will require IT professionals to work with Software Defined
Networks (SDN) and edge computing (to allow data to be analyzed closer to the
source), thus requiring them to have some programming skills. There will be on-
going demand for entry-level IT workers graduating from community colleges
nationally, but industry will require graduates with higher-level infrastructure
skills and some programming and cybersecurity knowledge and skills in addition
to standard foundational IT skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CTC focuses on
leading national efforts to ensure that students are prepared with up-to-date IT
skills to be highly employable upon completion of a two-year degree. CTC will
address curricular needs required by extensive changes expected in the industry,
create new business-led regional hubs (r-hubs) of influence to broaden
dissemination and sustainability, create and disseminate IT skill standards
authored by the BILT, and provide products and services required to implement
and support programmatic changes in community and technical college IT programs
to promote graduates' success. CTC has built a Community of Practice (CCN) that
currently has 57 community college and university members that meet quarterly
and participate actively in the work of the Center. The CCN will be expanded to
add high schools and more universities to bolster support for 2+2+2 agreements.
CTC will collaborate with other Centers/Projects to share curriculum, diversity-
building materials and other products. All curriculum, labs, training, and other
models (e.g. BILT model, student portfolios) will be disseminated via social
media and through events at the CTC and r-hub institutions to community
colleges, high schools, and universities nationally.