* 1700910
* Characterizing Non-Traditional Student Access and Success in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jacqueline McNeil, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 110,258.00

Technical Description:

The PIs and their students will describe the demographic characteristics and
academic pathways taken by nontraditional engineering students?students who
enter engineering programs at age 24 or later, commuter students, and part-time
students as measured in this study. Nontraditional students have been studied in
community colleges and urban universities, but have been rarely studied at
public 4-year universities in engineering due to a lack of longitudinal data on
individual students. This study uses the Multiple-Institution Database for
Investigating Engineering Longitudinal Development (MIDFIELD). MIDFIELD is a
longitudinal, multi-institutional, and multivariate dataset of over 209,737
engineering students. MIDFIELD is large enough to provide a better understanding
of nontraditional students in public 4 year universities, identify conditions
where they are more numerous and more successful, and explore the conditions
that support their success. The focus will be on engineering, rather than the
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines combined,
because engineering has been shown to have unique characteristics. This study
will explore the relationship between nontraditional status and student outcomes
of interest, such as graduation in engineering, controlling for other relevant
factors. Whereas prior research has ignored or masked the contribution of
nontraditional students to graduation statistics, this research focuses on
nontraditional status and its associated outcomes. Following the development of
descriptive statistics, this will be studied in a multivariate setting,
comparing the outcomes of nontraditional students to those of traditional
students.

Broader significance and importance:

Whereas university attendance was once a privilege of a small fraction of upper
class white males, the demographics of college classrooms have changed with
society's expectations of a larger and more diverse college-bound population.
Graduation statistics are typically reported in ways that have not kept up with
these changes. The most commonly reported graduation rate statistics, which are
taken from the Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data System maintained by
the Department of Education, ignore part-time time students, students who enroll
for the first time in spring rather than fall or summer, and students with more
than a proscribed minimum number of credits from other higher education
institutions. Thus, even as university students have become more diverse, the
success of those students is frequently measured using outdated approaches. By
including students ignored by typical techniques, this project will provide a
more accurate representation of what happens to today's engineering students.
More importantly, by studying what happens to those nontraditional students in
particular, this project will draw attention to the educational outcomes of a
population that currently comprises 10% of student enrollment, but represents
some of the fastest growing pathways in US higher education. The work of this
project is possible because it uses a special multi-institution database
headquartered at Purdue University created to understand the engineering
education system and to make it possible to increase the quantity and quality of
engineering degree recipients.

This research is supported by the Research in Engineering Education Program of
the Engineering Education and Centers Division.