* 1700814
* Algebraic Geometry of Knot Homology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Evgeny Gorskiy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

A knot is a closed curve in three-dimensional space. More generally, a link is a
collection of several such curves. Two links are equivalent if one can be
transformed to another by a continuous deformation and/or stretching (without
tearing). A link invariant is a quantity that does not change under the
deformations of a link. Such invariants can be used to distinguish links and to
study geometric properties of knots, and many powerful link invariants have been
developed in recent decades. In another direction, the mathematical subject of
algebraic geometry studies spaces described by polynomial equations and has
applications in a wide range of fields, including statistics, control theory,
and computer science. This project is focused on surprising interactions between
the invariants of links and algebraic geometry that appear in two different
mathematical frameworks. It is anticipated that the research will provide new
perspectives on the relationships between low-dimensional topology, algebraic
geometry, representation theory, and combinatorics.

In more detail, the first framework is classical: given a complex plane curve
singularity, its intersection with a small sphere is a link. Similarly, for a
complex surface singularity its link is a three-manifold. The investigator will
the study the interactions between the algebraic properties of these curves and
surfaces, and the Heegaard-Floer homology of their links. The second framework
is less direct. The investigator and collaborators have conjectured that the
Khovanov-Rozansky homology of links can be computed by studying the algebraic
and geometric properties of the Hilbert scheme of points (the configuration
space of points in four-dimensional space). The Hilbert scheme is well studied
in algebraic geometry, representation theory and combinatorics, so this
interpretation would yield explicit computations of Khovanov-Rozansky homology
that were previously out of reach. In this project the investigator will develop
the connection between knots and the Hilbert scheme, with the goals of computing
these invariants for various classes of links and proving the conjecture.