* 1700923
* Collaborative Research:   Cloud-Capable Tools for MG&amp;G-Related Image Analysis of OOI HD Camera Video
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Timothy Crone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 10/31/2018
* USD 117,336.00

Since November 2015 the Ocean Observatory Initiative (OOI) high-definition
camera (CamHD) has been collection video clips of the deep water hydrothermal
vent on the Juan de Fuca Ridge located off the coasts of the state of
Washington. The CamHD is being used to study the change of the vent over time
and flow of fluids. Scientists hope to use the time-series images to study
animal behavior and changes in animal and microbial colonization associated with
changes in fluid flow, temperature and chemistry in response to seismic and
volcanic events. The data is all publicly available but the huge size of the
archive and the lack of tools for easy retrieval make it difficult for
investigators to take advantage of this unique data set. With this project the
PIs hope to demonstrate the scientific value of the OOI CamHD system by
providing tools to provide better access to the video data. This project has the
potential to enable the scientific investigations in biological, geological, and
oceanographic investigations that are yet to be imagined. This project will
support two early-career scientists engaging in an interdisciplinary effort to
add substantial value to this community resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
time of the writing of this proposal some 33 TB data from the OOI seafloor high-
definition camera (CamHD) has been collected and archived. The data is all
publicly available but the huge size of the archive and the lack of tools for
easy retrieval make it difficult for investigators to take advantage of this
unique data set. The PIs have requested EAGER funding to demonstrate value of
the proposed cloud-capable system for this data.