* 1700759
* Galois Representations, Monodromy Groups, and Motives
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Stefan Patrikis, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* michelle manes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 139,999.00

Throughout the mathematical sciences, symmetry is a powerful organizing
principle. In number theory, which studies the integers, especially the prime
numbers, there are no manifest symmetries of the kind encountered in more
intuitive, geometric settings (symmetry of a square under 90-degree rotations,
etc.). Nevertheless, much of our deepest knowledge of the primes comes from
their connections with the "symmetries" of polynomial equations. This project
focuses on the study of Galois representations, which are natural packages for
this information about the prime numbers. One of the central programs of modern
number theory, initiated by Robert Langlands, proposes new ways to "unpack"
Galois representations by relating them to remarkably different mathematical
objects arising in geometry. Although they are essentially about the prime
numbers, these relations have even had reverberations in fundamental physics.
This project involves both constructing new Galois representations and unpacking
the information they contain in the light of Langlands'
conjectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises two research programs.
The first will study deformations of Galois representations valued in arbitrary
reductive groups, with a view toward establishing in as great generality as
possible the existence of geometric p-adic deformations of a given mod p
representation. The work is likely to furnish steps toward generalizations of
Serre's modularity conjecture to general reductive groups. Such geometric p-adic
representations are expected to be the (semi-simple) Galois representations
occurring in the cohomology of algebraic varieties over number fields. The
second program aims to study a number of questions of Fontaine-Mazur type,
seeking to establish the motivic origin of certain Galois representations or, in
a more geometric setting, local systems over a curve. The work will require
elaborating the motivic structures underlying basic objects of the geometric
Langlands program, a problem that should be of long-term independent interest
even for the arithmetic Langlands program.