* 1700942
* Collaborative Research: GP-EXTRA: Oceanographic shipboard and lab research for diverse students: experiential learning as a gateway to geoscience careers
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Anthony Rathburn, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 294,960.00

Part 1: &lt;br/&gt;A significant shortage of United States geoscientists is
predicted by 2022. Recruitment and training of a diverse workforce of geologists
and related scientists is critical for national health, prosperity, welfare and
defense. However, recruitment of underrepresented minorities into geosciences
faces many obstacles. This project employs novel high-impact educational
practices to increase the number and diversity of geoscience majors entering the
geoscience career pipeline and trains K-12 teachers to inspire their students?
interest in geosciences. Underrepresented students and pre-service teachers will
engage in innovative marine geoscience&lt;br/&gt;experiences, mentoring
programs, and courses using exciting technologies, career opportunity exposure,
and hands-on learning. This project will target and recruit underrepresented
students into geoscience majors at a private liberal arts university and a
Minority (Hispanic-Serving) Institution that has a high percentage of rural,
low-income, first-generation students who have very little exposure to marine
science. We will evaluate the impact of engaging exposure to oceanography on the
recruitment and retention of geoscience students and the preparation of K-12
teachers. Under the mentorship of research scientists, students will conduct
authentic research, advancing our understanding of marine resources and
environmental changes on the Pacific margin of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is an inter-
institutional, co- and extra-curricular, participatory field-based oceanographic
research program in collaboration with Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO)
to train and inspire diverse students to pursue careers in the geosciences. This
program will integrate students from a private urban coastal campus (University
of San Diego; USD) with generally rural, minority, low-income students from a
minority-serving public inland campus, California State Univ., Bakersfield
(CSUB), with established ?geoscience career pipelines? to bring high-school
students into geoscience majors and place graduates with geoscience employers.
We intend to examine the idea that a multifaceted approach including integrated
marine science experiences in the lab, at sea and in the classroom can enhance
recruitment and retention of students in the geosciences. This project builds on
a successful program of shipboard education/research developed by USD and
Rathburn. The broad goals of the program are to: 1) Increase oceanographic
research and education opportunities at a minority-serving institution (CSUB);
2) recruit underrepresented students into geoscience programs; 3) engage
geoscience majors, non-majors, and educators in shipboard and follow-up
oceanographic research and internships in partnership with&lt;br/&gt;Scripps
Institution of Oceanography; 4) enable students to conduct authentic
oceanographic research using techniques employed by industry, government and
marine researchers; 5) train pre-service teachers with mentors; 6) develop and
test a virtual research voyage and exportable laboratory modules; 7) assess
program efficacy and examine the influence of this approach on recruitment and
retention; and 8) disseminate research findings. As a consequence of this
multifaceted approach to sustainable geoscience recruitment
and&lt;br/&gt;engagement, we will quantitatively evaluate the value and impact
of: a) unique experiential learning at sea as a means to engage geoscience
majors; b) oceanography and paleontology as means to attract non-majors to
geosciences; c) the educational and recruitment/retention value of course
integration with hands-on learning at sea; d) teacher/researcher mentorship and
program&lt;br/&gt;engagement on pre-service teacher interest and competence in
geosciences; and e) the use of sustainable marine educational materials as a
means to engage teachers and attract students to geosciences. This sustainable
project will: a) increase recruitment of diverse underrepresented students into
the ?geoscience career pipeline?, b) improve interest, knowledge of career
opportunities, preparation, and competency to enter and move through different
stages of the GCP, c) generate novel curricula that incorporate authentic
research and oceanographic samples into high-school and college courses, d)
high-school teachers who have increased willingness, enthusiasm, and confidence
to integrate geoscience research into their classrooms, and e) disseminate
?lessons learned? from this program which will contribute to the evidence base
about novel, multifaceted approaches to increase students? interest,
preparation, and success in&lt;br/&gt;geoscience careers.