* 1700351
* Research Initiation Award: Engineered demographic-specific in vitro microfluidic bone microenvironment models
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Jerald Dumas, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,956.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home institution, and
involves undergraduate and high school students in research experiences. The
award to Hampton University has potential broader and societal impact in a
number of areas. The project focuses on transdisciplinary research in the area
of bone tissue engineering to facilitate the optimization of treatment of
complex bone diseases based on race-specific regimes. These studies will build
upon the current relationship between Hampton University and the Brandeis
University Materials Research Science and Engineering Center through the
recently established Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will apply the basic science
and engineering techniques of biomaterials, cell culture, 3D printing, and
microfluidics to fabricate race-specific microenvironment bone models. The
objectives of this project are to: 1) determine the most informative 3D printing
and microfluidic techniques that incorporate an engineered biomaterial to model
bone homeostasis; 2) identify key cell/bone matrix interactions using an
engineered bone microfluidic system as it relates to differences in bone
homeostasis among various patient demographics; and 3) predict disturbances in
bone homeostasis based on bone matrix differences between demographic groups
with an engineered bone microfluidic system. The work is designed to be
transformative on several levels: the methodology of human tissue integration to
create race-specific in vitro systems, the advancement of solvent 3D printed
microfluidic devices for biomedical applications, and the multidisciplinary
approach designed to study the relationship between cells and extracellular
matrices in a controlled environment. Expected outcomes would include the unique
ability to ascertain key race-specific details about bone homeostasis in high
throughput systems.