* 1700060
* Conference:   Clinic on Dynamical Approaches to Infectious Diseases Data; University of Florida, December, 2016
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Steven Bellan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2017
* USD 24,999.00

This award will provide support for the annual Clinic on Dynamic Approaches to
Infectious Disease Data to be held in December, 2016, that will provide training
for U.S. scientists in the mathematics of infectious disease epidemiology.
Mathematics and simulation are essential tools in infectious disease control,
enabling decision-makers to explore control policies before implementing them,
interpret trends, and predict emerging threats. Over the past decade,
integration of the fields of mathematical epidemiology and biomedical
epidemiology has increased in research practice; however, training options
provide few opportunities for integration in the classroom. This clinic
addresses this gap by offering participants exposure to a broad range of
concepts and techniques from both epidemiological traditions. The clinic will
provide a conceptual foundation for integrating dynamic modeling approaches with
empirical infectious diseases research. It is aimed at participants without
substantial experience in scientific computing or in mathematical modeling. The
training will focus on how the complex dynamics of pathogen transmission
influence study design and data collection for addressing applied problems in
infectious disease research. This training will prepare participants to pursue
their research goals after the clinic. Participants will develop the skills
necessary to identify which research questions can and cannot benefit from
development of a dynamic modeling program. In addition, because the clinic will
also include scientists from Africa it will provide opportunities for U.S.
scientists to build a network of international collaborators. In addition,
lectures will be made publicly available online so that they can be used for
self-instruction by those unable to attend the clinic or incorporated into
teaching materials for other courses.