* 1700829
* PFI:AIR - TT: Tactile Electronic Readers for People with Vision Impairment
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Qibing Pei, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 251,729.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a smart
material technology to fill the need for an electronic device for people with
vision impairment to read braille texts and tactile graphics. The braille
electronic readers will greatly impact the underserved population with vision
impairment: (1) providing blind children with convenient availability of braille
text, math equations, maps, and graphic images; (2) providing convenient means
of communication for the 21 million Americans and 314 million people worldwide
who suffer from vision impairment; and (3) better access to public
transportation through the adoption of public dynamic braille displays such as
time tables for public transportation and signs in public buildings and on
streets. The project will result in a prototype tactile device having the area
of a smartphone screen size to display 40 braille characters at a time. The
contents can be refreshed. Compared to existing braille electronic readers, the
new devices will be 10 times more compact yet 10 times cheaper, such that every
person in need can own their personal copy like a smartphone or iPad.

This project addresses the following technology gap as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. There is a lack of a
transducer material that allows for large, out of plane deformation from a flat
surface to forming raised dot, in a compact form factor and with low energy
consumption. The researchers have innovated a new smart material that is capable
of large-strain rigid-to-rigid actuation and thus exactly bridges the critical
material gap. In combination with formation of an array of compliant electrodes,
a refreshable braille dot array will be fabricated meeting the braille standard.
This project will demonstrate a prototype device and investigate options for
active matrix driving circuitry and control software.

A postdoctoral researcher and two undergraduate interns will participate in the
project, and interact with a senior researcher with extensive industrial R&D
background and a business consultant to receive training experience in
technology innovation and translation. The project will help educate these
junior researchers with technology-driven thinking and entrepreneurship that are
unavailable in regular academic learning.