* 1700649
* Biomedical Engineering Technology - Pathways to Medical Device Manufacturing, Networking, and Cybersecurity
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Natavia Middleton, St. Petersburg College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 619,859.00

Modern healthcare is defined by its inclusion of rapidly-progressing technology
in medical devices used to assess, monitor, and treat patients. Device
capabilities such as wireless networking enhance functionality, but increase
risks associated with threats to cybersecurity and patient safety. Skilled
technicians trained in the manufacturing, installation, repair, networking, and
security of medical devices are in high demand throughout the healthcare
industry on a national scale. However, current Biomedical Engineering Technology
(BMET) education must evolve to capture students at every point along the
educational pathway and to address skills gaps for new and emerging medical
device technology. To address these needs, St. Petersburg College will leverage
connections with national industry advisors to implement the BMET Pathways
program. BMET Pathways will expand the current BMET Associate of Science degree
at St. Petersburg College to incorporate new stackable certificate pathways,
including an innovative Networking and Cybersecurity certification. Embedded in
these certificates will be new micro-credentials tied to industry-recognized
competencies. Such certificates allow incoming students with specialized skills,
such as veterans, to earn credit for prior learning while also providing current
students with verification of skills for rapid employment without a degree. BMET
Pathways will also strengthen the employment and training pipeline by supporting
education initiatives from K-12 through articulation to multiple baccalaureate
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BMET Pathways will advance knowledge by addressing
two primary goals: 1) establish a sustainable pipeline of trained biomedical
engineering technicians and 2) expand educational and career opportunities that
are responsive to industry demand. The project will utilize senior faculty from
Biomedical Engineering, Engineering Technology and the College of Computer and
Information Technology to create: (a) a minimum of 15 micro-credentials, (b)
three new college credit courses, (c) three new industry-recognized
certificates, and (d) a minimum of three Associate to Bachelor of Science degree
articulations to support enhanced learning. A new BMET laboratory will allow
students to gain hands-on experience in a simulated healthcare environment.
Industry partners will provide internship opportunities and ensure that training
and competencies remain responsive to cutting-edge skill needs. Evaluation of
the program includes assessment of student retention and completion data both at
St. Petersburg College and across other NSF-funded institutions to demonstrate
effectiveness of flexible degree pathway options. Results from the project will
be disseminated at the local, regional, and national levels through
presentations at conferences. Open-source curriculum sharing with partners will
also take place and lead to greater global gains in BMET education and boosting
the number of technician degrees in the Tampa Bay area and beyond.