* 1700614
* Welding Education Long-Distance Community Outreach
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Terry Brase, West Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 11/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Certified welders with advanced science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) knowledge and skills are vital to the United States
petroleum, food production and processing, transportation, and manufacturing
industries, and this project includes industry partners from these sectors.
Because of this great need, the Welding Distance Community Outreach (WELDCO)
program at West Hills Community College is designed to meet the needs for a
growing sector of advanced welding technicians on the West Side of the
California impoverished Central Valley. The program seeks to transport and make
mobile a successful, face-to-face, welding program and offer it in
geographically isolated areas within the service area of the college where
career and technical education (CTE) has been historically very limited.
Cultural changes will occur within the regional community as children of first-
generation immigrants attain post-secondary education and gainful employment,
thus creating a positive generational learning outcome. Further benefits will
accrue to the region as adult learners, those already employed seeking to
improve job skills, and the unemployed capitalize on the accessibility of this
education program. The project will impact both the state and the nation as this
education paradigm is shared with other community colleges and organizations for
improving employer partnerships and growth. A robust project evaluation will
study the impact of this project on business and industry and on the students
and workers involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WELDCO is a cohort-specific
curriculum design which includes variable integration of e-learning, Virtual
Reality (VR) welding technology, and traditional training as a means of engaging
nontraditional students. Formative and summative assessments will be employed to
assess curriculum performance and modifications needed. The package takes full
advantage of California legislative mandates and state funding for education
programs (including high school pathways and post-secondary education) to
enhance the impact on education and subsequent employment in the region.
Students will benefit from the expanded internship opportunities and employer
collaborations to help create a regional impact. This project focuses on 3
objectives: (a) development of a blended welding curriculum to integrate
e-learning, VR instruction, and traditional classroom instruction that will lead
to American Welding Society (AWS) certification; (b) optimization of course
delivery to maximize efficiency, effectiveness, and engagement by addressing
student cognitive preferences and learning styles; and (c) implementation of
population specific recruitment to include Hispanic, minority, and female
students.