* 1700983
* Groundwater-forest interactions during drought in temperate forests across scales
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Philip Townsend, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 434,934.00

An estimated 3 trillion trees cover 42 million km2 worldwide - equivalent to the
combined areas of North and South America. Societies around the globe rely on
forests for water supply and provision of food, medicine, and forest products,
as well as other recreational, cultural, and aesthetic benefits. Economically,
tropical and temperate forests provide ecosystem goods and services totaling an
estimated $23.32 trillion/yr worldwide. Drought - and changes in drought regimes
- have the potential to disrupt this provisioning of forest services through
reduced forest growth and increased vegetation stress and mortality.
Groundwater, when and where available, may buffer specific portions of forest
from the consequences of changing drought regimes. Strategies to adapt to
drought impacts on forests requires improved understanding and forecasting of
patterns, consequences, and feedbacks between drought response and groundwater.
The overarching goal of this research is to evaluate groundwater as an ecosystem
attribute that alleviates adverse impacts of changing drought regimes on
temperate forests. This project will develop a suite of complementary drought
detection tools to observe and link tree and forest response to drought, as
influenced by groundwater. We will use simulation models to place our
measurements in the context of a range of scenarios. This study will help
society to better address forest and water resource challenges in the 21st
century through dissemination of results to a broad array of stakeholders
including researchers, forest and water resource managers, and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As drought regimes continue to change and impact forests,
it is critical to identify and evaluate ecosystem attributes that alleviate
drought stress and to develop novel methodologies to monitor drought response.
Traditional methods rely on limited water stress observations of individual
trees and stand level vegetation metrics derived from coarse resolution
satellite images. Synthesis of such data dilutes species-specific responses and
does not provide the necessary datasets to reveal mechanisms linking drought
impacts on forests across spatial scales. Through the proposed work, multiple
lines of evidence will be used to quantify species-specific tree and forest
response to drought as buffered by groundwater. Specifically, this research
proposes to investigate drought response across gradients of groundwater depth
using: (1) tree ring chronologies to provide historic tree response and quantify
the influence of groundwater on tree growth and drought vulnerability; (2) tree
sway measurements from accelerometers to continuously monitor water stress and
tree physiological response to drought; and, (3) hyperspectral remote sensing to
spatially map species-specific foliar drought response. These novel methods for
monitoring drought response will be aggregated with traditional complementary
datasets to develop a suite of numerical models for simulating groundwater-tree
interactions to mechanistically represent field observations. This project will
provide a basis for understanding the role of groundwater in conferring drought
resistance at the tree, transect, and landscape scales in temperate
forests.&lt;br/&gt;