* 1700581
* Assessing Educational Pathways for Manufacturing in Rural Communities: An Investigation of New and Existing Programs in Northwest Florida
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Charles McClure, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2023
* USD 792,476.00

With the call for building the nation's skilled technical workforce, the demand
for middle skill professionals in technical fields in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) is increasing. The alignment of educational
programming and job requirements for STEM-oriented technician sectors is
essential for establishing career pathways that produce high quality middle
skills professionals for technology-rich fields. Building on prior research on
career pathways in Information Technologies (IT) this targeted research project
investigates the alignment of educational programming, employer needs, and new
employee experience in Advanced Manufacturing (AM) and tests the usefulness of
tools and processes developed to assess such alignment. Focusing on the
opportunities and challenges in rural areas, the overarching goal of the project
is to improve rural manufacturing capacity by better understanding the
relationships among curriculum, employer expectations, and student readiness for
jobs in AM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative and qualitative mixed methods
research design combines content analysis and text mining with surveys, and
interviews/focus groups. A review of the literature frames the study by
integrating the literature on advanced manufacturing education, employment
qualifications for technology-rich technician fields, and readiness to engage in
entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship as employee or innovator/small business
owner. The research design, instrument development, and data analyses will be
guided by a theoretical approach that blends theories of human, social, and
cultural capital. The research team will apply text mining approaches for text
preprocessing and keyword extraction to identify learning outcomes specified in
syllabi; tokenize the text; extract and identify keywords; and match national,
state, and professional standards and requirements for industry
certificates/certifications with course syllabi and job postings. Qualitative
analysis of interviews and focus groups will examine the expectations of
employers and employees through an iterative process for clustering data into
themes until saturation and themes have stabilized. The extent of matching among
data from different sources will be calculated and examined for congruence and
divergence of educational programming and job requirements. The testing of
tools/instruments and processes for conducting analyses of educational
programing with job requirements in advanced manufacturing will confirm the
viability of an approach for analyzing career pathways in other STEM-oriented
technician programs.