* 1700851
* GP-EXTRA: Bridge and Earth Science Training (BEST) Program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* rebecca dodge, Midwestern State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 398,866.00

Non technical:&lt;br/&gt;The BEST (Bridge and Earth Science Training) program is
a new high school bridge program between North Texas high schools and Midwestern
State University (MSU) that acts a conduit to educate students, teachers and
parents about the opportunities for geoscience careers. Each summer, a cohesive
long-term cohort of high school juniors will begin an inquiry based geoscience
camp at MSU. The BEST camp will focus on developing the relationship between the
student and local industry professionals, and learning how real geologists apply
scientific concepts to their careers. Field trips to active workplaces and
laboratories will reinforce this link and provide additional exposure to the
role of geoscientists in the real world. Each member of the cohort will
participate in a research project on water quality and environmental parameters
in conjunction with the Red River Authority (RRA) and Texas Stream Team (TST).
The students will learn to take measurements from industry professionals, and
their data will contribute to an ongoing research collaboration between MSU,
RRA, and TST. Each member of the cohort will be provided with an invitation to
attend MSU as a geosciences major, and they will have the opportunity to
continue their research as a part of their undergraduate experience. More than
143,000 geoscientists are expected to retire in the next 10 years, and our
project aims to train sufficient professionals to meet the demand in energy and
hydrology workers across the United States. This project will allow students to
explore new opportunities by working with professional geoscientists and engage
with career-relevant, field-based research that will allow them to build a
successful career. By generating career-relevant experiences in geoscience
education, the BEST program works towards providing a brighter future for Earth-
related fields that promote clean air and water, secure our energy future, and
promote public understanding of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The BEST Program will
establish a multi-year research collaboration among academia, industry, and
government employees, which will engage geoscience professionals in the training
of future geoscientists. &lt;br/&gt;The first component of the BEST Program is
an inquiry-based residential geoscience camp each summer. A cohesive, long-term
cohort of high school juniors and seniors will learn how geoscientists apply
scientific concepts to real-world problems. Each participant in the camp will be
trained by scientists from the local Red River Authority (RRA) and the Texas
Stream Team (TST) to participate in the TST water quality monitoring program
using protocols established by the Texas Council on Environmental Quality. BEST
students will investigate and test hypotheses related to the relative
contribution of various forcings such as variation in rainfall severity,
extended dry or seasonal changes, and rates of change of key water parameters to
overall water quality in the Red River watershed. During this 7-10 day
experience, the BEST Program will focus on developing the relationship between
the student, MSU geoscience faculty, local geoscience professionals, and current
MSU students who will serve as BEST Camp counselors. Field trips to workplaces
and laboratories reinforce this link and provide additional exposure to the role
of geoscientists in the real world. Cohort members will be invited to attend MSU
as geosciences majors, where they continue their research and engage in
geoscience data gathering and analysis activities, present to and meet with
professionals involved in similar work, and share their experiences with other
students. Through this collaboration, students? research will inform policy
makers as they make decisions related to land use, water use, or permitting,
which will impact residents in the Holliday Creek and Red River Watersheds. The
BEST Program will also test the IUSE Geopaths Program's Theory of Change, which
is that novel, authentic, career-relevant geoscience experiences will increase
the students? desire to pursue degrees and geo-related careers.