* 1700471
* Molecular Rotors and Materials Properties of Rotary Dipolar Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 475,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Based on the use of advanced molecular design,
synthetic chemistry, and molecular self-assembly, researchers at UCLA are
pursuing the control of molecular motion in the solid state to control the
physical properties of a new class of materials known as amphidynamic crystals.
Equipped with rotary components bearing positive and negative groups in
structures that resemble macroscopic compasses, these materials are capable of
responding to the presence external electric and magnetic fields to change their
physical properties. While some specific molecular compass arrangements are
expected to cause all the dipoles to point in the same direction, others are
expected cause adjacent dipoles to point in opposite ways (these arrangements
are known, respectively, as ferroelectric and antiferroelectric). While these
new materials have the potential of displaying interesting electric, magnetic,
and elastic capabilities, the so-called multiferroic properties that can be
controlled with external fields, this work includes experiments that measure
their interaction with light as a result of changes in the orientation of the
constituent dipoles. These materials are expected to be among the fastest, most
efficient optical switches. With molecules designed to switch between states
rotation in the solid state, the UCLA group intends to control the speed of
sound and create devices that will help control the rate of signal transmission.
Research on amphidynamic crystals based on inertial dipolar arrays provides a
unique opportunity to educate and train talented materials chemists from a wide
range of backgrounds. The PI has been successful attracting women and students
for underprivileged backgrounds to his research group by maintaining a
supportive and creative environment that fosters careers in materials science
and in science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The realization of freely reorienting dipolar molecular
rotors pursued in this project is a new frontier in materials chemistry design.
Engineered rotation in these "amphidynamic crystals," relies on structural
elements that combine a set of relatively static, lattice-forming units, and
dipolar components that possess the ability to reorient about established
lattice directions in response of internal dipolar interactions and external
fields. To determine internal rotational dynamics in the solid state this
project takes advantage of multinuclear (1H, 19F, 15N, 13C) Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) techniques. These include spin-lattice (T1) relaxation and
quadrupolar echo 2H NMR line shape analysis as a function of temperature.
Variations in temperature between ca. 4K and 500K make it possible to determine
rotational motion over a range that covers from a few kilohertz to the terahertz
regime and determine activation energies from close to zero up to ca. 15-20
kcal/mol. Inertial polar rotators with barriers that are lower than thermal
energies are expected to reorient very rapidly, such that their emergent
polarization below their corresponding Curie-Weiss temperatures will make it
possible to study dipolar self-organization that will lead to the emergence of a
new class of designer ferroic materials with electric, magnetic, and elastic
switching capabilities. To test their properties, an emphasis is placed on
measurements that help disclose inner dipolar order in the form of temperature-
dependent transitions between paraelectric and ferroelectric or
antiferroelectric states. It is predicted that dynamic correlations resulting
from rotational motion and dipole-dipole interactions follow either conrotatory
(ferroelectric) or disrotatory (antiferroelectric) trajectories and studies are
in progress to analyze rotational correlations (gearing) based on mechanical
(steric) forces.