* 1700856
* Variation in Use of Courts by Legal Status and Jurisdiction
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Kimberly Welch, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 7,679.00

Courts often reproduce existant power differentials; it is difficult to make
legal claims in court from more powerful groups. This research finding has been
addressed in multiple venues and across multiple areas of law. It has not been
tested historically, nor do we know enough about what that means when members of
disadvantaged groups take court cases in local courts against people who may
only be marginally more advantaged, or may differ in legal status. Yet in
multiple jurisdictions, members of minority groups have used the courts to make
claims and vindicate interests. Finally, the framework remains underexplored in
explicit comparisons across types of legal regimes. This project will test the
significance of both legal status and jurisdiction in making claims in the
courts, comparing across common-law and civil-law regimes. Civil law
jurisdictions organize legal claims making differently from common law systems.
People who took cases to court varied by legal status. That variation will allow
the project to evaluate the significance of legal status in making legal claims,
both in process and outcomes. Litigation indicates that the legal system was not
solely the province of the elite. Reimagining members of subordinated groups as
shrewd litigators will complicate our interpretation of power and will serve as
a model for understanding the legal action of other subordinated groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate a dataset of all extant lower
court cases involving black litigants in four counties (about 2,000 cases),
preserving records that are fragile and making them more broadly available.
Unpublished local court records stored in courthouse basements and storage sheds
are rarely accessed and rapidly deteriorating. These records represent an
important resource for understanding the relationship between legal systems and
formally legally marginalized peoples in stratified societies. The project will
also contribute to the training of a student in the social sciences. In addition
the project will allow improved teaching of undergraduates concerning legal
stratification and use of the courts.