* 1700624
* Distance Education and Learning In Vacuum technology for Employment Readiness (DELIVER)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ruth Robinson, Normandale Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,018,486.00

Almost all modern technologies that benefit consumers, industry, and the
national defense depend on vacuum and thin film technology. Examples of
engineered systems that depend on vacuum technology include the touchscreens on
phones, coatings on medical devices, and water purification components. Although
a significant and "enabling" technology in its applications, it is also often
hidden. Vacuum systems, and the technicians who maintain them, remain virtually
unknown outside of the industry. As the existing workforce ages and the number
of businesses relying on vacuum technology increases, our nation faces a
critical shortage of technicians to maintain the complex vacuum systems that we
are all dependent on. This project will respond to this challenge by developing
a "focused track" credential to educate vacuum technicians to meet workforce
needs. This Vacuum Technology Certificate will be offered by Normandale
Community College in Bloomington, Minnesota, an accredited institution that is
part of the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system. The Vacuum
Technology Certificate can be completed in one year and will serve the following
audiences: (a) entry-level workers already in the field who want to advance
their careers, (b) workers in related industries (automotive, metallurgy) who
need to retrain, (c) veterans with related experience moving into a new career,
and (d) high school students who seek work experience prior to continuing their
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure that the Vacuum Technology
Certificate is broadly accessible, the project team will use a blend of distance
learning technologies and disseminate the program widely. Key activities of the
project include: (a) curricular development for both face-to-face and online
course delivery, (b) hands-on laboratory development, (c) professional
development for educators, and (d) dissemination. More specifically, three new
courses will be developed: (1) an e-learning course for anyone to explore basic
vacuum technology concepts and careers, (2) an online course for current
students to earn credit while learning chemistry, math, and physics concepts
used every day by technicians, and (3) an advanced course in vacuum and thin
film technology for the certificate program. The three-course core curriculum
will be offered on campus and via telepresence using high speed audiovisual
connection linking students and instructors in real time. The use of trainer
systems will also enable students to gain hands-on practice with the processes
and equipment used on job sites. Lastly, with strong dissemination, a network of
instructors with industry experience will be established and be supported to
become teachers to the next generation of vacuum technicians.