* 1700199
* Research Initiation Award: Investigation of mechanisms underlying pathological rhythms in parkinsonian basal ganglia - A mathematical modeling study
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Choongseok Park, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 295,840.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to North
Carolina A&amp;T State University has potential broader and societal impact in a
number of areas. The project focuses on developing a mathematical model to
understand the mechanisms underlying deep brain stimulation, a therapy used in
the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Undergraduate students as well as high
school students will gain research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
effectiveness of deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease has been linked
to the destruction of pathological rhythmicity in basal ganglia. To find a more
effective deep brain stimulation procedure, it is crucial to use appropriate
neuronal network models that are able to produce intermittently synchronized
oscillatory dynamics observed in parkinsonian patients. As the only excitatory
nucleus in the basal ganglia, the subthalamic nucleus plays an important role in
the dynamics of basal ganglia and is a standard target for deep brain
stimulation in Parkinson's disease. Recent experiments have identified a set of
ionic currents that are responsible for various rhythmic bursting patterns in
subthalamic nucleus neurons. This research will develop a new computational
model for the subthalamic nucleus that comprises key currents and then set up
network models, namely an updated basal ganglia network model and an extended
cortex-basal ganglia-thalamus model. By performing numerical and mathematical
analyses, the research will study how intrinsic neuronal properties and network
properties in basal ganglia incorporate to generate intermittently synchronized
rhythms. This project will enhance the understanding of the mechanisms
underlying pathological rhythms in parkinsonian basal ganglia and deep brain
stimulation procedures. The research may also lead to the discovery of more
effective methods to break the intermittently synchronized rhythms in
parkinsonian states with a minimal amount of stimulation intervention.