* 1700695
* Integrating Environmentally Improved Photolithography Technology and Virtual Reality into Advanced Nanotechnology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Reza Kamali-Sarvestani, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 703,906.00

Advances in nanotechnology have significantly influenced manufacturing methods,
the development of new systems and devices as well as the future of science,
engineering, and technology in the nation. Nanoscience is critical to many high-
technology and manufacturing industries in Utah, and the state is faced with a
rising need for skilled workers in this field. In response to the urgent
workforce need in local industries, Utah Valley University (UVU) will develop
curricula to train students in nanotechnology principles. A nanotechnology
course and associated modules will be developed for community college students
and other introductory-level undergraduate students. The course will include
design projects and laboratories using innovative environmentally-friendly
fabrication techniques. Advanced virtual-reality game techniques will be used to
promote students' understanding and visualization of the underlying physics
concepts and the methods used to build very small-scale structures. The new
course will also serve as a springboard for students intending to pursue
advanced degrees in nanotechnology. The project will enhance the preparation of
students, increase the number of skilled technicians, and help strengthen the
regional workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement an
introductory nanotechnology course that aligns with rapidly changing industry
requirements, develop new tools for nanotechnology education, and complement
existing associate and bachelor degree programs at UVU. The course will include
a series of modules and projects, as well as laboratories that feature a novel
water-based technique for photolithography which avoids the hazardous solvents
of conventional methods. This improved method for photolithographic fabrication
will contribute a potentially transformative methodology for both education and
industry, and contribute to the knowledge base about the effectiveness of
virtual learning environments in education. The laboratory experience also
includes thin film fabrication using auto-catalytic metallization, and scanning
electron microscopy for both characterization and electron beam lithography.
Virtual-reality learning modules with high-fidelity simulation of various
experimental methods and processes will also be incorporated into the course.
These virtual-reality techniques will allow students the opportunity to learn
from their mistakes without the disadvantage of depleting resources or trying to
assemble flawed designs in the laboratory. The virtual-reality modules will also
provide an effective alternative in circumstances where advanced equipment may
not be available. The format of this nanotechnology course will facilitate
adoption and adaptation at other institutions. The resources and practices from
the project will be shared through a project website and through professional
development workshops for educators. Summer programs for high school students,
with an emphasis on groups underrepresented in STEM fields, will incorporate
virtual-reality educational games and simplified lab experiments from the course
to expose and engage students in nanotechnology.