* 1700081
* Neutron scattering studies of spin dynamics in iron-based high-temperature superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Pengcheng Dai, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 541,617.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to explore
and understand the microscopic origins of various phases in iron-based
superconductors, specifically the iron arsenide superconductors BaFe2-xNixAs2,
(B,K)Fe2A2, and BaFe2As2-xPx, using neutron scattering as a primary tool. The
research has two components: initial materials characterization and neutron
scattering. For synthesis, a comprehensive materials laboratory was established
and single crystals of the proposed materials can be grown at Rice. The initial
characterization of these single crystals is performed using facilities at Rice.
Neutron scattering, the core part of this research program, is used to study the
spin dynamical properties of these materials. In particular, the effect of
uniaxial pressure on their structural, magnetic, and spin dynamical properties
are studied. Uniaxial pressure can also detwin the sample and allow twin-free
states of these materials to be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project addresses the fundamental physical
processes that give rise to novel collective phenomena such as high-transition
temperature superconductivity. The materials known to exhibit these collective
phenomena are the strongly correlated electron materials. The understanding of
these phenomena not only enhances our knowledge of basic science, but also give
us the ability to design materials with novel and predictable properties.
Specifically, the experimental research includes neutron scattering experiments
aimed at the fundamental understanding of the spin excitations in a family of
iron-based high-transition-temperature superconductors. The objective of the
research is to explore and understand the microscopic origins of various phases
of iron-based superconductors using neutron as a probe. Neutron scattering
experiments are performed mostly at the high-flux isotope reactor (HFIR) and
Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. However,
the project also utilizes other world-class facilities in the U.S. and Europe
when similar capabilities are unavailable at HFIR and SNS. The impact of this
research includes the training of the next generation of neutron scatters and
elucidating the nature of the exotic properties of the correlated electron
materials.