* 1700352
* Lasers and Fiber Optics Regional Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Chrys Panayiotou, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,070,743.00

Lasers and fiber optics (LFO) undergird most twenty-first century advanced
technologies. They are fueling innovations in medical instrumentation, photonics
integrated circuits, telecommunications technologies, laser additive
manufacturing, remote sensing, analytical instrumentation, and other industries.
The economic impact of light-based technologies on the U.S. gross domestic
product was $7.5 trillion in 2010. The Department of Labor projects that 1,710
LFO technicians will be needed annually between 2014 and 2024. U.S. colleges
with LFO and photonics programs produce only 300 technicians annually. The
demand is almost six times the supply. This project will support the education
of the workforce needed to keep the U.S. as the world leader in laser and fiber
optics enabled technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATE Regional Center,
LASER-TEC, proposes to continue developing the LFO workforce for the
southeastern U.S., and will expand the current network of 21 partner colleges.
The industrial corporate network will increase to include companies from
different sectors of the economy. The goals are to: 1) Increase and strengthen
LFO academic programs to meet industry demand; 2) Create and offer LFO
professional development programs for secondary school teachers, college
faculty, and incumbent workers; 3) Develop LFO curriculum materials for
secondary schools, colleges, and industry; 4) Develop, promote, and deliver
outreach and awareness programs to secondary STEM teachers, advisors,
counselors, and administrators; 5) Develop strategies and materials to recruit
and retain underrepresented groups to promote diversity in LFO programs; and 6)
Identify and disseminate LFO technicians' skillsets and employment needs in the
southeastern U.S. LASER-TEC is working with AIM Photonics, Power America,
Advanced Functional Fabrics of America, and other Manufacturing USA Institutes
to provide the workforce education and training as new technologies are
developed.