* 1700914
* PFI:AIR - TT:  RelMaster:  Towards a Reliability Simulation Toolset
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Linda Milor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 239,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating
semiconductor reliability simulation technology to fill the need to estimate
lifetimes of high-reliability projects. This is especially important in the
aeronautics, automotive, medical, and space segments of the semiconductor
industry because these products must achieve lifetimes well beyond those for
which the technology used for their manufacturing was designed. The reliability
simulation software will lower the cost and time-to-market of high reliability
semiconductor products by mitigating the risk of circuit failures of accelerated
lifetime tests, which are performed immediately prior to releasing a product to
market. When a circuit fails accelerated lifetime tests, it must be re-designed
and re-manufactured prior to release to the marketplace, at a cost of hundreds
of millions of dollars.

This project will result in a minimum viable product, which is software for a
lifetime check for semiconductor circuits. This semiconductor reliability
simulation technology has the following unique features: the software works at
the system level, covers both front-of-line and back-of-line wearout mechanisms,
and can incorporate customer-defined use scenarios. These features provide a
more complete solution to the wearout simulation problem when compared with the
leading competing reliability simulation software in the market space (covering
only device-level aging incorporated in device models).

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The work incorporates three
tasks, a comparison with standard industrial methodologies, calibration
techniques for adjusting models to experimental data, and refinement of the
simulation methodologies to enable scalability to large industrial designs.
Approaches include the use of accelerated tests for circuits, where test
conditions are selected to isolate each wearout mechanism, so that failures due
to a wide variety of wearout mechanisms can be observed, unlike industrial
standard practice. Scalability to large-scale designs will be demonstrated after
development of methods to incorporate steps in the existing design flow and
automation. The goal is to demonstrate a reasonable computational cost and
minimal impact on time-to-tapeout. In addition, personnel involved in this
project (Ph.D. students) will receive innovation/entrepreneurship/technology
translation training through working with the project's business mentor,
Jonathan Goldman.

This project engages Aeroflex Corporation to demonstrate calibration of the
experimental data to simulation results in this technology translation effort
from research discovery towards commercial reality.