* 1700725
* American Geophysical Union (AGU) Chapman Conference on Dayside Magnetosphere Interactions; Chengdu, China; July 10-14, 2017
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Pranoti Asher, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 04/30/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This proposal is requesting travel support for participants (including students,
early career scientists, and invited speakers without the necessary financial
means) to participate in a five-day Chapman Conference on Dayside Magnetosphere
Interactions to be held in Chengdu, China on 10-14 July 2017. The conference is
focused on open questions about the manner in which solar wind mass, momentum,
and energy penetrate into the Earth's magnetosphere on its sunward-facing side.
The underlying mechanisms are responsible for the development of space weather
disturbances around Earth. The workshop is timely due, among other things, to
the availability of a growing collection of multi-point observations from
operating scientific satellites and new techniques for constructing global maps
of electrodynamic parameters from both satellite arrays in low earth orbit and
instrument networks on the ground. In addition, new insights are expected from
comparing mechanisms for the penetration of solar wind plasma at Earth to those
at other planets. An international workshop is particularly valuable for
progress because many of the combined data sets are the result of international
collaborations. Chapman conferences have a long history of successfully bringing
together international researchers (and students) in a workshop style atmosphere
to address open questions at scientific frontiers. Such an environment, which
intermixes a wide variety of viewpoints and diverse participants, provides a
known incubator for new and innovative approaches that have the potential for
enabling breakthroughs. This environment is also a valuable educational
experience for students and an opportunity for international networking.
Following the meeting, proceedings will be published in a volume of the American
Geophysical Union (AGU) Geophysical Monograph Series, which is expected to
document the state of the field in this scientific
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Only a few percent of the solar wind striking the
Earth's magnetosphere actually penetrates through our magnetic barrier. However,
this small amount is responsible for the development of dangerous space weather
disturbances throughout Geospace and the upper atmosphere. Understanding the
manner by which this penetration occurs will lead to improved forecasting of
space weather disturbances and help to address a national priority focused on
protecting and/or mitigating damage to critical space-vulnerable societal
infrastructures.