* 1700442
* Research Initiation Award: Marking the Drosophila eye imaginal disc landscape with positional coordinates for precursor stem cell formation
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Sandra Leal, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 297,654.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs to
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research-intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home institution,
and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Harris Stowe State University (HSSU) will
conduct research to investigate larval eye disc development in the fruit fly,
Drosophila. The project will enhance the research capabilities of the PI as well
as teaching and learning at HSSU where approximately 90% of the undergraduate
students are African Americans. Undergraduate students will benefit from the
research experiences and training opportunities provided by the project
activities. The project has the potential to increase the number of African
Americans engaged in research and support the nation's efforts in building a
robust STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed study is
to understand the basic underpinnings of Midline (Mid) function as a cell-fate
determinant, pattern generator, and newly identified anti-apoptotic factor
within developing Drosophila eye tissues using a combination of genetic,
molecular biological, bioinformatics and biochemical approaches. Specific
objectives are to: 1) determine whether the mid gene patterns the developing
retina by using genetic and immunolabeling approaches to examine the expression
level and pattern of specific morphogens in developing wild-type, mid loss-of-
function (LOF) and mid-gain-of-function (GOF) eye imaginal discs; 2) resolve the
mechanisms by which mid or the Mid protein collaborates with Notch-Delta pathway
members to pattern the retina and to specify sensory organ precursor (SOP) cell
fates utilizing genetic, molecular biological and biochemical approaches; and 3)
identify mid-regulated gene expression specific to Notch and apoptotic signaling
pathways within early-staged pupal eye imaginal discs using real-time
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), Differential Expression for RNA Sequencing (RNA-Seq)
and microRNA-Seq methodologies. The successful completion of the proposed goals
will contribute to the field of T-box and eye developmental research.