* 1700429
* Research Initiation Award: Ionic Liquid Derived and Assisted Green Catalytical System for the Small Molecule Sustainable Conversion
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Zhe Wang, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,992.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM junior faculty at
HBCUs who are starting to build a research program, as well as for mid-career
faculty who may have returned to the faculty ranks after holding an
administrative post or who need to redirect and rebuild a research program.
Faculty members may pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded
Center, at a research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA
projects are expected to help further the faculty member's research capability
and effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home
institution, and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Xavier University of Louisiana, a
private liberal arts college, will conduct research aimed at addressing the need
for sustainable and environmentally-friendly catalytic methods that can permit
efficient and targeted conversion of fossil, green-house gas and biorenewable
feedstocks with lower energy requirements and environmental impact. Xavier
University of Louisiana is ranked highly nationally for awarding African
Americans bachelor's degrees in chemistry. This project, with its focus on
environmental chemistry and a strong emphasis on student recruiting and
mentoring, will provide hands-on research and training for students that will
build skills, techniques, and methodologies applicable throughout their science
career and motivate them toward STEM research careers. This project will greatly
contribute to Xavier's efforts to have a research program that is both active
and well balanced, having positive ancillary effects on student recruitment,
retention, and student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is
to investigate electrochemical catalytical reaction in ionic liquids including
reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) with nanomaterials, a newly discovered
catalytical system whose properties have not yet been studied systematically.
The specific aims of this project are to: 1) identify intermediates and a
pathway during the CO2 reduction in ionic liquids and elucidate the reaction
mechanisms for mapping the optimization and nanomaterial design strategy; 2)
build the specific nanomaterial/ionic liquid for CO2 reduction and optimize
catalytical system; and 3) integrate catalysis and chemical treatment methods to
establish a highly efficient system for CO2 conversion that may extend to other
small molecule conversion. The O2 assisted electrochemistry reaction may provide
a new route to reduce CO2. Due to the low energy consumption and high carbon
selectivity, this method has the potential to apply in practical production in
the future. Findings from this study will support future research to design and
optimize higher efficient system for CO2 conversion and product control.