* 1700505
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Asymmetric character displacement in evolutionary-novel Anolis lizards.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Christopher Baraloto, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2018
* USD 16,105.00

This work will provide new understanding of how evolution can result in the
coexistence of similar species that compete strongly for resources. When species
compete for the same resource the weaker competitor can be eliminated from the
community. Nonetheless, there are many communities that contain competing
species. One hypothesis is that competing species diverge so as to reduce
competition, a phenomenon known as character displacement. This work focuses on
closely related lizard species that have been introduced to southern Florida.
Their recent co-occurrence provides an opportunity to study how species respond
to novel competition, and what traits in each species diverge as a result.
Observed shifts in both ecology and morphology may ultimately contribute to
their long-term coexistence. The result of this study will be a better
understanding of the role of character displacement in the origin and
maintenance of biodiversity. This project also creates a framework for teaching
students and the public about the processes that enhance biodiversity. This
framework will be implemented via an Ecology Club and an information webpage, as
well as by engaging undergraduates in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Populations of two non-native Anolis lizards,
that have had no prior evolutionary interactions, will be studied to quantify
the progression of character displacement. These species, the Cuban brown anole
(Anolis sagrei) and the Puerto Rican crested anole (A. cristatellus), are
ecologically and morphologically similar. Throughout Miami FL, they exist in
multiple spatially-independent communities that consist of either both species
(sympatric populations) or only one species (allopatric populations). These
communities are analogous to the early stages of adaptive radiation, whereby
ecomorphologically similar species that have speciated in allopatry come into
contact and adaptively diverge as a result of interspecific competition. The
project will investigate the ecological relationship between these two species
to test the following hypotheses: (H1) In the presence of each other, both
species will experience a divergence in resource use to minimize interspecific
interactions. This hypothesis will be tested through detailed analyses of the
ecology and behavior of both species across multiple replicates of both
allopatric and sympatric populations. (H2) Divergence in resource use leads to
changes in the phenotype of both species ? this is the process of character
displacement. This hypothesis will be tested by detailed phenotypic assessments
of both species across the populations. (H3) Shifts in phenotypic traits are
heritable. This hypothesis will be tested by measuring trait heritability with
laboratory breeding experiments. Taken together this case study will provide a
more detailed understanding of the role of competition in evolutionary
divergence.