* 1700805
* Collaborative Research: Kinetics and Mechanism of Restructuring of Atmospheric Soot and Associated Impact on Light Absorption
* GEO,AGS
* 08/22/2016,06/30/2020
* Chong Qiu, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 63,689.00

Nanoparticulate atmospheric soot particles are complex in their shape, size and
chemical composition. They can be variably observed as fractal aggregates
composed of elemental carbon (EC- in graphitic or graphene structures), or
organic carbon compounds (OC - hydrocarbons with oxidized or other attached
heteroatom moieties). Other aerosol materials potentially embed or enmesh, in
either internal or external mixing states, such soot particles as they age in
the ambient atmosphere. Our limited knowledge of relationships between soot
mixing state, soot morphology, and soot optical properties, remains a major
source of uncertainty in evaluating the optical and radiative contribution of
carbonaceous aerosols to direct radiative) climate forcing. Researchers will
undertake a series of combined laboratory and computational studies to better
characterize the formation of soot particles with different mixing states, and
to investigate associated structural and optical properties in relation to the
particle initial state and aerosol aging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixing states
and morphology of soot aggregates will be determined from a combination of mass-
mobility measurements and environmental scanning electron microscopy imaging.
Optical calculations constrained by the experimentally measured mixing states
and morphologies will provide a closure with directly determined light
absorption and scattering by this range of carbonaceous
soot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One broader impact of this work will be the promotion
of collaboration between faculty at a PhD-granting and a primarily undergraduate
teaching university.