* 1700032
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Secure and Usable Mobile Authentication for People with Visual Impairment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Rui Zhang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 07/31/2018
* USD 58,888.00

Mobile authentication is necessary for preventing unauthorized access to mobile
devices with increasingly more private information. Despite significant progress
in mobile authentication for sighted people, secure and usable mobile
authentication for people with visual impairment remains largely under-explored.
This project is to develop, prototype and evaluate novel secure and usable
mobile authentication techniques for people with visual impairment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three research thrusts. The first thrust is to
develop CurveAuth, which authenticates a user based on his/her finger-drawing
curves on the device screen. The second thrust is to develop TapAuth, which
authenticates a user based on his/her sequence of rhythmic finger taps or slides
on the device screen. The third thrust is to develop ShakeAuth, which
authenticates a user based on his/her sequence of rhythmic shakes of the device.
This research also includes a plan to prototype and evaluates the proposed
techniques through comprehensive user experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful development of the proposed techniques will
have profound impact on allowing the visually impaired to fully embrace the
power of modern mobile devices for improving their quality of life. Project
outcomes will be made publicly available online in the forms of talks,
publications, datasets, and Android/iOS apps.