* 1700552
* Unmanned Aircraft System operations Technician Education Program (UASTEP)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Sean Figg, Palomar College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2021
* USD 798,858.00

This ATE project is focused on developing educational and career pathways to
prepare students to succeed as employees or entrepreneurs in the high growth
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) or "drone" industry. Led by Palomar College in
San Marcos, California in close collaboration with Southwestern College in Chula
Vista, California, this project will serve to educate technicians for the high
growth UAS industry in close collaboration with industry partners and other
academic institutions. Industry estimates project that the UAS industry will
generate more than 100,000 jobs in various sectors, and generate economic
impacts upward of $82 billion by 2025. California, and specifically San Diego,
is home to the world's two leading UAS manufacturers and the demand is
increasing for a workforce that specializes in the production of drone sensors,
drone data analytics, and the development of UAS navigation technology for
mapping and inspection applications. Because there is a lack of UAS educational
programs, local colleges and universities have been urged to focus on UAS
technology to preserve San Diego's leadership in the industry. In response to
industry demand for qualified UAS technicians and the need for UAS educational
programs, Palomar College and Southwestern College along with their many
industrial and educational partners will develop new academic programs and
educational pathways to prepare the next generation of UAS
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project brings
together community college leaders in collaboration with partners from high
school districts, universities, and various industry representatives to develop
industry-specific UAS coursework. The project team will involve industry
professionals and veteran experts to support curricular development,
professional development for educators, student competency development, and
outreach efforts. Students will be prepared with not only UAS knowledge and
skills, but also business and workplace acumen. Summer academies will be hosted
to excite underrepresented high school and college students about UAS
educational and career pathways. This project will not only increase the number
of skilled UAS technicians in the workforce, but also seeks to foster interest
in UAS among faculty members and students from different disciplines. A Massive
Open Online Course (MOOC) will also be developed as part of this project and
will enable broad dissemination about the safe and novel applications of UAS to
both the public and technical professionals. Such dissemination has the
potential to foster a responsible culture for UAS operations and building
further excitement around UAS careers.