* 1700621
* A Sustainable ATE Coordination Network for Enhancing Personalized Learning Using Virtual and Augmented Reality-based Technology Innovations in Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Anand Gramopadhye, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 864,820.00

This Coordination Network (CN) enhances the technician workforce pipeline
required for US manufacturing competitiveness across a range of advanced
automotive and aviation manufacturing industries, via the use of virtual reality
(VR)-based and augmented reality (AR)-based technologies. It creates new virtual
teaching spaces to provide highly accessible and personalized learning
environments. The project yields a collective end-to-end innovation ecosystem,
which lowers barriers for two-year colleges to embrace virtual and augmented
reality-based, technology innovations to enhance personalized learning. It
establishes a network for the national ATE community and advances state-of-the-
art applications of VR- and AR-based learning technologies for use in a two-year
college setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Composed of a national network of members
from industry, academia, government and other ATE centers, this CN provides
access to state-of-the-art VR and AR modules, designed to meet the needs of
industry and educational and workforce development programs for two-year college
students and entry and mid-level technicians. Specifically the CN has the
following objectives: i) nurture new collaborations, ii) strengthen
partnerships, iii) create new knowledge, and iv) disseminate existing knowledge
to enhance current two-year technician education programs. This coordination
network, based at Clemson University, convenes best-in-class innovators from
two-year and four-year colleges, research universities, Manufacturing Extension
Partnerships, National Network of Manufacturing Institutes, Workforce Investment
Boards, professional societies, government, and industry.