* 1700313
* HRRBAA: Habituation Feasibility Assessment for Critically Endangered Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Stacy Lindshield, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2018
* USD 34,135.00

This high-risk research project will gauge the feasibility of habituating a
savanna chimpanzee community at Niokolo-Koba National Park in Senegal in order
to explore their foraging, hunting, and social behaviors. Habituation is a
process where wild animals become tolerant of humans, enabling researchers to
non-invasibely collect detailed, long-term behavioral observations. In the past,
habituation has resulted in benchmark discoveries about our closest animal
relatives, such as the findings that chimpanzees eat meat and distribute this
prized food within their communities, and that females and males use spear-like
tools to hunt small mammals. Savanna chimpanzees are of interest because they
inhabit risky and biodiverse arid environments that may parallel environments in
which hominins evolved. This project will encourage international collaborations
among U.S. scientists and Senegalese scientists, local field assistants, park
agents, and students, as well as support student training, science outreach, and
primate conservation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers predict that the
study of habituated savanna chimpanzees ranging in parkland alongside baboons -
their main competitor - as well as abundant numbers of large mammals, such as
antelopes, lions, and leopards, will yield important scientific discoveries
about their behavior. Fieldwork objectives include: (1) Locating and following
unhabituated savanna chimpanzees, (2) estimating the size and composition of the
chimpanzee community, and (3) identifying individuals based on their physical
characteristics. Given that habituation is difficult, the primary goal of this
project is to evaluate its feasibility. The greatest challenges include
persistently locating and maintaining neutral contact with savanna chimpanzees
because they occur at low population densities and range over large areas. The
researchers will make contact at water holes during the dry season and conduct
patrols in the wet season when drinking water is abundant. Project personnel
will follow international standard guidelines for chimpanzee health monitoring
and disease transmission prevention. Habituation feasibility is determined by
repeatedly contacting individuals, monitoring their responses to observers
during 12 consecutive months, and testing for increasing tolerance towards
researchers. Additional goals include improving estimates of chimpanzee
community composition and home range. These tasks will be accomplished through
supplementing direct observations of chimpanzees with genetic and camera trap
methods. If the initial research phase is successful, then the next steps entail
closely examining the behavioral strategies of these savanna chimps for
surviving in a highly competitive and dangerous savanna landscape.