* 1700390
* Research Initiation Awards: Synthesis of biomimetic melanin-like multifunctional nanoparticles for pH sensitive magnetic resonance imaging and photothermal therapy
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Yongfeng Zhao, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2022
* USD 298,005.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs to
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at his or her home institution,
and to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Jackson State University (JSU) will design and
develop nanoparticles which are sensitive to pH change and have biocompatibility
and low toxicity and can be used for molecular imaging and therapeutics. The
proposed project will strengthen the educational and research capacity at JSU,
augment the ongoing research being conducted in the Department of Chemistry, and
build collaborations both internally and externally. The project will allow
undergraduate students to connect basic chemistry and materials science with
potential application in biomedical engineering. The exposure of
underrepresented minorities to cutting-edge research and instrumentation will
result in students who are well-prepared for graduate school and well-qualified
to compete in the Nation's STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop biomimetic nanoparticles to enhance magnetic
resonance (MR) signals in response to pH. Specifically, this study aims to: 1)
synthesize and characterize poly(N,N-dipropyldopamine) nanoparticles (PDNPs)
with pH sensitive components 2) develop new schemes to modify the surface of
PDNPs to improve their solubility and for further functionalization; 3) prepare
multifunctional PDNPs by intrinsically chelating with iron(III); and 4) evaluate
the biocompatibility of nanoparticles by incubating with living cells. The
development of the PDNPs will provide a procedure to prepare melanin-like
nanoparticles with pH sensitive MR properties and photothermal effect. The
structural characterization of PDNPs will provide information for the mechanisms
of interaction of the metal ion with catechol groups. The project will not only
enhance biomedical engineering research but also provide excellent education and
training opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students at JSU. This
work will be conducted in collaboration with the Washington University in St.
Louis. The research and educational activities will advance the academic mission
of JSU.