* 1700031
* PFI:AIR - TT: Advancement of Dispersed Particle Electrochemical Device for Analytical and Energy Storage Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Gary Koenig, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a technique
for characterizing battery materials from the proof-of-concept phase to a
functional prototype that can be demonstrated to potential customers. This
technology aims to fill the need for faster and less ambiguous evaluation of
battery materials during the quality control stage of battery manufacturing. The
dispersed particle electrochemical device is important because it improves the
speed and reliability of battery manufacturing quality control. Improvements in
speed of quality control processes results in lower manufacturing costs, which
translates to less expensive batteries. More reliable and robust quality control
reduces uncertainty in performance and incidence of failure in battery products.
Thus broader impacts of this proposal include both reducing the cost of
batteries and reducing the incidence of battery failures, which in some cases
result in major safety hazards including fire and injury.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a prototype that provides
straightforward quantitative outputs for comparison between battery materials
using a very fast method relative to the current state-of-the-art. This
dispersed particle electrochemical device has the following unique features:
fast electrochemical evaluation of battery electrode materials, further narrows
tolerances for battery manufacturing, reduces ambiguity on the source of battery
performance perturbations, and accelerates screening of candidate new materials.
These features provide the following advantages: time savings of quality control
analysis, improved battery product reliability, and faster evaluation of battery
materials both in manufacturing and research environments. These features result
in cost and safety improvements for finished battery cells at the consumer
level. The dispersed particle electrochemical device, when compared to the
leading competing battery cell fabrication and evaluation practice currently
used in this application, is both orders of magnitude faster and is not
misinterpreted due to contributions from other battery cell components in this
market space. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gaps as part of its intellectual merit as the technology translates
from research discovery toward commercial application. The technology has
currently been demonstrated with a single battery material, and manufacturers
have indicated that additional materials must be demonstrated to confirm the
broad applicability of the technique. This project will also demonstrate the use
of lower cost and nonflammable dispersion solvents which will make the
technology more adaptable to a manufacturing environment. Similarly, part of the
advancement to the prototype stage will include adapting to a flow-through
device which will improve sample throughput and will be more amenable to
manufacturing applications. Knowledge gaps related to commercialization
including additional interviews with battery manufacturers to further understand
quality control processes and needs, more detailed evaluation of existing
intellectual property and necessary partners, and production of a travel
prototype to demonstrate at customer facilities will also be addressed. In
addition, personnel involved in this project, including faculty, post-docs,
graduate students, and undergraduate students, will receive innovation,
entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences through working towards
advancing the dispersed particle electrochemical device to the prototype stage
and further working with battery manufacturers to adapt the technology to
address their needs.