* 1700711
* Collaborative Research: Refining and Testing Methods for Identifying and Quantifying Gaseous Oxidized Mercury in Air
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Mae Gustin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2020
* USD 564,965.00

Atmospheric mercury (Hg) occurs in many forms some of which are more toxic than
others. The largest component of Hg, gaseous elemental mercury (GEM) is
relatively inert but it oxidizes to gaseous oxidized mercury (GOM) or converts
to particle bound mercury (PBM) that are reactive and toxic. Therefore, it is
critical to monitor these distinct forms of mercury accurately. The
investigators' past work sponsored by NSF has shown that the commercial Tekran
systems, which are used widely to monitor reactive mercury and accepted as the
standard, are prone to large errors and systematic biases. Specifically, Tekran
based reactive GOM and RGM show a persistent low bias and call into question our
current understanding of mercury toxicity and exposure. The project will deploy
a new suite of instruments globally to provide robust and well-calibrated
measurements of reactive mercury globally to improve our predictive knowledge of
mercury and its health risks for humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop and deploy a suite of new stable and sensitive instruments for
calibrated speciated reactive mercury measurements at a network field sites
where conventional Tekran systems have been operating. It builds on preliminary
promising results that were supported by NSF. The instruments include a new
active GOM system developed by the team that collects GOM on cation exchange and
nylon membranes and then analyzes them for reactive mercury. The two-distinct
collection and analysis methods will confirm the absence of potential biases
from speciation or atmospheric sampling conditions (e.g. high humidity or
ozone). This method has been shown to be highly selective with no interference
from GEM that is present in much larger amounts. Furthermore, the investigators
will deploy an automated GOP and GEM calibrator for routine field verification.
Finally, a gas chromatography/mass spectrometry system to separate and identify
various oxidized mercury compounds will be co-deployed at multiple sites. The 10
core sites will span the globe and cover a wide range of atmospheric conditions
and emission cases. The harmonized bias-free chemically rich global mercury data
on mercury will be analyzed to lay a solid observational foundation for the
mercury modeling and assessment research community. The systems developed here
will be commercialized and made available to the wider community for reliable
speciated mercury measurements.