* 1700216
* Student Support for the "Frontiers of Attosecond and Ultra-fast X-ray Science" School
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Louis DiMauro, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides travel support for US students (students enrolled in US
universities) and US postdocs (postdoctoral researchers employed at US
universities) to participate in the "Frontiers of Attosecond and Ultra-fast
X-ray Science" School that will be held during March 19-28, 2017 at the Ettore
Majorana Foundation and Centre for Scientific Culture in Erice, Sicily, in
Italy. The school program will have lectures from international experts on
attosecond science and technology. The lectures will discuss fundamentals and
applications of free electron lasers, synchrotron radiation, and ion collisions
for studies of electron dynamics in atoms, molecules, nanostructures and
condensed matter. These topics are among the forefront of the scientific
activities in atomic, molecular, and optical physics. This School offers an
opportunity for students and postdocs to interact with senior scientists from
the United States and also from a broader international
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support of students and postdocs through
this award makes a substantial contribution to the education and training of
future scientists. Students and postdocs with a background in attosecond and
ultrafast x-ray science acquire a broad range of knowledge and skills that
enable them to contribute to progress in many areas of science and technology.