* 1700582
* International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC) Conference on Cyber-Physical &amp; Human-Systems (CPHS 2016)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Anuradha Annaswamy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 12/31/2017
* USD 17,800.00

This award will help defray travel costs for ten or more US graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers to travel to Florianopolis, Brazil, for the first
International Federation on Automatic Control (IFAC) Conference on Cyber-
Physical and Human Systems (CPHS). Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), in which the
physical world interacts with information technology and data flow, remain a
challenging research area. However the research needs are even greater when
humans are introduced. Research groups around the world are making progress in
advancing the field of automatic control in areas such as smart prosthetics and
medical implants; human control of robots and vehicles; large-scale integration
of autonomous, semi-autonomous, and human-controlled vehicles; and smart and
connected urban infrastructure. This award will enable early career scholars to
present and discuss their work to an international audience that they would
otherwise not have the resources to access. Likewise, this conference travel
grant will provide them the opportunity to learn about work being done at
institutions that they would otherwise not have the resources to
visit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will address various roles humans
may play in regard to cyber-physical systems. The CPS may be directly controlled
by human operators, the CPS may operate autonomously with the objective of
empowering specific human activities, humans may be components in a CPS whose
objectives are not directly aligned to human goals, or humans they may be acting
against the goals of a CPS. The goal of the conference is to direct and
coordinate activities of the international community of control science and
engineering researchers to the many opportunities and newly emerging results in
these areas.