* 1700425
* Combinatorial Set Theory, Model Theory of Abstract Elementary Classes, and Borel Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Itay Neeman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 117,047.00

This project explores questions in three separate areas of logic and foundations
of mathematics. First, the project will study possible behaviors of the
mathematical universe using Zermelo-Frenkel set theory as a foundation. The main
goal is to understand infinitary combinatorics through the lens of forcing and
large cardinals. Second, the project will investigate the connections between
set theory and an abstract view of model theory. Many assertions in model theory
turn out to have set theoretic content, and the investigator will pursue the
question of when there is such a connection and when there is not. Third, the
project will explore the relatively recent field of descriptive graph
combinatorics and its connections with classical questions in geometry and
measure theory.

From infinitary combinatorics, the project will focus on the tree property,
which is a compactness principle that abstracts the Konig infinity lemma to
higher cardinals. A specific goal of the project is to explore the conjecture
that modulo the consistency of large cardinals the least uncountable cardinal is
the only cardinal which provably carries a counterexample to the tree property.
The project will also pursue other similar questions. From model theory, the
investigator will study model theoretic notions connected to the classification
theory of abstract elementary classes and their set theoretic content.
Particular properties of interest are tameness and locality, categoricity, and
Hanf numbers. From descriptive graph combinatorics, the investigator will
explore matchings and colorings in definable graphs. This study has already been
shown to have interesting connections with questions in geometry, for example
Marczewski's question about whether the Banach-Tarski paradox is possible using
Baire measurable pieces.