* 1700596
* BPE Symposia/Travel:  Funding Women Engineers to Attend the National LATTICE Symposia
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Eve Riskin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 02/29/2020
* USD 29,988.00

Extant scientific literature indicates that women students in STEM, who take
classes from women STEM faculty, are more likely to major in STEM disciplines.
Therefore, engineering and science benefit from diversity. In 2015, the NSF
ADVANCE Program awarded a grant (HRD-1500310) to the University of Washington,
North Carolina State University, and California Polytechnic State University to
create LATTICE (Launching Academics on the Tenure Track: an Intentional
Community in Engineering), an adaptation of an existing professional development
model that combines a national symposium with peer mentoring circles to broaden
the participation of women in engineering, particularly at the underserved
postdoctoral and early-career faculty stage. The intent of this travel grant is
to support 30 early-career women in electrical engineering and computer science
to attend the first LATTICE Symposium on May 18-21, 2017, outside of Seattle,
Washington. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LATTICE intends to bring together engineering
faculty, faculty diversity advocates and practitioners, and social scientists to
create a professional development symposia, followed by peer Mentoring Circles
for two national cohorts of early-career women interested in engineering faculty
careers, to support women engineering faculty in electrical engineering and
computer science and study what contributes to the success of the planning team
and the intervention. The symposia, plus Mentoring Circles intervention, are
designed to positively impact engineering women faculty's career self-efficacy,
sense of belonging, and career advancing behaviors so that they are able to
cultivate successful careers. The LATTICE project is also designed to obtain
important information that can help the fields of electrical engineering and
computer science better understand the efficacy of adapting the professional
development model to different populations, such as women in engineering.