* 1700845
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Developmental mechanisms of morphological novelty and adaptation in the hindlimbs of bats (Chiroptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Kathryn Stanchak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,116.00

This project seeks to better understand evolutionary novelty and anatomical
diversity through an investigation of the bat calcar, a skeletal element found
in bat feet but not in the feet of other mammals. The calcar is a
'neomorphism,'it suddenly appears in the earliest bats but is not found in their
ancestors: its appearance in the fossil record is difficult to explain. The bat
calcar is particularly exceptional because it varies extensively across bat
species, suggesting that anatomical variation may have functional and ecological
implications. Therefore, the calcar offers a unique model system for studying
the processes that generate anatomical novelty and diversity in vertebrates. In
this project, the researchers will link approaches from developmental biology
and biomechanics in order to explain the evolution of the calcar and to explore
its functional relevance across the global radiation of bats. The researchers
will also create education and outreach activities that will promote the utility
of interdisciplinary research for solving enduring questions in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers' primary goal is to use the calcar
of bats (Chiroptera) to understand how developmental modifications can lead to
the formation of novel skeletal structures and to functionally-relevant
variability in those structures. The specific objectives of this project are to
1) reveal the developmental origin of the calcar and discern its homology among
bats, and 2) identify developmental processes that lead to differences in
connective tissue composition among calcars (i.e., why some calcars calcify or
ossify while others do not). These objectives will be addressed using
histochemical and immunofluorescent assays of bat embryos representing
phylogenetically, morphologically, and ecologically diverse species. These
experiments will expand on the researchers' recent work on calcar functional
anatomy and biomechanics. This project will strengthen the ability of the
researchers to test their overarching hypothesis: the evolution of the calcar
resulted from modifications in developmental regulation of chondrogenesis and
ossification leading to adaptive evolution.