* 1700734
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role Of Spatial Clustering In Group Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Daniela Triadan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 14,403.00

Under the direction of Dr. Daniela Triadan, Melissa Burham will investigate the
social and spatial organization of ancient Maya cities through time. Many
scholars have focused on evidence from the center of Maya cities, households and
settlement patterns to understand social and political organization. However, in
complex, urbanized societies, social groups such as neighborhoods, districts and
local communities, develop at levels between the household, the city, and the
state. These were important spheres of social reproduction and negotiation both
in the past and present, and help to unify different groups of people into
cohesive social, economic and political systems. Archaeology is well placed to
study how diverse groups formed in the past, and how they articulated with the
larger society through time. Burham's project contributes to a growing body of
research on intermediate-level groups by focusing on the interactions that
fostered local identities, which may have included ritual practices, co-
residence, and the management of communal resources, like water. By looking at
developments over a time span of almost 2000 years, this project investigates
the nature of early urbanization and explores how early complexity shaped later
society. Furthermore, by studying the role of water management in social
integration, this project carries implications for understanding sustainability
and resource management in urban landscapes, both past and present. Burham's
work provides methodological and theoretical approaches for studying different
levels of community organization, and hence offers new insights into the
development of urbanism and social complexity in ancient societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Burham's research is part of the Ceibal-Petexbatun
Archaeological Project, which consists of an international team of collaborators
directed by Dr. Takeshi Inomata and Dr. Daniela Triadan. Ceibal, located in
Guatemala, had an extensive occupation from the Middle Preclassic through the
Terminal Classic periods (ca. 1000 BC-AD 900), and appears to have had a well-
structured city plan. It is therefore an ideal case to study the spatial and
social organization of people living in outlying areas through time. Burham's
project focuses on minor temple groups, which are located at regular intervals
in outlying residential areas. Many researchers have suggested minor temples
were important integrative hubs in lowland Maya settlements. Building on these
perspectives, this project investigates minor ceremonial groups, how the people
living near them related to the temples and to each other, and how the practices
and social relations undertaken at the temples influenced the larger
sociopolitical order. Minor temples were likely the physical and ideological
centers of local communities at Ceibal. Although they may have been discrete
social units, the formation of these groups was crucial to shaping and
sustaining the larger society, especially as populations increased and social
hierarchies became more pronounced. Focusing on evidence from five minor temple
complexes and the residential structures surrounding them, this project assesses
the degree and nature of social integration of local communities by examining
whether they were: 1) arranged into spatially-distinct zones and organized in
association with at least one temple; 2) had a source of water within each zone
that supported the local community population; and 3) had a distinct pattern of
material culture within each zone, resulting from similar access to or
preferences for certain goods. An examination of multiple lines of evidence over
a large time span provides a basis to better understand the formation of
intermediate social groups, and for exploring how community organization may
have changed throughout Ceibal's history.