* 1700564
* Photonics and Laser Project
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Stephen Leone, Westchester Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,926.00

Photonics and optics are globally significant technologies used in national
defense, computing, and the medical field. Because industry partners in the
region are research-driven firms that depend on highly-skilled technicians to
remain competitive, Westchester Community College (WCC), a Minority and Hispanic
Serving Institution in Valhalla, New York, has designed the Photonics and Laser
Project (PAL-TEC) in response to increased regional demand for skilled
technicians. Area employers anticipate a 35% increase in the number of
technicians needed with knowledge and skills in photonics and optics and have
made long-term commitments to the program. PAL-TEC will increase the number and
quality of technicians by developing (1) a new educational pathway aligned with
industry standards, (2) new teaching methods; and (3) an evidence-based, gender-
inclusive recruitment and retention program. It has strong support from area
industry partners that include IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Bern Optics and Kent Optronics. PAL-TEC is a scalable model
designed with evidence-based best practices from the NSF ATE community that can
easily be adopted by other two-year colleges. The project will involve course
development; professional development of faculty; development of gender-
inclusive recruitment and retention plans and activities; and dissemination at
national conferences and meetings of high school and college faculty and
counselors. This project will establish a regional pathway to photonics careers
and address the recruitment and retention of women and minorities, a long-
standing challenge for the field of mechanical technology, and a growing demand
for highly-skilled photonics technicians. It has the potential to significantly
impact traditional enrollment patterns in mechanical technology programs at the
college by introducing a new paradigm for increasing participation among women
and minorities by focusing on the nature of these careers today. This project
represents a strong partnership between industry, academia and high schools,
addresses an unmet need in the Northeast region, and contributes to
understanding how NSF ATE technical education resources can be readily adapted
to meet emerging industry needs. A comprehensive evaluation will determine
project effectiveness and impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
improve science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
educator development by improving curriculum, teaching methods, and faculty
capacity in optics and photonics. The technologies to be taught are in use in
manufacturing, data transmission, medical testing, and imaging industries. PAL-
TEC will convene industry, high school, four-year, and internal partners in
order to assess, design, and implement timely modifications to existing programs
and to improve the diversity of the STEM technician labor force. Professional
development in photonics, problem-based learning, and gender-inclusive
strategies will be utilized. It will leverage expertise from the Asheville
Buncombe Technical Community College (AB-Tech) ATE project, the National Center
for Optics and Photonics (OP-TEC), other model institutions, and expert
resources to scale quickly and effectively. WCC will work to expand use of NSF
ATE resources to improve its technician education programs and share best
practices with others to meet changing regional needs. NSF resources to be used
include OP- TEC, A-B Tech, South Carolina ATE Center of Excellence, ATE Central,
ATE-TV, and TeachingTechnicians.org.