* 1700575
* Technician Training in Advanced Building Performance Analysis and Verification
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Andrew McMahan, Central Carolina Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 199,612.00

In order to meet the demand for highly educated technicians in the modern
construction industry, Central Carolina Community College (CCCC) will expand the
curricula of their Sustainability Technologies and Building Construction
Technologies programs. Today's construction industry is a high tech landscape
that plays a significant role in human health, resource management, and energy
consumption. Modern buildings contain complex systems that require skilled
technicians to properly design, install, and verify using technical skills along
with scientific and mathematical theory and knowledge. This trend in the
construction industry has led to industry demand for individuals with enhanced
education and credentials to ensure buildings meet performance criteria.
Informed by their industrial partners, CCCC will provide internships and field
experiences that prepare students to earn relevant third party credentials that
prepare them for the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly
benefit three groups; students, CCCC, and local industry. For student
technicians, they will receive (1) a value added educational experience with
both institutional and third party credentialing, (2) multiple avenues for
success through educational pathways and stackable credentialing, and (3)
increased field experience. CCCC will (1) update curricula to better educate
students interested in energy analysis and performance verification, (2)
strengthen connections between the college and local industry, and (3) address
technical education needs of underrepresented populations in the college's
service area. The benefit of this approach to industry will be (1) the increased
pool of well-trained new employees, and (2) the increased ease of hiring new
employees with college credit training and industry specific, nationally
recognized credentials.