* 1700267
* Quantum Symmetries: Approximation Properties, Operator Algebras, and Applications to Quantum Information
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Michael Brannan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 120,000.00

This research project aims to address several fundamental problems arising in
two areas of mathematical analysis that have have their origins in quantum
physics: operator algebra theory and quantum information theory. The common
mathematical structures that thread the various aspects of this project together
are called quantum symmetries. Quantum symmetry can be thought of as an enriched
notion of symmetry, adapted to model the complex structures arising in nature.
In practical contexts, mathematicians and scientists are interested in studying
properties of a given system (e.g., a mechanical system, a molecule, or a
population of organisms). Understanding the symmetries of such a system -
transformations of the system that preserve the relevant structure - provides a
wealth of insight into its properties. In many contexts, the symmetries that one
encounters are described by mathematical structures called groups. However, for
certain complex systems (particularly those connected to quantum mechanical
phenomena, or operator algebra theory), groups are insufficient to describe the
relevant symmetries that arise. This results in the need for a more general
mathematical notion of symmetry, and led to the concept of a quantum group.
Quantum groups were formally introduced in the 1980's as a tool to study certain
types of non-classical symmetries arising in statistical physics. Since that
time, quantum groups (and related notions of quantum symmetry) have proved to
have remarkable applications in topology, quantum algebra, operator algebras,
quantum probability, quantum information theory, and the classification of
topological phases of matter. By exploiting the quantum symmetries appearing in
various mathematical and physical systems, this project aims to provide new
insights into challenging problems in both operator algebra theory and quantum
information theory.

This project is divided into three components. The first part concerns the
structural theory of von Neumman algebras associated to a class of discrete
quantum groups, called orthogonal free quantum groups. The principle aim here is
to use recent exciting developments in free probability theory and geometric
quantum group theory to solve a conjecture which states that these von Neumann
algebras can never be isomorphic to free group factors. The second part of this
project concerns the structure of a class of von Neumann algebras, called the
q-deformed Araki-Woods algebras. The PI will use certain asymptotic
distributional symmetries for these algebras to investigate finite dimensional
approximation properties and algebraic indecomposability results. The third and
final part of this project proposes completely new applications of quantum
symmetries in quantum information theory (QIT). The PI will investigate a new
method for constructing examples of quantum channels using representation
categories of quantum groups. Applications of these new quantum channels to
various relevant questions in QIT will be investigated.