* 1700299
* Quantification of Bone's Load-Induced Multicellular Intreractions with a Lab-on-a-Chip Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Marnie Saunders, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 346,015.00

Bone remodeling is an elegant and tightly orchestrated process by which bone
forming cells (osteoblasts) and bone removing cells (osteoclasts) work in
concert to add or remove bone. In mechanically-induced bone remodeling, bone
communication cells (osteocytes) are believed to sense the stimulus and then
direct the remodeling response. While this theory is generally accepted, there
is still much to understand about how these interactions are coordinated.
Current research techniques do not allow for these signals to be fully studied.
Understanding bone remodeling at the cellular level is important if the process
is to be manipulated to improve bone healing after injury and to minimize the
impact of bone diseases, such as osteoporosis. This project is developing a
novel lab-on-a-chip system that will incorporate all three types of bone cells
and will permit the cell-to-cell signals to be isolated and identified. For the
first time, the difference between mechanically generated signals and
biochemical signals are being clearly identified. These systems are being
studied for both normal stress loading scenarios and overloading stress
scenarios, for which the induced an overall response could be bone growth or
bone damage, respectively. In addition to incorporating this research into
undergraduate and graduate courses, planned outreach activities include the
development of a learning community for inner city sixth graders who will
participate in a two-year summer camp. The learning community is designed to
provide a peer group for the students, with the goal of working with these like-
minded students to graduate from high school and to matriculate in college.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current experimental techniques are not appropriate for
the separation of mechanically-derived cues for bone remodeling from soluble
cues for this phenomenon. For example, in vitro cell models generally isolate
one cell type and study its isolated response, while in vivo models require
animal sacrifice and represent the remodeling environment at the time of
sacrifice. To effectively study the multicellular interactions that occur in
remodeling, models are needed that accurately recapitulate the environment. To
that end, this research project is developing an in vitro, lab-on-a-chip bone
remodeling platform that incorporates osteocytes, osteoclasts and osteoblasts
and enables quantification of functional outcomes (i.e., bone formation and
resorption). The experimental platform is then being utilized to address the
role of soluble signals, cell-cell communication, and cell contact in
mechanically-induced remodeling responses in physiological load and overload.
Soluble activity is being analyzed by quantifying the effects of loading-induced
osteocyte conditioned medium on bone formation and resorption. Experiments are
then being repeated in co-cultures of osteoclasts and osteoblasts to incorporate
soluble signals and cell contact allowing the contribution of the mechanisms to
be determined. Finally, experiments are being repeated in gap-junction deficient
systems to allow the contribution of cell communication to be determined.