* 1700945
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Electroactive Scaffold for Cartilage Regeneration: A Proof of Concept Study
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Treena Livingston, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the use of a
smart biomaterial for the application of cartilage repair.   The project will
utilize a piezoelectric material to regenerate cartilage tissue. Piezoelectric
materials are capable of converting mechanical deformation into electrical
output and have largely been unexplored for cartilage repair. An estimated 49
million Americans suffer from cartilage damage as a result of injury, or wear
and tear with aging, which can significantly affect a person's quality of life
and can progress to widespread cartilage destruction and disabling arthritis. At
present, current repair techniques are unable to restore a normal "hyaline"
cartilaginous surface, resulting in fibrous "scars" that do not return the joint
to normal function. The project will result in the development of a
piezoelectric scaffold prototype for implantation and will determine whether the
piezoelectric scaffold will regenerate functional cartilage tissue. Proof-of-
concept will be demonstrated. The piezoelectric scaffold has the following
unique features: mechanically flexible, biodegradable, porous for tissue
ingrowth and cell attachment, and provides electrical stimulation. For treating
cartilage defects, the piezoelectric scaffold can be combined with
microfracturing, a common surgical procedure that stimulates the bone marrow and
provides a source of endogenous stem cells, to promote healing and integration
with the native cartilage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
following technology gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. The piezoelectric scaffold is a composite consisting of
zinc oxide, which possesses both piezoelectric and biological growth factor
properties. A piezoelectric material acts as a highly sensitive mechano-
electrical transducer that generates charges in response to minute mechanical
deformations. This project will develop a flexible, piezoelectric fibrous
scaffold that can achieve a local electric field mimicking the natural
extracellular matrix observed during development and regeneration. This natural
extracellular matrix is also rich in growth factors so the bifunctional property
of zinc will provide a synergistic benefit to cells to promote repair. The
proposed studies will focus on prototype development and establishing proof-of-
concept in an in vivo model. Many individuals suffer from osteoarthritis or
cartilage damage. Innovative technologies are needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personnel involved in this project, both undergraduate and
graduate students, and postdocs, will receive entrepreneurship, innovation and
technology translation experiences through teaching modules and university
programs.