* 1700644
* Pathways to Geospatial Technology and Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Ratan Dhar, CUNY Bronx Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2023
* USD 962,663.00

Geospatial analysis and geospatial technologies are used in a growing number of
industries. This progress has created an increased demand for employees with
essential geospatial skills, competencies, and training. In this project, Bronx
Community College and York College of the City University of New York will
collaborate with industrial partners to educate highly-skilled technicians to
meet these evolving workforce needs, and to increase the number of young adults
interested in entering the geospatial technology field. The project will develop
new geospatial technology courses, an associate-level degree program, innovative
summer workshops, research internship and professional development programs in
geospatial applications for students and educators from institutions with
limited access to suitable resources, and effective pathways toward geospatial
technology careers. Bronx Community and York colleges are both minority-serving
institutions with mostly female enrolment, therefore project activities will
successfully recruit and train students from historically underrepresented
groups to help diversify the future workforce. The project will enhance the
technical education of students and provide pathways to careers in a high-
technology field that is important to the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to expand educational pathways to
geospatial technology careers. It will advance knowledge and contribute to this
objective through: 1) Curriculum development focused on place-based, hands-on
learning experiences that enhance spatial thinking and cognition in key areas of
geographic information systems, remote sensing, and global positioning systems.
The Geospatial Technology Competency Model developed by the Employment Training
Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor will be utilized as the
foundation for these development activities to align the curriculum to national
workforce competency standards. 2) Articulation agreements for the degree
program from the 2-year to 4-year institutions. 3) Implementing a summer
research internship program that will heighten learning experiences for
secondary and postsecondary students using industry-standard geospatial software
and equipment in practical applications. Students will be exposed to cutting-
edge research and careers in geospatial technology, and receive training in
research ethics, data transfer methods, and scholarly writing. 4) Conducting
year-round workshops and developmental activities for students and educators
from resource-poor schools and colleges to enhance their expertise. 5)
Developing flexible internship pathways, in collaboration with industry partners
and the New York State Department of Labor, to provide students with
opportunities to acquire life-long learning skills and experiences critical for
achieving success in their careers. The project materials, practices, and
outcomes will be shared through the project website, professional development
workshops for educators, and ATE-Center hubs.