* 1700441
* Meeting Industry Demands for an Immunobiotechnology-Capable Workforce through College and Secondary Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sandra Porter, Shoreline Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 572,070.00

With an emphasis on two-year colleges, the Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) program focuses on the education of technicians for the high-technology
fields that drive our nation's economy. Immunobiotechnology is one of the
fastest growing disciplines in the field of biotechnology. Immunobiotechnology
encompasses two main areas that are vital to modern medicine: developing drug
and diagnostic methods that relate to the immune system and manufacturing
therapeutic drugs derived from the immune system (for example, from antibodies).
Jobs in immunobiotechnology require specialized expertise that is not widely
available for secondary and college students. The gap between evolving industry
needs and existing training means that even college graduates and incumbent
industry workers must seek additional training or education in
immunobiotechnology to acquire and/or succeed in these jobs. By offering
enhanced educational experiences to students enrolled in two-year college
degree- and certificate programs and connecting this curriculum with secondary
school education, this project at Shoreline Community College in Washington will
educate a wide variety of biotechnology workers in line with industry needs as
it provides a robust education and training program to support the growing
immunobiotechnology industry of Washington state and the United States. The
deliverables and best practices developed through the project will be
disseminated through coordination with Bio-Link (a National ATE Center for
Biotechnology), at Life Sciences Teaching Resources Community website, in
faculty and teacher development institutes hosted at Shoreline Community College
and at Austin Community College, and through biology education journals and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biotechnology is a dynamic industry, where
continually changing methods and practices must be reflected in technician
training and continuing education to ensure the emerging and incumbent workforce
possesses current, high demand skills. Currently no other project in ATE's Bio-
Link network offers a certificate or specialty training in immunobiotechnology.
This project intends to fill this gap by creating portable courses in
immunobiotechnology for use in degree and certificate programs by two-year
colleges and kit-based instructional units that can be used by high school
teachers in a variety of secondary biology courses. Investigators at Shoreline
Community College in Washington state, collaborating with Digital World Biology
and consulting with advisors from the region's biotechnology industry, will
incorporate immunobiotechnology topics in multiple courses in the college's
existing biotechnology program and will create new immunobiotechnology courses
that respond to the emerging needs of local industry. New courses include Case
Studies in Drug Development, Cancer Biology, Quality Systems, Advanced
Bioinformatics, and two special projects courses providing independent research
experiences for students. The new courses will serve as elective courses for
current and future students enrolled in Shoreline's Biotechnology Associates of
Applied Arts and Sciences (A.A.A.S.) Degree and Biotechnology Certificate
programs. The new courses also comprise the core of a stackable Immunobiotech
certificate aimed at graduates and incumbent industry workers seeking to update
their knowledge and skills. The new immunobiotechnology courses will be
disseminated to the broader biotechnology technician education community via the
Bio-Link Course-in-a-Box(TM) feature. In addition, the project team will develop
and pilot two high school level kit-based instructional units in
immunobiotechnology - Infectious Disease and Cancer Biology - to encourage
secondary students to complete high school and seek college-level education. In
the future these kits will be available to local teachers through Shoreline's
existing Biotechnology Program kit loan program. The dissemination of the
portable college-level courses and high school-level kits is likely to
dramatically improve the preparedness of technicians in biotechnology
nationally. A formative and summative evaluation process will be employed to
continuously enhance the project activities and provide opportunities for
researching and evaluating the success of the project and its deliverables.