* 1700137
* Surface/Interface Phenomena and Topological Order in Emerging Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Jagadeesh Moodera, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In recent years interest is increasing in a
class of emerging new materials called topological insulators (TI) displaying
unexpected quantum properties at their surfaces/interfaces. This has led to vast
advancement in quantum science, and with potential for future quantum devices
that can be energy efficient for information storage and transmission. These new
materials can carry current without dissipation and are capable of enhancing the
performance in existing technology such as spintronics (used in computer data
storage, communication and sensing). Another topology related phenomenon is a
new type of quantum state called Majorana bound states (MBS) that can appear in
TIs by combining materials with different physical phenomena (topology,
superconductivity, magnetism), which may lead to future highly fault-tolerant
quantum computing. In this project, students as well as young scientists acquire
knowledge and train in many advanced areas, as well as push the frontiers of
physics and material science. There is potential to lay the foundation for
establishing energy efficient quantum electronics to revolutionize the future
information technology. Instruments, patents and knowledge developed during this
research would be made available to companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The demonstration of two-dimensional quantum coherent
properties and unexpected stabilization of interfacial ferromagnetism to much
higher temperatures in TI by proximity coupling to a ferromagnetic insulator,
has prompted the investigation: i) to reach the occurrence of quantum coherent
properties in a ferromagnetic TI at a higher temperatures, ii) the quantum
behavior of spin polarized chiral current in TIs with proximity induced gap when
hybridized with a magnetic insulator, and iii) probe unconventional
superconducting pairing, the electron spin polarization and quantum coherence in
the edge conduction channel of magnetic TI by tunneling spectroscopy. These
goals are achievable based on our extensive previous related multidisciplinary
knowledge with thin film heterostructure properties using state of the art
molecular beam epitaxial system for film growth and measurement facilities,
including atomic level characterization of interfaces utilizing the national
facilities. Education and training of students (including high school students
summer programs) and young scientists in the areas dictated quantum coherent
topology driven phenomena are planned under this program.