* 1700555
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Dynamic, Climate-Driven Water Availability on Tree Water Use and Health in Mediterranean Riparian Forests
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kelly Caylor, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 07/31/2022
* USD 396,566.00

Forests along rivers are under threat due to climate-driven changes in water
availability to trees. When water in the rooting zone is limited, trees undergo
physiological changes that affect their overall growth and health. This problem
is particularly acute within forests in river floodplains in regions with warm,
dry summers (e.g., large areas of the USA). Such forests provide a range of
ecosystem services, but they are limited in area, species diversity, and are
challenging to manage under a changing climate. This project aims to build new
understanding of the ?ecohydrological? links between water availability and
forest health by employing an interdisciplinary set of research methods. It
involves extracting tree cores from floodplain trees to investigate annual
growth and will further investigate the ?isotopic signatures? of source water
used by trees as recorded within each annual ring. By also monitoring climate
variations and collecting water from various contributing sources, the project
will provide insight into variations in potential source waters to forest trees.
To generalize this research, the research will employ a numerical model to
assess how climate controls water access to forests under plausible scenarios of
regional climate change. The project will generate: new tools and information
for practitioners of forest/water/basin management, international educational
opportunities for underrepresented groups in the hydrologic sciences, and a new
ecohydrology course for undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;This research project
combines: 1) field-based measurements of climate and hydrology and laboratory
analysis of oxygen isotopes from all potential tree water sources; (2)
contemporary and retrospective analysis of oxygen and carbon isotopes in annual
tree-rings to investigate recent climate-driven fluctuations in tree water use
and water use efficiency; (3) seasonal (intra-annual) analysis of oxygen
isotopes via high-resolution ?micro-slicing? of annual tree rings to assess
seasonal fluctuations in tree water source use; and 4) improvement and
application of a climate-driven numerical ecohydrology model that includes
dynamic water fluxes into the floodplain, isotopic fractionation/mixing, and
tree water uptake. It will compare the ecohydrologic responses to climate in
water availability at forest sites along a strong climatic gradient.
&lt;br/&gt;There is currently limited ability to link tree/forest response to
decadal climate shifts. Generalizable understanding linking regional climate to
water availability to water use by riparian trees across forests stands is
currently lacking, which limits predictive capability of forest response to
drought stress over decadal timescales. This research will enable: i)
identification of signatures of water stress within riparian forests; ii)
predictive capability of forest response to climate change; iii) a clearer
picture of regional variations in the expression of climate within floodplain
water availability; and iv) improvement of dendro-paleoclimate reconstructions
by providing better constraints on water availability and use under different
conditions of climatic forcing. &lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide
managers with a new perspective and tools for anticipating and mitigating the
risks of climate change on vulnerable riparian forest resources along major
rivers in temperate and Mediterranean climatic regions. The project will host a
2-day workshop to disseminate our findings to practitioners and stakeholders in
in the study region. It also includes a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) supplement to enable two female and/or minority students to travel to
France as their first international trip to participate on the first field
campaign. The REU will provide these students will an exciting international
research experience, a world-class learning opportunity, and an introduction to
a potential career in environmental/hydrologic sciences. Additionally, data and
models from this research will be integrated into a new upper division course on
dryland ecohydrology at UCSB. &lt;br/&gt;