* 1700604
* RAPID:   Waterborne Elizabethkingia disinfection studies in response to ongoing U.S. outbreak
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Brooke Mayer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,928.00

1700604 Mayer

There is an ongoing outbreak in the U.S caused by Elizabethkingia bacteria.
Elizabethkingia is a ubiquitous group of bacteria whose presence in soil and
water ordinarily pose little risk to human health. However, the current outbreak
includes 63 confirmed cases, and has been associated with 18 confirmed
fatalities since November 2015. This opportunistic human pathogen is
particularly alarming because it tends to exhibit a high degree of antibiotic
resistance and mortality. Given the emergence of this pathogen and the ongoing
outbreak, it is important to develop a better understanding of how to
effectively control these bacteria in drinking water.

This RAPID research project will provide the first direct assessment of
inactivation of waterborne Elizabethkingia bacteria using chlorination,
chloramination, ozonation, and ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. Specific objectives
of the proposed work include the following. Characterize the disinfection
response of: 1) planktonic cells, 2) attached cells, and 3) develop a deeper
understanding of the relationship between disinfection efficacy and
Elizabethkingia composition. Laboratory experiments will be used to establish
concentration (or UV intensity) x time relationships (referred to as CT
relationships). This disinfectant response data is currently unknown, and is
urgently needed to develop effective disinfection strategies to curtail the
current outbreak and avoid future public health disasters. Additionally, this
project will probe the relationship between the bacteria's composition (nucleic
and amino acids) and susceptibility to different modes of disinfection. The
proposed research will substantially contribute to advancing broader societal
outcomes including improved understanding of drinking water disinfection
strategies to better protect human health, which has immediate implications for
curtailing the ongoing outbreak caused by Elizabethkingia bacteria and for
preventing future outbreaks. Findings from this project will also be integrated
into course modules/discussions in the PIs regular teaching rotation, a summer
experience for high school students, and at the Emerging Contaminants Short
Course offered annually at Marquette University for academics and professionals.