* 1700896
* GP-IMPACT: Integrating Geoscience to Engage Majors with Mathematics: iGEM2
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2020
* Elizabeth Griffith, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2020
* USD 158,479.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;At The University of Texas at Arlington (UTA), mathematics
courses leading to Calculus constitute a major obstruction to success for
alarming numbers of STEM-intended majors. This fact reflects a challenge faced
by universities across the country. Our goals are to (1) improve success of
intended STEM majors at UTA in mathematics courses that lead to Calculus,
courses taken primarily by STEM-intended majors, but yielding D-F-Withdraw rates
&gt;60%, and (2) introduce first and second year students to the geosciences and
related career pathways before they decide on a major, thereby increasing the
number and diversity of students who choose to major in the geosciences. We will
do this by modifying the laboratory/recitation component of Math 1302 (College
Algebra) by integrating geoscience research of The Ohio State University (OSU)
and UTA faculty into the mathematics curriculum, reaching approximately 1,000
students per semester. Weekly lab meetings in the mathematics courses will
incorporate a video presentation by geoscience faculty describing how the
mathematical skill is essential for his/her scientific research, and exercises
the students perform will be cast in the context of that research project,
followed by problem-solving activities that synthesize mathematical concepts and
apply the concepts with problems related to geoscience research. In this way,
the mathematical abstraction will be connected with geoscience content crossing
the fields of geophysics, environmental geochemistry, and oceanography. This is
a strategic partnership, as the geosciences incorporate research methods from
across all of STEM and are therefore likely to be relatable to a broad range of
STEM-intended students. This collaboration will empower beginning STEM students
by placing abstract mathematical concepts in a scientific context at a critical
transition, which constitutes statistically a major stumbling block for many
STEM-intended majors. At the same time, it will expose students early in their
college experience to geoscience as a potential major. This project will be made
possible by building a new partnership between the School of Earth Science at
OSU and Mathematics at UTA. Success of the project will be determined by
monitoring D-F-W rates of this course, evaluate students? perceptions of the
geosciences and confidence in mathematics, and tracking students through
declaration of their major and beyond. In the final year of the project, the
model implemented at UTA will be propagated to OSU, demonstrating long term
transportability and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
II&lt;br/&gt;Freshman level math courses often form a roadblock for STEM-
intended students, particularly when students do not test directly into Calculus
when they enter college. This is certainly true at The University of Texas at
Arlington (UTA), an access-oriented university. Calculus is the first
mathematics course in all natural science degree plans at UTA; however, Algebra
or Precalculus are common mathematics entry points for STEM-intended majors
especially those who begin their major through nontraditional pathways. In 2012,
UTA had the highest acceptance rate and highest number of new transfer students
(8,649) in the country (National Student Clearinghouse Research Center) and this
trend continues. Given these statistics, and the fact that the proposed work
will directly affect ~1000 students per semester, this project will have an
enormous impact on a diverse population of at-risk students who aspire to
graduating in a STEM degree. Our goals are to (1) improve success of intended
STEM majors at UTA in mathematics courses that lead to Calculus, courses taken
primarily by STEM-intended majors, but yielding D-F-Withdraw rates &gt;60%, and
(2) introduce first and second year students to the geosciences and related
career pathways before they decide on a major, thereby increasing the number and
diversity of students who choose to major in the geosciences. We will recast
College Algebra concepts in the context of research areas of Earth Science
Faculty at The Ohio State University (OSU) and UTA without changing the content
of the current course. In this way, we will empower beginning STEM students by
placing abstract mathematical concepts in a scientific context - crossing the
fields of geophysics, environmental geochemistry, and oceanography - at a
critical transition which constitutes statistically a major stumbling block for
many of STEM-intended majors. This is a new strategic partnership, as the
geosciences incorporate research methods from across all of STEM and are
therefore likely to be relatable to a broad range of STEM-intended students. At
the same time, it will expose students early in their college experience to
geoscience as a potential major. Success of the project will be determined by
monitoring D-F-W rates of this course, evaluate students? perceptions of the
geosciences and confidence in mathematics, and tracking students through
declaration of their major and beyond. In the final year of the project, the
model implemented at UTA will be propagated to OSU, demonstrating long term
transportability and sustainability.