* 1700680
* Developing a Precision Agriculture Workforce Ladder through Secondary, College, and Incumbent Worker Education that Integrates Emerging Technologies and Farm Data
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Michael Lechner, Northeast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 785,625.00

With an emphasis on two-year colleges, the Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) program focuses on the education of technicians for the high-technology
fields that drive our nation's economy. According to projections from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics, technicians are needed to fulfill growing demand in fields
that require precision agriculture such as agriculture and food science,
environmental science and protection, farm equipment mechanics and service, and
land surveying and mapping. Jobs in precision agriculture require a unique
combination of technical and agricultural expertise that is not widely available
for secondary and college students. The gap between evolving industry need and
existing training means that even incumbent workers must seek additional
training or education in precision agriculture technologies and practices to
acquire jobs and succeed in them. By offering a ladder of enhanced educational
experiences to secondary students, two-year college students, and incumbent
industry workers, Northeast Community College in Nebraska will educate a wide
variety of agriculture workers in line with industry needs as it provides a
robust education and training program to support the vital agricultural industry
of Nebraska and the United States. A focus of the project is on increasing the
number of women and individuals of Hispanic origin in precision agriculture,
which will strengthen and diversify an emerging U.S. industry. The deliverables
and best practices developed through the project will be disseminated in
coordination with ATE Central, at websites reaching agriculture education
communities, through regional agriculture and cultural events, and through
agriculture education journals and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
highly technical nature of precision agriculture jobs, the agriculture
curriculum is often outdated and does not fully prepare students for available
positions. Enhancing precision agriculture curriculum for two-year colleges and
connecting this curriculum with secondary schools and incumbent worker education
will dramatically improve the preparedness of technicians in a number of
agricultural sectors. Faculty at Northeast Community College in Nebraska,
collaborating with Erudite Ingenuity and consulting with local agriculture
industry, will utilize the college's existing precision agriculture curriculum
as the foundation for a more technology-enabled, data-driven, and experiential
Associates of Applied Science (A.A.S.) degree program. Integration of emerging
technologies and longitudinal farm data throughout the precision agriculture
A.A.S. program will provide important opportunities for college students to
engage in real-world farm scenarios, the processes of gathering and analyzing
farm data, and deciding on informed action plans. In addition, after
modularizing three core courses of the precision agriculture A.A.S. program,
investigators will flexibly adapt the course modules for use in the secondary
Intro Ag course and in Northeast's early college precision agriculture course(s)
to encourage students to complete high school and seek college-level education.
The course modules will also be the foundation of a series of credit-eligible
workshops and hybrid courses for incumbent agriculture workers to support their
productivity. Local secondary teachers will collaborate with the project team to
co-develop and pilot a precision agriculture unit that could be used in the
Introduction Ag course offered by all Nebraska agriculture education schools.
Local industry representatives will provide input on program and curriculum
design as members of Northeast's Precision Agriculture Program advisory
committee. The project will support a full-time Precision Agriculture Training
Associate that will contribute to the proposed educational activities and will
facilitate relationships between Northeast Community College and the high
schools and incumbent workforce in its service area. A formative and summative
evaluation process will be employed to continuously enhance the project
activities and provide opportunities for researching and evaluating the success
of the project and deliverables.