* 1700519
* Strengthening Mobile Application Resources and Technician Training: The SMARTT Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Ann Beheler, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2022
* USD 680,187.00

The daily use of mobile applications has superseded web browsing and is
approaching that of television viewing, with growth of more than 50% in recent
years. No one technology is growing faster or transforming business activities
more than mobile devices. However, development of mobile technology is limited
by a shortage of talented developers. By 2024, the number of targeted
occupations for Mobile Application Development Technicians in central Ohio is
projected to grow by 20%. The Strengthening Mobile Application Resources and
Technician Training project (SMARTT) serves the national interest by preparing
students to fill this workforce need. SMARTT will develop an education program
to meet the increased demand for Mobile Application Development Technicians in
the Ohio region and contribute to the diversity of the region's work
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SMARTT project will create three deliverables
for wide national dissemination. First, the project will create a Mobile
Application Development Technology 2+2+2 pathway featuring model articulation
agreements from high school to community college and then to university-level
baccalaureate programs. Second, a new state-of-the-art curriculum will integrate
existing courses with new courses featuring project-based learning and
incorporate an experiential learning capstone course and a SMARTT Device Lab.
The curriculum will include the design of a collaborative Mobile Design and
Development certificate. Third, targeted outreach will focus on underserved
populations with specific emphasis on low-income and first generation students
as well as veterans. Decisions will be guided by input from an industry advisory
committee.