* 1700941
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Developing high-throughput whole slide imaging platform using single-frame instant-focusing scheme
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2021
* Guoan Zheng, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 11/30/2021
* USD 288,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the single-
frame instant-focusing scheme to fill the need for high-throughput whole slide
imaging (WSI). WSI refers to scanning conventional glass slides in order to
create digital slides which can then be used for diagnostic purposes via a
computer where they can be viewed, managed and analyzed. It is the most recent
imaging modality being employed by pathology departments worldwide and continues
to gain traction for diagnostic, educational, and research
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovation is important because it
can address the challenges of high-throughput microscopy imaging and lower the
cost barrier of brightfield and fluorescence whole slide imaging for the
biological research and medical diagnostic markets. The project will result in a
WSI product prototype that has the following unique features: 1) it can rapidly
and precisely detect the sample position over a long axial range without
mechanical z-scanning, 2) it is able to handle transparent and low-contrast
samples, 3) it can provide multiple imaging modalities in the same platform, and
4) it requires minimum hardware modification to an existing microscope platform.
These features lead to a better imaging quality, a higher throughput
performance, and a cost saving when compared to the competing WSI products in
this market space. Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the technology
gap of the time-consuming autofocusing process as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial applications. By employing a dual-pinhole aperture
or a dual-LED illuminator for autofocusing, the optimal focal position of the
sample can be precisely detected over a long axial range in real time. The
single-frame detection nature of the proposed innovation also allows
autofocusing even when the stage is in continuous motion and the focus errors
will not be accumulated to other spatial positions. In addition, personnel
involved in this project, including undergraduates and graduates, will receive
entrepreneurship and technology translation experiences through the "Accelerate
UConn" program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages business partners from
Dover Motion to guide commercialization aspects in this technology translation
effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.