* 1700844
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Scalable Accelerated Power Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Young Cho, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
integrated circuit (IC) power estimation simulation technology into an
integrated simulation tool that is superior to the current state-of-the-art. The
Scalable Accelerated Power Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis
(SAP-SPICE) will drastically improve the way IC manufacturers design, fabricate,
and test modern chips by significantly increasing the speed and the accuracy of
the power estimation simulations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the following technology gap as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. While the gold-standard simulation tool HSPICE produces
the most accurate result, it comes at a high computational cost. On the other
hand, accelerated simulators are faster because they depend on larger component
models but they produce less accurate average results. The SAP-SPICE project
uses a different approach with logic design, a logic simulator, and a portion of
power data to extract a more accurate result while maintaining fast
computational speed. The goal of this project is to produce a preproduction
quality prototype that will integrate with existing industry standard tools to
demonstrate the advantages of the technology over other tools to potential
customers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAP-SPICE will have broader impacts on
several fronts. First, the tool can lead to significant societal and
environmental benefit when it is used by the chip manufacturers to improve the
chip yield. Second, the techniques developed for the product have potential
broader applicability to other areas of computing such as large server systems,
mobile devices, and consumer appliances; especially in a future where a fine-
grained energy accounting will be an integral part of all computing devices.
Beyond its impact on technology, the project will also contribute to workforce
development through educational benefits to the students participating in the
project who will be organized in a structure similar to a small business,
encouraged to find innovative solutions on a short timeline, and will meet
weekly with the business mentor.