* 1700615
* Unmanned Aircraft Systems and Geospatial Information Technology Integration into Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jonathan Beck, Northland Community & Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 599,977.00

The landscape for geospatial information technology (GIT) and unmanned aircraft
systems (UAS) technology continues to evolve on a daily basis with new
applications for GIT and UAS as well as changing regulations that govern the
industry. This rapidly advancing technology requires a collaborative model
between education, government, and industry stakeholders to cultivate the
necessary advances in knowledge and technician education. The goal of this
project at Northland Community and Technical College in Minnesota is to advance
technician education by forming new educational pathways and partnerships,
leading to a highly skilled GIT and UAS workforce. The program development will
parallel significant changes resulting from industry integration of GIT and UAS
technology; develop a technician workforce prepared to utilize UAS technology in
a safe, efficient and responsible manner for numerous industries; incorporate
input from faculty and industry and government stakeholders in shaping the
evolution of technician education enhanced by GIT and UAS technology; and expand
educational resources and best practices for GIT and UAS technology. This
project builds on a small ATE project (1501629) that was designed to bridge the
gap between new and emerging aviation technology and technician education in the
area of UAS technology. A comprehensive evaluation will determine the impact of
the project as well as make recommendations for modifications so that it can
have maximum impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northland has the only accredited UAS
maintenance program in the country and has helped define nationally recognized
credentials in partnership with American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) and SpaceTEC. It launched the first two-year AAS degree program in the
country in Geospatial Intelligence Analysis to respond to the growing need for
technicians educated in this high demand career field and has recently created a
small UAS Field Service Technician Program to develop the knowledge base in
technical proficiencies required as small UAS are integrated into the national
airspace system (NAS). Building on these activities and those of its partners,
the project will create innovative, industry driven curriculum to integrate GIT
and UAS technology into technician education; develop collaborative partnerships
with universities, public sector, and industry stakeholders to align educational
pathways for dynamically changing careers resulting from GIT and UAS technology;
and advance faculty knowledge and resources for GIT and UAS technology. The key
objectives for this project are to: (a) leverage existing NSF ATE resources to
validate workforce assessments and enhance GIT and UAS curriculum modeling for
broad disciplines such as agriculture, public safety and infrastructure
inspection.; (b) establish collaborative educational pathways by integrating new
and existing curriculum across Minnesota State through dual credit enrollment
and 2+2 articulation; and (c) expand GIT and UAS professional development
opportunities and educational resources throughout higher education including
development of curriculum and materials, access to laboratory resources, and
workshops for college faculty, high school teachers, and students.