* 1700818
* High-Impact Introduction to the Geosciences through the Undergraduate Coral Research Initiative
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Vertigo Moody, Santa Fe College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2022
* USD 322,591.00

Non Technical&lt;br/&gt;Many former senior military and national security
officials believe global warming poses a threat to our nation?s security, both
through increased flooding of coastal military installations and via increased
political instability from the disruption of food production and economic
systems. Understanding the impacts of global climate change and mitigating its
effects will require the concerted effort of geoscientists. At the same time,
our country faces a critical need for people with training in the geosciences to
fulfill employers? need for qualified personnel. The difficulties developing our
nation?s geoscience workforce starts early, as most college students are
unfamiliar with the various academic disciplines that are a part of the
geosciences and the career possibilities for those with training in the
geosciences. Consequently, very few students begin college with an intention to
pursue a degree or career in the geosciences. This proposal expands and develops
the pool of students pursuing careers in geosciences by providing mentored
research experiences in the geosciences at the critical junction when students
are most likely to be deciding their career trajectory. By providing students at
a two-year college the opportunity to receive mentorship from scientists at
four-year universities and federal agencies, this program develops the STEM
workforce through enhanced education in traditionally underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Mentored research
opportunities are a proven means to recruit, retain, and advance students in
STEM fields, including the diverse disciplines that make up the geosciences, and
mentored research therefore provides an exemplary model for developing the next
generation of geoscientists. This mentored research program, called the
Undergraduate Coral Research Initiative (UCRI), builds upon the recent discovery
by USGS scientists of a unique coral refuge from global warming among the shaded
mangrove prop roots in Hurricane Hole, within the US Virgin Islands Coral Reef
National Monument Marine Reserve. Over the course of three years, at least
fifteen students will be guided through all phases of the research process,
beginning with developing science literacy skills (Phase I), followed by
practical research skills in experimental design, data collection in a marine
context, data analysis, and presentation of research findings (Phase II).
Students will play a central role in designing and executing experiments to
address the biotic and abiotic factors that promote coral survivorship in some,
but not all, parts of this mangrove habitat. Because coral reefs are a keystone
component of marine ecosystems, the work conducted by students will contribute
to our understanding of, and ability to protect, coral from the stresses induced
by global warming. Finally, students will be provided a broader perspective of
careers in geosciences through geology field skills training with students and
faculty at a four-year university (Phase III).