* 1700558
* Development of a 21st Century Industrial Process Operations Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Bart Johnson, Itasca Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,691.00

To assure that manufacturing, mining, biochemical, pulp and paper, power
generation, oil and gas, water treatment, and food and beverage industries in
Northern Minnesota remain globally competitive, it is vital that industrial
technicians and process operators be prepared with the skills and knowledge
required to help these industries thrive. This project at Itasca Community
College in Minnesota is timely as the current workforce in the region is aging,
and it has become recognized by regional industries that a workforce pipeline is
needed to maintain current operations and facilitate future growth. It is
designed to develop an Associate in Applied Science (AAS) program in Process
Operations that will capitalize on the need these industries have for highly-
qualified and motivated employees. The program is a shift from the current
industry specific technical programs of the region to a program that is focused
on developing graduates who are prepared to be 21st century workers for these
industries. This will increase the regional economic vitality and help the
college remain a model of progressive instruction. Partners include industries
such as Minnesota Power, Lonza, Blandin Paper Company, Marvin Windows and Doors,
and American Sugar as well as the high schools in the vicinity of the college.
The overall curriculum will be industry driven through its development and will
remain responsive to the industrial fluctuations in the region by maintaining
and utilizing strong industry ties. The college will become a member of the
North American Process Technology Alliance (NAPTA) that can provide curriculum
and access to model programs as well as an avenue for project dissemination.

This Associate in Applied Science (AAS) program in process operations will
encompass a broad scope of industrial plant operations to educate and motivate
future industrial technicians by utilizing a structured learning community to
deliver a condensed one-and-a-half year curriculum. To maximize the chance for
success, students will be required to have prerequisite courses in industrial
safety, welding, machining, fabrication, computing, and mathematics. To provide
students multiple pathways, students may enter the program from one of four
pathways (a summer boot camp, high school credits developed for this project,
industrial work experience, or relevant college courses and experiences.) It
will develop ties to local school districts through "College-In-The-Schools"
curriculum development and take advantage of industry partners through site
visits, capstone projects, and adjunct industry-based instructors. The areas of
student development and assessment will be technical knowledge (what students
know), professionalism (who students are), and process awareness (what students
can do). The nationally recognized pre-engineering program at the college will
serve as a model for this new AAS Process Operations program. Model tenents will
be utilization of Project Based Learning (PBL), industry tours, industry
professionals serving as instructors or guest speakers, student learning
communities, and student ownership of and pride in the program. The two
established and growing Industrial Technologies programs in Power Generation and
Pulp and Paper at the college have laid the groundwork for this more broadly
applicable AAS Process Operations program in terms of infrastructure,
curriculum, and industry ties. A comprehensive evaluation process will be used
to assess and improve this AAS in Process Operations program during its
formation and execution.