* 1701451
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Individual recognition and long-term memory of third-party relationships in a social bird
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Michael Pardo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 20,280.00

Non-technical Abstract: There is mounting evidence that the evolution of
intelligence is primarily driven by the need to navigate complex social
relationships. However, the way in which a species' social system influences
developing intelligence is less well understood. While it is known that some
animals are aware of the relationships between individuals other than
themselves, previous studies have concentrated on short-term knowledge about
relationships within a single social group. This narrow focus limits the
inferences that can be drawn about how different social systems shape
intelligence. This project will test whether acorn woodpeckers can remember the
relationships between others for years, an ability that has not been
investigated in any non-human species. Acorn woodpeckers are a group-living bird
in which relatives maintain a relationship even after years of separation, and
kin who no longer live together may act as allies in times of conflict. Thus, if
acorn woodpeckers can recognize and remember their neighbors' kin for years,
they could benefit by keeping track of competitors' allies. This study aims to
identify whether they have this ability. The project will create paid positions
for two field assistants and several undergraduates will be mentored and learn
transferable skills by assisting in data collection and analysis. The
investigators will also continue their scientific outreach and education efforts
with youth from under-served communities. By improving scientific understanding
of the relationship between sociality and cognition, this project could provide
perspective on the evolution of intelligence in general.

Technical Abstract: The goal of this project is to expand our understanding of
social cognition by testing the hypothesis that acorn woodpeckers can remember
the relationships between others for at least two years. The investigators will
create playback stimuli that simulate two birds calling in unison, which acorn
woodpeckers only do naturally with current or former members of their own group.
Woodpeckers will then receive playbacks of the following simulated vocal
exchanges: 1) two related birds who formerly lived together two years ago, 2)
two related birds who never lived together, and 3) two unrelated birds who never
lived together. In all cases, the callers will be unrelated to the subject. If
acorn woodpeckers remember the relationships between birds that lived together
two years ago, they should recognize Stimulus 1 as being more socially congruent
than 2 and 3, and should thus exhibit a longer response latency to Stimulus 1,
indicating less violation of expectation. If they recognize the relationship
between callers via an acoustic cue of relatedness rather than by memory, they
should show a longer response latency to both Stimuli 1 and 2 compared to 3.
This work will also provide relevant training and mentoring to undergraduate
students. Results will be communicated to the scientific community through
publications and the general non-scientific community through outreach efforts.