* 1701506
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Can Predation Risk Limit Small Mammal Seed Predation in Novel Winter Habitats?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Pete Guiden, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 19,890.00

In northern forests, many plants and animals live at the interface between the
snow and soil. In recent decades snowfall has declined across many parts of the
northern United States and this decline is expected to continue into the future.
This study focuses on how small mammals that live at the interface between the
snow and the soil respond to the loss of this habitat. While deep snow allows
small mammals, such as mice or voles, to hide from predators, these animals may
benefit from leaving snow covered areas to search for food (seeds and
seedlings). This study will remove snow in a small area to determine whether
less snow leads small mammals to spend more time foraging and being susceptible
to predators. Cameras will be used to record changes in the behavior of the
small mammals. Seeds and seedlings will be monitored to determine how the
changes in mammal behavior influence their survival. Understanding conditions
that promote small mammal activity in areas with little snow could help in
predicting seedling survival in future decades, ultimately leading to more
effective forest management strategies. This study will support the training of
a graduate and undergraduate student and will provide opportunities for outreach
with K-12 students and with the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research examines the importance of snow depth and predation risk on small
mammal activity and seed predation in a northern temperate forest. The
researchers will conduct an experiment that manipulates the predation refuge
provided by the interface between the soil and snow (subnivium), and an
alternative predation refuge (woody debris) from which most snow has been
removed. Using a recently described technique, motion-sensor infrared cameras
will be placed in each treatment combination to compare small mammal activity in
areas with deep snow and shallow snow. Cameras will be focused on trays
containing seeds and seedlings of four native tree species, allowing researchers
to quantify how changes in small mammal activity can influence the relative
survival rates of the plant species they consume. By combining camera traps in
the subnivium with a seed removal assay, researchers will also be able to
monitor the small mammal species consuming seeds. This research will help
clarify the trade-offs small mammals face between foraging efficiency and
predation risk during winter, providing a more thorough understanding of how
environmental context might alter the relationship between snow depth, and small
mammals and the seeds they consume.