* 1701602
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Defensive chemistry underlying latitudinal patterns in plant-herbivore interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Carina Baskett, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,798.00

The distribution of crop pests is not constant in all places always. If
scientists could predict where or when pests would be worst, it could prevent
financial losses. This project will provide direct insight into the specific
role of the environment (climate, summer length, etc.) on pest pressure. The
researchers will address this question in a wild plant species rather than a
crop species. This is because pesticides and agricultural practices hide the
influence of natural factors. The focal species in this study is pokeweed (and
associated pests). Pokeweed is a culturally significant perennial plant native
to the eastern USA. Prior research has shown that pokeweed is heavily eaten by
caterpillars in the southern vs. northern US. This proposal checks if pokeweed's
defenses against insects are stronger in the South. That pattern would suggest
that the plants in the South have adapted to a long history of stronger pest
pressure. In addition, the research will answer basic questions about how the
environment influences relationships between plants and insects. It will also
help to address the long-standing mystery of why ecosystems closer to the
equator have more species than ecosystems at higher latitudes. The project will
also enhance K-12 education through the creation of videos on latitudinal
diversity for distribution to teachers.

This project tests the hypothesis that plants are better chemically defended at
lower latitudes. The researchers will use a generalist caterpillar (Spodoptera
exigua) to bioassay defense, and correlate caterpillar performance with leaf
traits. Preliminary trials show that mortality is greater for S. exigua raised
on a diet of pokeweed leaves from lower vs. higher latitude plants, suggesting
that low-latitude plants are better defended. Lower latitude leaves are tougher,
so to disentangle mechanical and chemical defense traits, ground leaves will be
incorporated into agar for bioassays that test the effects of chemical defenses
only. Liquid and Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry will characterize leaf
chemistry profiles, and the ratio of carbon to nitrogen will serve as an index
of leaf nutritional value. In sum, the project asks which leaf traits predict
caterpillar performance over a latitudinal gradient, advancing our understanding
of geographic variation in plant defense and addressing recent controversy about
the generality of stronger biotic interactions at lower latitudes.