* 1701639
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Gender Inequality and Couples? Income Organizational Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Joanna Pepin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2019
* USD 11,932.00

This study will analyze class variation in the ways couples share their
financial resources. The project will address theoretical debates about whether
retaining autonomous control over earnings facilitates women?s ability to
convert money into power within their relationships. Investigating how couples
allocate money will help resolve the theoretical puzzle of why women's increased
labor force participation has not been a sufficient condition to reducing gender
inequality in the home. This research will add conceptual clarity to the ways
gender and economic circumstances combine to structure family relations.
Securing the welfare of all individuals within households is a matter of public
concern and this study is expected to expand knowledge about women's economic
position in society. How families share money influences relationship quality
and the distribution of resources when relationships end, an event that often
disproportionately disadvantages women economically. The research will
contribute to our understanding of the stability of adult intimate
relationships, a topic important to policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;Economic changes in
society altered the dynamic of financial resources brought into relationships
and family structures are increasingly diverse. Modern couples confront tensions
between ideals of mutual family interests and values of individualism, a
departure from fitting themselves into culturally expected family arrangements
of the past. Interpretations of why individuals increasingly withhold money from
a common family pot are inconsistent and sometimes contradictory, and has
generated competing claims about what the trend symbolizes: a rise in the
instability of families, a shift towards individualist interests within
marriages, or evidence of movement towards an ethos of gender equality. Class
disparities in the risk of financial hardship may also influence the goals and
resources available to families. This project uses semi-structured interviews
with couples to understand how couples' allocation of money mitigates or
exacerbates gender equality within families and whether the strategies used to
achieve couples' goals are conditional on class position. The interviews will
focus on life transitions associated with changes in financial allocations
approaches and addresses the paradoxes between the stated reasoning behind
couples? allocation systems and the actual consequences of their organizational
approaches.