* 1701825
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Does a large detritus pool enhance ecosystem resilience in response to an episodic perturbation?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* William Renwick, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* John Schade
* 04/30/2018
* USD 15,390.00

Storm water runoff can erode and transport high levels of sediment and nutrients
to lakes. This export is especially pronounced in the Midwestern U.S., where
large areas of agriculture have left exposed soils that easily wash away during
storms. These large pulses of sediments and nutrients to lakes during storms can
affect drinking water quality, recreational opportunities, and commercial and
sport fishing. It is expected that storms in the Midwestern U.S. will increase
in severity and frequency over the next 100 years. This Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement Grant will provide funds to understand how lakes will respond to
storms under these changing conditions. In addition, this project will directly
support the research of one doctoral student, and will provide hands-on research
opportunities for undergraduate students.

This research will experimentally examine what factors contribute to lake
ecosystem resilience following storm events, using replicated aquatic mesocosms
(5000 liter tanks) that simulate conditions during large storm events in a lake.
This research will answer three general questions: (1) Do larger detritus pools
speed lake resilience (the time necessary for ecosystems to recover) following
large storm events? (2) How do additions of sediment and nutrients that occur
during large storm events affect lake recovery time? and (3) How do additions of
sediment and nutrients and detritus pool size interactively affect lake
resilience? The experiment will include manipulations of detritus pool size,
hydraulic flushing (a physical disturbance that reduces the amount of algae),
and addition of sediment and nutrients. A factorial design will be used to
isolate the mechanisms that influence lake recovery following large storm
events. Understanding how these factors interact is essential to understanding
ecosystem resilience and for effective management of water quality in lakes and
reservoirs.