* 1701132
* GP-EXTRA: Building a new generation of urban environmental scholar-citizens through community-based programs for science and impact
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Gabriel Filippelli, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 489,898.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to engage students from
underrepresented backgrounds in the geosciences through targeted mentoring and
extra-curricular community-engaged programs. The new generation of science
students exhibits tremendous interest in direct application of their training
for local and global good, and that ?bridge of relevance? is rarely adequately
developed in the geosciences to take advantage of this passion. In an urban
university like IUPUI, this new moral- and equity-driven student is one that is
likely to be engaged in local transformation, more likely to be of economically,
racially and/or culturally diverse background, and eager to serve their
community. We will utilize several practices to engage students in this program,
including a Thematic Learning Community to build confidence and support for
students in the initial stage of their college career, a set of modules that
will be developed in our majors courses that actively involve community-based
examples of fundamental geoscience concepts, and the development and support of
cohorts of Environmental Action Scholars, who will conceive and implement
community-engaged projects in collaboration with our community partners.
Collectively, these practices will institutionalize community-engagement and
informed action in the geosciences, and thus provide relevance for students who
might otherwise feel a disconnect between their geoscience classroom learning
and their career goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to engage students from underrepresented backgrounds in the
geosciences through targeted mentoring and extra-curricular community-engaged
programs in the Indianapolis area. Project objectives include: Utilizing
Thematic Learning Communities (TLCs) to enhance recruitment of, and a sense of
belonging among, underrepresented students in the geosciences; Developing four
hybrid classroom-field modules to diversify educational experience and increase
content knowledge in a manner that provides application of theoretical knowledge
in a societally-relevant urban context; Implementing community-engaged pedagogy
and project mentoring to retain, support, and promote the holistic formation of
underrepresented students as geoscientists by developing Cohorts of
Environmental Action Scholars and providing externship opportunities for these
students in the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypotheses that frame this
work are (1) engaging science-interested but uncommitted students early and with
mentor supports will enhance recruitment (both number and diversity), (2)
providing practical place-based experiences that are linked to relevant societal
challenges will personalize subject learning, and (3) supporting the
implementation of topically-relevant projects in communities will provide the
opportunities for learners to transition to experts. These hypotheses are
developed on a theoretical platform of "situated learning" as applied to
societally-relevant, and student-relevant, geoscience
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings will be disseminated to the broader
scholarly community, and will simultaneously be informing geoscience and other
STEM educators on how to improve their STEM teaching and student learning, as
well as the impact of this project and related pedagogical efforts on motivating
students from underrepresented populations to pursue careers in the geosciences.
Broader impacts for geoscience education include development, testing, and
disseminating novel geoscience-impacts modules, determining the efficacy of
interventions at several critical junctures that narrow the diversity pipeline
in the geosciences, and providing opportunities for students to contribute
meaningfully to community priorities in the realm of the geosciences, and thus
to be better prepared for the modern geoscience workforce.