* 1701043
* PFI:AIR-TT: Design and Development of High-performance Miniature Radiation Detectors using Ultrasensitive Graphene and Carbon Nanotube ion Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Swastik Kar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
nanotechnology-based charged-particle (ion) detection method for a range of
radioactivity and nuclear radiation sensing and monitoring applications. The
project will result in prototype detectors of radiation that is commonly
associated with nuclear and radioactive materials, such as gamma and X-rays, as
well as alpha and beta particles. The prototype detectors will be ultrasensitive
with significantly reduced size, weight, cost and power-consumption compared to
current technologies that involve Geiger-based counters, scintillation
detectors, and high-purity germanium (HPGe) detectors. These new detectors have
the potential to enable disruptive advances in early/rapid nuclear threat
detection for homeland security, safety applications such as border security and
control, city-scale networkable monitoring, domestic nuclear power plant and
medical facilities monitoring, and remote sensing via unmanned vehicles for
military operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototype detectors will utilize
a novel low-power high-amplification sensing mechanism that has been recently
discovered to be a property of nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes and
graphene. This will enable high-sensitivity detectors with reduced size, cost
and power consumption compared to conventional radiation detectors that utilize
high ionization volumes, high-voltage avalanche breakdown, and/or expensive and
difficult-to-miniaturize mechanisms to obtain highly sensitive detection. This
will be achieved by optimizing the design of a radiation detector that houses
these sensors in a miniature chamber that senses any nuclear radiation passing
through it. The shape, size and architecture of the housing chamber, along with
the type of materials will be optimized for maximum response. Along with this,
detectors will be developed for various types of radiation so that they are
capable of responding to diverse radioactive or nuclear events. The aim will be
to develop detectors that are capable of rapidly detecting ultra-low signals (at
a cost and degree of portability currently not achievable by conventional
techniques) for early/rapid threat detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will engage graduate students to design, fabricate, test, and optimize these
detectors, which will train them in advanced nanomanufacturing skills,
beneficial for their future career endeavors. In addition, the students will be
engaged in activities to understand the market need and scale-up manufacturing
constraints. The successful development and demonstration of these detectors
will be an important step towards commercialization, possibly through a start-up
venture. The long-term aim of this project will be to address low-cost
networkable devices capable of serving from building-scale to city-scale
monitoring, and to provide real-time data for early action that can
significantly reduce the impact of a nuclear or radioactive event.