* 1701519
* EAGER:   Exploratory Natural Models for Fog Harvesting
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Constantine Megaridis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

The present study focuses on the physical mechanisms that allow a beetle to
collect water droplets from the atmosphere, and quantify water collection rates
as a function of the incoming fog stream conditions. Fundamental knowledge in
this area is necessary because of its relevance to engineering systems that use
either physical capture (nets, screens, etc.) or phase change (condensation) to
extract water from the atmosphere. The research is of interest not only to the
thermal transport community, but also to the wider communities of biomimetics.
The impact of this study may transcend interdisciplinary boundaries and has the
potential to maximize fundamental knowledge of immense technological
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work combines multiphase fluid transport
with elements of biology, ecology and materials engineering. More specifically,
the work will quantify water collection rates not only in terms of the chemistry
and morphology of the beetle's body, but also with respect to the flow structure
and droplet concentration boundary layer around the animal. This would be the
first time that a study considers the integral system of the beetle and the
surrounding atmosphere, which is a multi-phase fluid flowing over a complex
granular terrain. The natural system studied has the potential to inform the
design of moisture harvesting devices based on biomimetic principles. On the
fundamental side, the research is expected to produce a mechanistic model of how
the beetles harvest fog from the atmosphere. The data produced will also
contribute to the debate surrounding earlier proposed fog basking models that
have inspired intense activity and discussion in the thermal transport
community.