* 1701567
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: An Algebraic Approach to Secure Multilinear Maps for Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Dan Boneh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The project is an interdisciplinary collaboration between mathematicians and
computer scientists in an intensive focused research effort to solve a central
challenge in cryptography, namely constructing a family of secure and efficient
algebraic multilinear maps. Multilinear maps have remarkable applications in
cryptography, such as multiuser non-interactive key-exchange, general functional
encryption, fully-homomorphic encryption, and indistinguishability obfuscation.
The results of the project are expected to enable a new age of cryptographic
systems and open new directions in the field. The project will train graduate
students and postdoctoral associates through involvement in deep modern
mathematics research with applications in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first candidate multilinear maps are
inefficient in practice, and have been shown to be insecure for some of the
desired applications. This project takes a very different approach from earlier
ones. The starting point is the observation that there already exist many
natural multilinear maps in arithmetic geometry, arising naturally from the
cohomology of arithmetic varieties and motives, and from K-theory. They give a
richer class of objects than elliptic curves over finite fields, whose groups of
points are widely used in practice for cryptographic key exchange and public-key
encryption. The challenge is to find such algebraic structures for which the
multilinear maps can be efficiently computed, and for which the associated
cryptographic problems (e.g., discrete logarithm problems) are expected to be
hard.