* 1701839
* Dissertation Research:  Nitrogen to phosporus ratio as a driver of arsenic retention
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Keeley MacNeill, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,280.00

Arsenic is a trace element that can be toxic to people and at lower
concentrations cause neurological symptoms or have immunological and endocrine
effects. Throughout history, arsenic has been used as a poison, pesticide,
weapon, and it has contaminated more than a billion-people's food and water
supplies. In addition, a number of groundwater springs worldwide have naturally
occurring arsenic levels that exceed those safe for human drinking water. As
this groundwater seeps into streams the elevated arsenic can affect the
chemistry and biology of the stream. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement
Grant (DDIG) research integrates arsenic into an ongoing study of streams in
Ecuador to assess what drives arsenic retention in stream plants and animals and
how that affects the transport of arsenic downstream. Understanding how arsenic
interacts with other elements to cycle through water supplies will inform global
mitigation efforts. Furthermore, the researchers will disseminate results to
Ecuadorian communities reliant on arsenic contaminated waters.

Elevated stream arsenic concentrations can alter stream ecosystem function by
altering the biogeochemical cycling of nitrogen and phosphorus or via altering
aquatic food webs. In addition, the bioavailability and effects of arsenic on
aquatic food webs are closely interlinked with both the concentrations of
nitrogen and phosphorus and the ratio of nitrogen to phosphorus present in
aquatic systems. Funds from this award will be used to evaluate how the
nitrogen:phosphorus ratio of stream water affects the retention and transport of
arsenic in geothermal streams with varying nitrogen:phosphorus ratios. The study
also will test the effect of stream resource nitrogen:phosphorus ratio on
arsenic cycling in the aquatic food web and biotic excreation of arsenic and
consequent downstream transport.