* 1701086
* Workshops and an Attitudes Survey for Broadening Participation in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology; January, 2017 and March, 2017; New Orleans, LA
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 38,123.00

Researchers will explore reasons why black Americans ("blacks") rarely pursue
careers in ecology and evolutionary biology, despite decades of investment by
state and federal agencies to boost their participation in those and other
fields of science. This project consists of two workshops and a survey. First,
ecologists, evolutionary biologists, and social scientists will meet to develop
a survey that will be sent to a large number of students, with the goal of
understanding how they decide on various career paths. After analysis of the
survey's results, a larger group of scientists and representatives from
professional organizations will meet to reach consensus on the most important
obstacles to students pursuing careers in ecology and evolutionary biology, and
to propose new ways of assisting those students. This work is important because
advancement of science depends on a diverse workforce to provide novel ideas
that would remain undiscovered if all scientists had similar
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research to understand the low
participation of blacks in ecology and evolutionary biology suggests they have
higher levels of religiosity than other underrepresented groups and that their
reluctance may also hinge on misconceptions about evolution. The principal
investigators (PIs) of this project hypothesize that lack of role models, lack
of experience working in the outdoors, and cultural factors (e.g., religious
beliefs, values) are barriers to inclusion, lowering blacks' sense of identity
and belonging in the fields of ecology and evolutionary biology. To test this
hypothesis, the PIs have developed a survey to assess the roles these factors
play in shaping attitudes of undergraduate students to careers in different
disciplines of science. Participants at a small initial workshop will rigorously
review and assess the efficacy of the survey. After revisions are made, the
survey will be administered to a large and diverse sample of students.
Participants at a second workshop will review the results of survey and consider
their implications for broadening participation in careers of science, with an
emphasis on blacks and the disciplines of ecology and evolutionary biology.