* 1701136
* PFI: AIR-TT: PharmaFlux: Drug Evaluation on a Biomimetic Microfluidic Device
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Yaling Liu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a
therapeutic analysis platform designed to mitigate scientific, financial, and
temporal risks associated with transitioning new therapeutics from high-
throughput evaluations to later stages of testing. The therapeutic analysis
platform is important because it will serve to assist pharmaceutical companies
in the efforts of bringing viable new therapeutics to market in a more timely,
cost effective, and sustainable manner. Bringing this technology to market will
in turn provide benefits to pharmaceutical companies developing new therapeutics
and the patients whom ultimately receive treatment.

The project will validate current proof-of-concept testing with the therapeutic
analysis platform, which will be carried out using current therapeutic systems
produced by pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. This platform has the
following unique features: capability of controllable flow, small sample volume
requirements, scalable, flexible design layout, ability to mimic specific
disease conditions, and ease of use/data collection. These features enable
advantages of reduced operating costs, high-throughput testing capabilities
providing greater efficiency of new therapeutic development, reduced risk
associated with large investments of time and funding, and greater follow-
through to market for new therapeutics when compared to the leading competing
statically-grown cell-based analysis platforms in this market space today.  
This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. Baseline testing of the
platform has been completed on a few therapeutic delivery systems such as
nanoparticles. The next steps in validation of the analysis platform is the
application of the technology to well-established therapeutic systems currently
utilized in the pharmaceutical industry. As such, various stages of benchmark
testing will be performed with the goal of characterizing therapeutic candidate
delivery (cell binding and interactions), disease state efficacy markers, and
cell-based toxicity at various shear rates. Utilization of the analysis platform
will provide data which can then be directly or indirectly compared to current
industry standards and published data sets for validation of the platform. In
addition, graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project will
receive research, commercialization and entrepreneurship experiences through
literature reviews, lab-based research, product design, and strategic planning
with pharmaceutical and biotechnology company partners.

The project currently engages a local Bethlehem, PA company, Particle Sciences,
a part of Lubrizol Life Sciences, to assist in the characterization of novel
therapeutic delivery vehicles prior to later stage in vivo testing to ensure
that full optimization is achieved. Additional industry based collaborators will
be acquired throughout future testing as a part of this technology translation
effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.