* 1701047
* PFI:AIR-TT: Technology Translation: Rolled-up 3D Passive Electronic Component Prototype Development
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Xiuling Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the strain-
induced self-roll-up membrane nanotechnology to fill the need to reduce the size
of widely used lumped passive components in integrated circuits.   The
miniaturization of passive electronic components is important because it will
shrink the overall size and weight of wearable devices or allow more
functionalities to be implemented without changing the footprint of the
electronic components. The project will result in a prototype of an integrated
circuit chip with rolled-up passive components, particularly an inductor. This
rolled-up inductor has the following unique features: small, light, and high
operating frequency. These features provide advantages including better
wearability and higher frequency mobile communications when compared to the
leading competing planar coil inductors and other passive components in this
market space. 

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates the
strain-induced self-rolled-up membrane (S-RuM) based passive components from
research discovery toward commercial application. The current widely used lumped
passive components, especially planar inductors in monolithic integrated
circuits (ICs) have several drawbacks that include large on-wafer footprint
(occupy as much as 90% of the IC), low operation frequency, and sensitivity to
substrate doping levels and deformation. One of the solutions to solve these
problems is to use three-dimensional (3D) structures, because hierarchical 3D
structures enable efficient use of materials without changing the footprint in
plane and lead to advanced functionalities that are otherwise out of reach.
However, if conventional fabrication technologies are used to produce 3D
structures, issues such as mechanical stability, conformity, alignment, process
complexity and cost are difficult to address. The S-RuM based passive technology
provides a revolutionary platform because of the self-assembly nature, which
produces a 3D cylindrical structure from a 2D layout spontaneously once released
from the mechanical support, minimizing mechanical stability concerns by
avoiding processing on suspended or curved surfaces. The CMOS-compatibility of
the materials and processes also makes integration with active devices and other
passive components feasible. In contrast to the planar counterpart, this 3D
platform promises to produce IC chips with dramatically enhanced inductance
density, superior Q factor/frequency, and minimized substrate coupling.
Personnel involved in this project, including one graduate student and two
undergraduate students, will receive innovation and technology translation
experiences through making a functional prototype that meets the needs of
potential customers.