* 1701000
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Technology for the Production of Polyamides With Bio-Enabled Properties
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Eric Cochran, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating polymeric
materials research into the creation of higher value, higher performance nylons
based on renewable raw materials. The development of these materials is
important because bio-based nylons with tunable chemical and mechanical
properties are highly desired in the automotive and packaging industries.

The project will result in a prototype polyamide material for which the desired
properties will be introduced through the use of 3-hexenedioic acid (3HDA), a
bio-derived unsaturated diacid monomer. This material has the following unique
features: elevated modulus, impact strength, flexibility, increased solvent
resistance, and tunable hydrophobicity. These features provide advantages such
as a larger window of operation and access to new properties when compared to
the leading polyamides in the market place.

This project addresses the following technological gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The chemistry of 3HDA when
embedded in a polymeric structure needs to be further studied in order to
identify and implement efficient cross-linking and derivatization techniques. In
addition, variables such as 3HDA concentration, nature of the cross-linker or
derivatization agent, and polymerization and curing conditions need to be
investigated. The impact of these variables on average molecular weight,
polydispersity, melting temperature, and mechanical properties needs to be
understood to achieve the level of control expected for performance plastics.

In addition, personnel involved in this project, including one graduate student
and one postdoctoral researcher, will receive innovation and technology
translation experiences through developing a functional prototype that meets the
needs of potential customers and catalyzes discussions with potential industrial
partners.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships and the Division of Engineering Education and Centers; reflecting
the alignment of this project with the respective goals of the two divisions and
their programs.