* 1701733
* Dissertation Research: Toxic algae as a model system for intransitive eco-evolutionary feedbacks promoting cooperation.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Mathew Leibold, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 12,521.00

This project will investigate how interactions among different genetic strains
of the single-celled algae Prymnesium parvum control the formation of toxic
algal blooms. Toxic algal blooms occur when certain algal species become highly
abundant and release toxins into the water that harm wildlife or humans.
Although toxic blooms have been increasing in frequency and severity, our
understanding of the factors that cause such species to either become highly
abundant or to die back is still very limited. Most research has focused on how
environmental factors, such as water pollution, affect bloom formation, but this
explanation is inadequate in many cases. In the focal species certain genetic
strains do not produce toxins; this study will test the unique hypothesis that
large changes in Prymnesium population abundance result from the cooperation and
competition among toxic and non-toxic genetic strains. In nature, many species
exhibit cooperative behavior, even when it is not in the best interest of the
cooperating individuals. Results from this work are expected to yield important
insights into the evolution of cooperation and identify management strategies
that can be used to control harmful algal blooms. In addition, the project will
involve mentoring both undergraduate and high school students, including
individuals from groups that are underrepresented in the sciences. Public
lectures and a weekly radio science show are also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algal species that form harmful blooms produce
toxins that often function allelopathically, by killing heterospecifics,
decreasing interspecific competition and releasing nutrients into the water. In
this way, these toxins appear to function as a 'public good' by benefiting the
entire population. In Prymnesium parvum, a low-toxic 'cheater' strain has
recently been isolated that has a significantly higher growth rate than toxic
'cooperator' strains both in monoculture and in mixed culture. This system
offers a unique opportunity to investigate how ecological interactions may
maintain cooperative allelopathy in unstructured populations. How can toxicity
be maintained, if low-toxicity strains reap the benefits of toxicity while not
contributing to toxin production? This question will be explored using a
combination of laboratory microcosm experiments, strain culturing, and
microscope observation. Specifically, mutual invasibility experiments will be
used to look for intransitivity cycles between TOX+, TOX-, and a heterospecific
strain in order to determine whether eco-evolutionary feedbacks lead to
maintenance of toxic variation in this algal species.