* 1701645
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Fossils, fruits, and phylogeny: an integrative approach to understanding the historical biogeography of palms over the last 100 million years
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Kelly Matsunaga, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2019
* USD 20,150.00

Palms are found abundantly throughout tropical regions worldwide and have
important roles in ecosystems and the global economy. Palms are an interesting
group of plants from both an evolutionary and environmental perspective. They
have a long evolutionary history stretching back at least 90 million years,
evidenced by a rich and widespread fossil record, and are useful indicators of
past environmental conditions due to the narrow climatic range within which most
can survive. By using the fossil record to inform the evolutionary history of
palms, this research seeks to understand their geographical range, and how they
have responded to changing environments throughout their history. This research
will test current hypotheses on palm evolution, and generate publicly available
databases of living and fossil palm diversity. One graduate student will be
trained in diverse systematics methods, and datasets generated by this research
will also be used to train undergraduates from underrepresented groups.
Materials from the research will also be used to develop interactive exhibits
for teaching about plant structure, diversity, and evolution to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the historical
biogeography of the palm family by incorporating empirical data from the
geologic record into phylogenetic and model-based biogeographic analyses. It
will test current hypotheses of a Laurasian origin of the crown node of
Arecaceae and of the biogeographic origins of the major subfamilies. This work
will also investigate the role of shifting continental geography in the
radiation of palms, and how climatic changes correlate with shifts in dispersal
and extinction rates over the last 100 million years. A comprehensive database
of the palm fossil record will be compiled and the data incorporated into a
dispersal-extinction-cladogenesis (DEC) model to infer historical ranges of
taxa, and a dispersal-extinction-sampling model to compute dispersal and
extinction rates over time, which can be correlated with climate data. Fossil
fruits with sufficient characters for inclusion in a phylogenetic analysis will
be studied using X-ray micro-computed tomography, and will be used to generate a
time-calibrated phylogeny for use in the DEC analysis. Outcomes include a
comprehensive fossil record database for palms, 3D morphological data on living
palms, a tribe-level chronogram for the family, and new insights into the
historical biogeography of this important group of plants.