* 1701253
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Development of a Diagnostic Device for Monitoring Fracture Healing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Michel Maharbiz, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on developing a smart
implant that will offer physicians the ability to monitor progression of
fracture healing in real time. Approximately 15 million bone fractures occur
each year in the United States, of which an estimated 10-20% result in delayed
or no healing (non-union) under normal conditions. If the bone fractures occur
in complex trauma cases or in patients that are elderly or sick, this percentage
rises to almost 50%. Based on a conservative estimate, over $24 billion in
additional medical care is required to treat these patients with poor healing.
An underlying problem with treating fracture patients is that there are
currently no standardized methods for accurately measuring healing. Physicians
make decisions about treatment based on subjective physical examinations,
patient's pain, and radiographic techniques (X-rays) that can only detect bone
formation late in the healing process. Consequently, physicians typically wait
6-9 months to diagnose non-unions, at which point patients require reoperation.
There exists a need for a quantitative, reliable method to monitor fracture
healing and particularly to distinguish between the phases of early stage
healing. This project will incorporate sensors into standard fracture plates
that are used to surgically stabilize broken bones. The sensors will take
electrical measurements related to the biology of the fracture and wirelessly
transmit them to external monitors. Accurate monitoring of fracture healing
using these smart fracture plates will inform clinical decisions of when to
begin weight-bearing and enable earlier intervention of high-risk fractures,
which together both improve patient quality of life and offer a substantial cost
savings to the healthcare system.

This project involves developing the electronic components to validate smart
implant technology that quantifies tissue composition in the fracture callus
based on electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Proof-of-concept studies have
been completed in ex vivo and murine models of fracture repair; this project
will scale the EIS technology into the rabbit model. Scaling-up to this larger
pre-clinical model allows the project to address technology gaps related to
development of the sensor and wireless detection system, while working with
commercially available Orthopaedic implants. A key feature that will make the
technology competitive is a custom algorithm designed to analyze and
characterize electronic signatures to distinguish the various stages of fracture
healing. Current competitors are focused on mechanical measurements. However,
electrical measurements could provide a more sensitive tool to detect early
changes, as the load bearing to load sharing transition (detected by strain
gauges) occurs after hard callus begins to form only in the last stage of
fracture healing.

The collaborative research leadership team is composed of two orthopaedic
research faculty, electrical engineering faculty, an orthopaedic surgeon and
university senior licensing officer, now seeking to translate the technology to
a larger preclinical animal model suitable in size for wireless smart implant
development and cost-effective enough to evaluate using an appropriate sample
size. Trainees involved in this project will receive innovation,
entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences through technical
development, execution of pre-clinical trials and exposure to commercialization
strategy.