* 1701363
* Collaborative Research: Plasmofluidic Nanoantenna-Superlens Biosensor for Single-Cell Functional Immunophenotyping
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Pengyu Chen, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 170,890.00

Accurate and real-time analysis of the functions of different disease-fighting
blood cells is very useful for monitoring the immune status of the human body,
as well as evaluating the disease stage and drug efficacy. The objective of this
research is to develop a new method that enables single-cell functional immune
analysis from droplets of human blood. Such a platform would ultimately provide
clinicians a new measurement for quantitatively characterizing the disease-
fighting blood cells. The proposed educational plans will have broad impacts on
students from various educational levels (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate),
genders, and ethnicities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate and real-time analysis
of the functions of different immune cell subsets is needed for monitoring the
immune status of patients, as well as for evaluating the disease stage and drug
efficacy. In particular, quantitative and dynamic profiling of the cytokine
secretions from individual immune cells is useful for determining the cellular
functional immune phenotype in patients. However, the heterogeneity of the
immune cells makes such quantitative characterization challenging especially
when dealing with human blood samples. The objective of this research is to
develop a new integrated plasmofluidic nanoantenna-superlens biosensing platform
that enables single-cell, multi-subset, multiplex functional immune analysis
from microliters of human blood. The approach combines an efficient on-chip
single immune cell isolation technique and a parallel cell cytokine secretion
assay based on the label-free plasmonic nanoantenna-superlens biosensor. The
proposed research will be achieved by pursuing the following objectives. 1)
development of plasmonic nanoantenna-superlens biosensing platform for rapid and
sensitive on-chip cytokine detection; 2) development of microfluidic single cell
isolation technique to achieve purification of leukocyte subsets from a
heterogeneous mixture found in whole blood; and 3) demonstration of an
integrated plasmofluidic nanoantenna-superlens barcode microarray biosensor for
multiplex functional immunophenotyping of single immune cells. The analysis
performed using the proposed platform for a large number of individual immune
cells will establish a new approach that permits immunophenotypical screening of
leukocyte subsets by detecting differences and time-dependent variations of
their immune functions. Such a platform would ultimately provide clinicians a
new tool for quantitatively characterizing the immunophenotypes of patients and
would, therefore, allow precise disease diagnosis, monitoring, and risk
stratification. The proposed educational plan will have broad impacts on
students from different educational levels (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate),
genders, and ethnicities. Technologies developed in the proposal will be used as
effective vehicles for education and outreach activities. Extending research
opportunities to K-12 students and undergraduates will expose them to the
rewarding scientific discoveries and encourage them to pursue future studies and
careers in engineering.