* 1701312
* Doctoral Dissertation Resarch:  Women's College Completion Rates and the Value of Higher Education
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Amanda Mireles, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 03/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This project asks whether women's gains in earning college degrees leads to a
devaluing of a college degree, such that college degrees become increasingly
less important for securing high paying jobs. If so, women's gains in education
might lead to unintended disadvantages in the labor market. Past research has
found that occupations with higher proportions of women have lower average wages
for both women and men. Does a similar process occur when women earn a higher
proportion of college degrees? More specifically, this project seeks to improve
our understanding of how the gender composition of colleges and universities may
impact the value Americans assign to the four-year college degree. By examining
the relationship between college completion rates of men and women and the value
of the college degree, the project will enhance our understanding of the complex
and unintended ways in which social progress can lead to social disadvantage. By
identifying how gender progress can result in unintended labor market
disadvantage, this project's findings will provide important research evidence
for policymakers who wish to understand and address persistent inequality
between women and men.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an original survey experiment,
the research will investigate the ways in which gender composition of colleges
and universities influences cultural and economic value assigned to the college
degree. Accordingly, do Americans rate the cultural value of the four-year
college degree lower when exposed to information that women complete college at
higher rates than men? Are hiring managers less likely to hire female applicants
when similarly exposed to information of women's advantage in college
completion? To address these questions, the extent to which women outpace men in
four-year college degree completion is experimentally manipulated to establish
its causal effect on several outcomes, including perceived competency of college
graduates, hiring preferences, and salary decisions. Taken together, the survey
experimental designs utilized in this project advance social demographic
theories on the causal mechanisms that impact gender inequality and provide
compelling data that observable differences in valuation of the four-year
college degree are driven by true valuation differences directly conditional on
Americans's perceptions of the gender composition of colleges and universities.
This research contributes to sociological inquiry by identifying and addressing
emergent forms of gender inequality, as well as providing practical implications
for policymakers and hiring managers alike interested in promoting gender
progress at home and in the workplace.