* 1701534
* Chemistries mediating deactivation in methanol to hydrocarbons conversion and strategies to mitigate them
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Aditya Bhan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,797.00

The conversion of methanol-to-hydrocarbons represents the final step in
upgrading carbon feedstocks, such as coal and shale gas, to high-value fuels and
chemicals. The shape selective characteristics of zeolites afford high
selectivity to light olefins or gasoline-range hydrocarbons, but are deleterious
for catalyst lifetime, as the accumulation of bulky hydrocarbons inside
micropores renders them inactive. The goals of this research are to explore
mechanisms involved in forming these inactive occluded hydrocarbon species, and
to develop formulations and process conditions to improve catalyst lifetime and
selectivity. The research will help ensure efficient utilization of the Nation's
fossil fuel resources by the energy and chemical
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methanol-to-hydrocarbons conversion proceeds
auto-catalytically with olefins- and aromatics-based intermediates localized
inside the zeolite pores, constituting the so-called "hydrocarbon pool," acting
as organic co-catalysts for carbon-carbon bond formation events. This research
seeks to examine the pathways that mediate the conversion of active hydrocarbon
pool intermediates to inactive polycyclic hydrocarbons. It is predicated upon
preliminary results that suggest methanol acts as a hydride donor during
catalysis and derivatives of methanol dehydrogenation act as alkylation agents
effecting hydrocarbon pool deactivation. The project is aimed at determining the
rate and mechanism by which methanol dehydrogenation events occur using isotopic
methods combined with transient and steady state kinetic measurements. The
researchers propose that catalyst lifetime can be improved by (i) modifying the
inorganic catalyst by introducing spatial constraints to mitigate formation of
bulky hydrocarbons or by addition of metal oxides that decompose aldehydes, and
(ii) introducing an organic co-catalyst prior to introduction of methanol
containing streams in the vapor phase. The researchers expect that the
strategies developed in this research for proton-form MFI and CHA zeolites will
extend to other zeolite topologies and will inspire the design of materials for
applications in heterogeneous catalysis extending beyond methanol-to-
hydrocarbons catalysis. In addition to providing opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate student training, the principal investigator will pursue
educational and outreach programs that introduce concepts of catalysis across
the K-12 curriculum.