* 1701970
* Dissertation Research: Intra-population genomic and metabolic diversity among understudied archaea in methane-cycling wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Christopher Miller, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,215.00

Archaea are microorganisms that are known to play critical roles in carbon and
nitrogen cycling, but little is known about the diversity and evolution of the
group. Woesearchaeota, is a poorly known group of Archaea that is commonly found
in freshwater wetlands but can also be found in diverse ecosystems globally. As
with most members of Archaea, there are no cultured representatives to study in
the laboratory, and few available genomes sequences to help infer function. This
research will employ environmental DNA sequencing methods and associated
computational approaches to generate multiple novel Woesearchaeota genomes from
a freshwater wetland. Analysis of these genomes will advance knowledge of the
functional potential of this group globally. This work will provide new insights
into the role of Archaea in regulating biogeochemical processes. One graduate
student will be trained in molecular systematics and undergraduates will receive
hands-on research experience on the fundamentals of scientific computing and
bioinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce novel whole-
genome sequences and inferences about the metabolic potential for the recently
described archaeal group, Woesearchaeota. To-date only a handful of
Woesearchaeota genomes and partial genomes have been reconstructed. A high-
resolution census of Archaea in a freshwater wetland has revealed that
Woesearchaeota at this site are phylogenetically diverse, and comprise two
ecologically differentiated ecotypes with niches defined by site geochemistry.
The hypothesis that observed niche preferences can be explained by genomic
variation will be tested by targeted reconstruction of multiple Woesearchaeota
genomes. Researchers will also test the hypotheses that local evolutionary
diversifications have resulted in a small core genome, and that the high
phylogenetic diversity observed within this phylum is mirrored by high levels of
inferred functional diversity.