* 1701107
* PFI: AIR-TT: Commercializing a new genre of Intelligent Science Stations for informal and formal learning
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2022
* USD 216,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project aims to build and commercialize a
reusable mixed-reality platform that engages children in scientific
experimentation and uses computer vision and automated feedback to help them
effectively learn scientific principles. The project focuses on translating
prior science and technology research that produced the first Intelligent
Science Station, called EarthShake. EarthShake is a mixed-reality educational
game in which children discover physical properties of balance by running
experiments with block towers on a simulated earthquake table. This project has
the potential to have substantial societal, commercial and educational impacts.
It aims to impact millions of children and families that spend time in
Children's and Science Museums, libraries, schools, and indoor play spaces. It
will transform traditional hands-on exhibits and play spaces into intelligent
learning environments that foster children's curiosity and improve their
learning in an engaging and collaborative way. It will also help to transform
the traditional educational system in schools, introducing an interactive,
engaging, mixed-reality system that can help students understand the underlying
evidence for scientific principles, not just memorize them. With over 270
Children's and Science Museums in the US alone, over 800 malls with play spaces
for children, 100s of indoor play/learning spaces, over 4,000 clubs and after-
school programs, 119,487 libraries, 36,767 private and charter elementary
schools and 103,460 elementary schools, this project can have a commercial
impact in addition to societal and educational benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
system uses computer vision to follow children's progress and provide
intelligent guidance in a predict-observe-explain scientific inquiry process.
Experiments demonstrate that grades K to 3 children learn much more from
EarthShake than from an otherwise identical flatscreen tablet or laptop
implementation showing as much as a 5 times greater pre to post increase on
tests of prediction, explanation, and stable tower building. The initial
prototype will be translated into a reusable platform for Intelligent Science
Stations and demonstrated in scalable development of multiple instances of three
games, EarthShake, RaceCars, and BalloonScale. The technical challenges are to
generalize the vision algorithm to work across the variety of objects and
configurations in these games and create modular hardware components that
provide for scale in development, distribution, and new products. This project
draws on technical expertise in computer vision/AI, mechatronics, tangible
interfaces, physical computing, human/child-computer interaction, and
educational technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intelligent Science Stations bridge
the advantages of physical and virtual worlds to improve children's science and
inquiry learning in an enjoyable and collaborative way and can be commercialized
to do so in various settings, indoor play spaces, museums, libraries, and
schools. The project contributes to the general robotics challenge by creating
an automated intelligent tutoring system operating in the physical 3D world,
incorporating sensors and perceptual algorithms to track what learners are
doing, actuators to manipulate the scientific apparatus, and an intelligent
dialogue system to orchestrate interaction. It addresses technical challenges of
creating a generalizable vision algorithm and a modular physical hardware
platform that allows customers to easily switch between different applications.
It will create new knowledge about how to develop a general and reusable mixed-
reality platform that integrates scientific apparatus including mechatronic
components (e.g,. sensors, actuators, servo motors, physical experimental set-
up) with an intelligent tracking system (including hardware and software
components with an AI vision algorithm).