* 1701059
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Green, Biocompatible Enzymatic Disinfectants for Broad-spectrum Inhibition and Removal of Microbial Contamination in Packaged Produce
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2018
* David Hesson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2018
* USD 199,576.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on producing custom enzymes
designed to break down polysaccharides which form the foundation of common
microbial biofilms. The enzymes can be used in an aqueous solution that can be
applied to food during cleaning and processing to remove biofilm-forming
microbes. The use of a safe and green enzyme-based disinfectant is important
because of the rising frequency of food-borne illness and associated outbreaks
linked to microbial contamination from pathogens such as E. coli and Salmonella.
In addition, these enzymes offer an opportunity to replace harsh chemical
cleaning agents with biocompatible, safe and green
alternatives.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a family of
cleaning products formulated for a wide range of uses in cleaning of produce and
other packaged foods. The uniqueness of the enzyme-based cleaning products are
(1) ability to engineer specificity and target a broad range of microbial
biofilms, (2) ability to select enzymes that retain activity under actual
cleaning conditions, (3) ability to discriminate between pathogen and non-
pathogen microbial biofilms, (4) demonstrated methods for high-yield production
and (5) providing a safe, biocompatible alternative to current chemical cleaning
agents. Collectively these features provide a new, green and targeted
alternative to current industry standard chemical disinfectants such as
peracetic acid in this market space.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses key gaps in knowledge required to translate this technology to the
marketplace. Chemical disinfectants and mechanical disruption often have limited
efficacy against microbial biofilms, allowing potential pathogens to persist in
processing environments despite cleaning and cause foodborne illness.
Furthemore, biofilm chemical structure is often complex and heterogeneous due to
the presence of multiple microbes present within a biofilm community. This
technology addresses both of these gaps by engineering enzymes that can degrade
chemically heterogeneous biofilms, and can act synergistically with other
cleaning methods or alone to enhance removal of microbial pathogens present
during food processing. In particular, the project utilizes some leading
industry partners such as Highland Fresh Technologies who will assist in
designing and simulating actual process conditions under which application
testing can be performed to determine amount per use and method of application.
Also, production costs during scale-up will be calculated to identify critical
costs associated with the final product. Additionally, post-doctoral fellows and
graduate students working on this project will receive technology translation
expertise, working to answer critical questions necessary to identify production
costs, business plan development as well as direct exposure to key industry
partners to design and execute key testing of products.