* 1701756
* Dissertation Research: Dispersal of moss spores by birds: elucidating the mechanisms of behaviorally enhanced bryophyte dispersal networks
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Matthew Chmielewski, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 19,304.00

Individual animals and plants often move from their places of birth to new
locations, where they live out their lives. This movement, known as "dispersal",
is important in ecology because it largely determines where species are found,
which species come in contact with each other, and the services they can then
provide to nature and to humans. Sometimes, plants depend on animals for
dispersal. Many trees and shrubs, for example, rely on birds to eat their fruits
and defecate their seeds somewhere else. Mosses may also rely on birds for
dispersal of spores, which are like seeds, but practically nothing is known
about it. Researchers will study how often spores are found on the feathers of
birds and whether the spores are actually dispersed by the birds. Mosses play an
important role in ecosystems by contributing to nutrient cycling, maintaining
water, and providing nesting material and places to forage for many forest
animals. By understanding the relationship between moss dispersal and bird
behavior, managers and policy makers will have a more complete picture of how
land use decisions influence the use and conservation of natural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dispersal is a key process shaping ecological
communities over time. Behaviorally-mediated dispersal via an association with
an animal vector can greatly increase the chances of arriving in a favorable
locale. While the impact of avian dispersal of seed plants has been widely
studied and is known to impact dispersal outcomes, avian dispersal of bryophyte
spores has received little attention. Preliminary work has shown that bryophyte
spores are present on a wide variety of bird species, and that these spores are
viable. In addition, there is evidence for species-specific relationships
between birds and bryophytes. Building on this work, this project has two aims:
1) to determine how behaviorally-directed dispersal by birds differs from bulk
spore flow via wind, and 2) to determine the topical retention time of spores on
birds. Results from the second aim will be incorporated into a model of flight
distance times to address the likelihood of long distance spore dispersal by
birds. Together, these aims will enhance understanding of bryophyte dispersal
ecology and will provide a comparative model that can be used to test theories
developed in tracheophytes.