* 1701863
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A heritable symbiont shapes community structure of plant-associated organisms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Matthew Forister, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,012.00

Plants are inhabited by an enormous number of microbes, including fungi and
bacteria. In recent years, biologists have suggested that these microbes may
play a critical role in shaping plant health and ecology. Most work so far has
relied on comparative studies of microbes among different plant species; the
next step forward is to manipulate plant microbial communities to better
understand how they influence their host plants. In this study, researchers will
manipulate the abundance and presence of fungi and bacteria in spotted locoweed
plants. Spotted locoweed hosts a fungus that synthesizes a potent, bioactive
compound that can harm livestock. This fungus is carried in seeds, and is thus
passed down to the next generation of locoweeds. The interaction between these
fungi and their locoweed hosts is responsible for millions of dollars in damages
annually in the Western United States, yet little is known regarding how these
fungi affect the ability of their hosts to grow and reproduce. In addition, many
other microbes inhabit locoweeds, most with unknown ecological roles.
Researchers will manipulate microbes in locoweeds to better understand the
function and importance of the entire microbial communities in these important
plants. Because microbes occur in all plants, results from this experiment will
have implications that extend across many plants beyond locoweed, including
agricultural crops. Researchers will include local high school students in the
scientific process, will present findings to the scientific community, and will
make results accessible to the general public.

The experiment will test the hypothesis that colonization of plants by
endophytic microbes influences plant trait expression. Locoweed plants will be
treated to remove the heritable, seed-borne endophyte and will be installed in a
field setting along with untreated plants. A subset of each treatment group will
be treated with an inoculum slurry of local microbial taxa. Variation among
treatment groups in plant traits, including reproductive and defensive traits,
will be assayed. Additionally, arthropod, fungal, and bacterial communities of
each treatment group will be characterized and co-occurrence patterns analyzed
to understand how members of the plant microbiome influence one another and
plant-associated arthropods. The study will generate novel results regarding the
functional role of the plant microbiome and how interactions among microbes
shape ecological communities.