* 1701835
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Phylogenetic, transcriptomic, and epigenetic analyses of vision and chemoreception in cave adapted crustaceans
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Heather Bracken-Grissom, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 18,756.00

Adaptations at the genetic level ultimately lead to the resilience of species,
allowing them to colonize new habitats, to recover following environmental
changes, and to diversify. This project examines the way organisms colonize and
adapt to extreme environments, namely freshwater caves. Caves are hostile
habitats where adaptation at the genetic level is essential for survival. Cave
organisms commonly have a special set of traits collectively known as
'troglomorphy,' which include changes in both form (reduced dependence on eyes,
longer legs and antennae) and function (tolerance to low oxygen, better sense of
smell). These traits in combination with the geographical isolation of caves
make them a perfect study system to answer long-standing questions on
adaptation, and species diversification. This project uses genetic methods to
study the geographic distribution of two crustacean species (Asellus aquaticus
and Niphargus hrabei), which have populations that can be found in surface
waters and freshwater caves throughout Europe. In order to better understand how
these species colonized and adapted to life in darkness, this project will
identify the important genes that play a role in troglomorphy, and examine how
they are controlled (switched on or off). The identification of genes that are
switched on or off when exposed to different conditions (surface vs. caves) will
help to clarify how genetics and environment ultimately come together to drive
the form and function of living organisms. Additionally, cave ecosystems often
contain rare, or new, species that are left undiscovered due to the difficultly
of accessing and studying these habitats. Unfortunately, many cave species are
endangered (pollution, habitat destruction, overexploitation of aquifers, etc.),
and the opportunity to gain knowledge from these ideal study systems is quickly
vanishing. In addition to the scientific knowledge generated during this
project, it will also result in the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in state-of-the-art molecular laboratory techniques and computational
analyses. The computer software developed for these analyses will be made
available online, providing other researchers with the opportunity to use these
new resources. Exploration of these caves will likely result in the discovery
and description of new species. Photo and video footage gathered during these
expeditions will be made public as a documentary highlighting cave exploration
and research. Results from this project will be offered in a series of public
seminars and outreach activities. Impacts from this research will aid in the
understanding of these important but very threatened ecosystems and will help us
better understand conservation needs for the organisms in these systems.

The unique characteristics of aquatic caves and of their predominantly
crustacean biodiversity nominate them as particularly interesting study subjects
for evolutionary biologists. The present study capitalizes on a perfect natural
experiment, the Molnar Janos thermal cave system in Budapest, Hungary. This
intricate freshwater cave system and the immediately adjacent Malom Lake present
the ideal opportunity to address questions of colonization, adaptation, and
evolution. Despite marked environmental differences between the cave and surface
waters, both localities are inhabited by natural populations of two emerging
model cave species, the isopod Asellus aquaticus and the amphipod Niphargus
hrabei. This project aims to employ these populations' phylogeographic histories
as robust frameworks on which to evaluate the transcriptional and epigenetic
basis behind the adaptive divergence of traits involved in troglomorphy, namely
vision and chemoreception. This investigation will be undertaken using
comparative DNA methylation (BsRADseq) and RNA sequencing (RNAseq) approaches.
The identification and evaluation of differentially expressed/methylated genes
and pathways will provide a solid bridge between genotype-phenotype, and aid in
the understanding of patterns of molecular evolution in cave systems. The
results will depict, in a phylogenetically informed context, a close to complete
picture of the molecular basis behind vision and chemoreception in A. aquaticus
and N. hrabei, of the role these traits play in cave adaptation, and of the
evolution of troglomorphy in the subphylum Crustacea. With these, the present
study will contribute to the discovery of evolutionarily significant molecular
mechanisms that permit the survival and evolution of life in caves and other
extreme environments. These findings will undoubtedly yield valuable insights
into the molecular underpinnings of adaptation and their role in evolutionary
processes across environments and across the tree of life.