* 1701221
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: King of the hill? How competitive interactions affect biogeographical pattern and species responses to environmental variability.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Jennifer Rudgers, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,683.00

Plants are moving up mountainsides into cooler climates as temperatures have
increased. An understudied consequence of this movement is that alpine species,
which cannot move further up mountains, may become rarer because of more
competition with the upward migrating species. Could this intensified
competition be strong enough to cause species extinctions? This research will
provide one of the few experimental tests of this scenario, using alpine plant
communities of the southern Rocky Mountains, CO, USA. This project expands upon
past work by coupling competition experiments with mathematical models to
predict population growth into the future and to generalize the results to other
ecosystems. This research will provide new insights for the management of alpine
and other ecosystems under variable temperature and precipitation patterns,
specifically for species important in wildlife management, recreation, and
restoration. In addition, this project will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students and the public by utilizing the Rocky Mountain Biological
Laboratory's Science Festival and Kids Nature Camp outreach programs.

The researchers have used niche models to inform an experiment that transplanted
alpine species into the low elevation plant communities expected to encroach
upslope. Results suggest that focal alpine species performance is reduced more
by low elevation plant communities than by resident alpine communities. The
researchers are combining demographic data from natural populations with field
manipulations of competition to parameterize integral projection models. These
models are aimed at long-term predictions of focal species population growth
under experimental conditions to determine their viability in a competitive
environment altered by increased temperatures. This project will generalize
these results to a wider set of systems and species. The researchers will
collect plant trait and environmental data on focal species and competing
communities to parameterize a new trait-based model aimed at predicting
competitive interaction outcomes from differences in species traits. By
predicating the competitive environment on newly measured trait-environment
relationships, this project will produce a priori predictions of plant
performance in various physical and competitive environments.