* 1701652
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Where Plant Litter Ends and Soil Carbon Begins: The Role of Microbial Physiology in Stabilizing Soil Organic Matter
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Richard Phillips, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,275.00

More carbon is found in soils than that in the atmosphere and plant life
combined. It has long been assumed that the carbon stored in soil represents the
"leftovers" - plant-derived compounds that cannot be broken down any further by
soil microorganisms. Recent work has shown that, as soil microorganisms
decompose plant materials, they can produce compounds that increase carbon
storage in soil. Thus, soil microorganisms are important to both the breakdown
and the buildup of soil carbon. Many questions, however, remain unanswered. What
controls microbial growth, and which aspects of microbial growth should lead to
long-term soil carbon storage? These are the questions to be addressed by
research through this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant. Experiments will
make use of a novel technique to measure rates of microbial production in both a
controlled laboratory experiment, and through studies along natural
environmental gradients in forests. Results of this project will further our
understanding of soil carbon content, and will enhance our ability to predict
when and where carbon storage in soils should be greatest. The investigators
will work with high school teachers to develop lesson plans and course
materials, as well as with high school students directly, to provide training
centered around the project objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of
organic inputs into microbial products is fundamentally controlled by three
processes: microbial growth rate, microbial growth efficiency, and microbial
turnover rate. Yet, despite the theoretical importance of these parameters for
stable soil organic matter (SOM) formation, little is known about how these
parameters vary with resource availability and environmental conditions, and
which of these parameters most strongly controls SOM dynamics. This research
will address two questions: 1) How do litter quality and soil properties affect
microbial growth rate, efficiency, and turnover? 2) To what extent do changes in
these parameters influence SOM formation and soil carbon storage? To date, our
understanding of microbial growth physiology has been hindered by the inability
of common methods to quantify growth on realistic substrates. To overcome this
challenge, the researchers will use a new, substrate-independent method -
tracking 18O-labeled water into microbial DNA - to quantify microbial growth
parameters in temperate forest soils. First, microbial growth rate, efficiency,
and turnover will be quantified across natural gradients of resource
availability in six temperate forests in order to determine whether these
parameters are consistent with previously-collected SOM data from these same
sites. Then, using two isotopically labeled litter decay experiments, the
importance of litter quality versus soil properties in controlling microbial
growth parameters and the conversion of plant inputs into stable SOM will be
evaluated.