* 1701026
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Automating Animal Welfare Tasks to Improve Animal Health and Human Wellbeing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2019
* Donald Brightsmith, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2019
* USD 197,129.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on using research on the
benefits of positive reinforcement training to create a digital system that
improves animal wellbeing while automating tasks related to common types of
animal care. This digital enrichment system is important because animal
husbandry, especially tasks related to animal welfare, take a great deal of
caretaker time, money, and effort that can cause caretaker burnout. Contented
animals are important to multiple industries: research animals undergo
significant physiological and behavioral shifts under stress, which biases
scientific studies; contented farm animals have increased immune function and
need less medication; conservation breeding of endangered species depends on
healthy breeding animals; and ease in pet keeping encourages the health benefits
of pet ownership.

The project will result in a manufacture ready prototype for use with parrots
that has the following features: it will offer toys and food items on a
preprogramed schedule, track and log bird behavior, and run interactive "apps"
that provide rewards for cognitive thinking challenges, exercise, and natural
behavior expression. Parrots are an unusual group of animals, as they exist
simultaneously in endangered conservation breeding, pet ownership, commercial
pet breeding, and research laboratories. This proposed digital enrichment
system's ability to provide many different types of stimuli at a cost of ~$300
per unit provides many advantagesÂ when compared to the $3,000-8,000 systems that
exist the laboratory market and perform only limited husbandry tasks. There are
basically no similar items in this primary market space, the companion bird
market. Current state of the art in the market space for other species are items
like monkey restraint chairs with levels and light panels, enriched poultry
confinement cages (dust bath, perches, nest), and low functionality single
species dog or cat products such as the iCPooch feeder.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery to commercial application. The complex actions and decisions
made by positive reinforcement trainers must become a set of programmed
instructions carried out by the app. The system requires specialized low
processing power computer vision, and computer hearing that work in a variety of
environments and for a variety of species. The technology must seamlessly
integrate into the home of the animal, be low maintenance, replace person-hours
of work, and be based on the best behavioral science. These needs will be
addressed by multidisciplinary teams of animal trainers, ornithologists,
computer vision experts, computer programmers, and engineers working in the lab
and aviary to create software and hardware combinations that overcome these
technology gaps. The animal health and outcomes monitored will include immune
function, body condition, bone density, and expression of natural behaviors.
During development, the project will explore crossover applications for zoo and
agricultural applications as appropriate. In addition, the project leaders will
work with undergraduate and graduate students to provide them with hands-on
experience working with industry partners and developing products for commercial
applications.

The project engages three important partners in this technology translation
effort: The Schubot Exotic Bird Health Center (a research center with 150
publications on bird health), Hill Country Aviaries (housing and breeding about
2,000 birds of 60 species), and Chris Biro (a bird show owner who provides
online training courses and engages several hundred thousand people in outreach
annually). This team will provide the researchers with the environment for joint
development, pilot testing, customer outreach, and guided commercialization to
help transform this research discovery into commercial reality.