* 1701565
* Exploiting Metal-Insulator-Transition in Strongly Correlated Oxides as Neuron Device for Neuro-Inspired Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Shimeng Yu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

A radical shift in computing paradigm towards the neuro-inspired computing is
attractive for performing data-intensive applications such as image/speech
recognitions. The neuro-inspired architecture leverages the distributed
computation in the neuron nodes and the localized storage in the synaptic
elements. The neuron node today is generally implemented by tens of silicon
transistors. Compared to the crossbar array of synaptic elements, the silicon
neuron is power-hungry and area-inefficient, thereby reducing the parallelism of
computing system. In such context, how to design a single device that can
efficiently emulate the neuronal behavior (e.g. integrate-and-fire) is critical
to the neuromorphic hardware design. This project aims to exploit the metal-
insulator-transition phenomenon in strongly correlated oxides as a compact
neuron node that can self-oscillate, namely oxide neuron, to overcome the
aforementioned limitations of silicon neuron. The proposed research will have a
profound impact on the society that is embracing the artificial intelligence.
For instance, a compact design of neuromorphic hardware may enable intelligent
information processing on power-efficient mobile platforms, e.g. autonomous
vehicle, personalized healthcare, wearable devices, and smart sensors. The
objective of the research and education integration is to train
undergraduate/graduate students and next-generation workforce with
interdisciplinary skills. The cross-layer nature of this project ranging from
materials engineering, semiconductor device, circuit-device interaction and
artificial neural network provides an ideal platform for this educational goal.
The project also plans to engage minority and unrepresentative students in
research. Technology transfer will be performed through video or on-site
seminars and student internships with industrial
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
advance the artificial neuron device design by exploiting the volatile and
threshold switching behavior in strongly correlated oxides, with the purpose of
significantly reducing the area and energy of the neuron node, and making it
compatible for the integration with crossbar array of resistive synaptic
elements. The scope of the project is to explore various material systems of the
strongly correlated oxides, in particular, NbO2 and SmNiO3 to demonstrate the
self-oscillation behavior in the artificial neuron node. When such oxide device
is connected with a series synaptic element whose resistance is within the
on/off dynamic range of the oxide device, the node voltage between the oxide
device and the synaptic element will start self-oscillation, and the oscillation
frequency represents the synaptic conductance. This project aims to explore such
self-oscillation to emulate the integrate-and-fire neuronal behavior. To achieve
the aforementioned research goal, device fabrication, physical and electrical
characterization, device modeling, and circuit-device co-design will be
performed to demonstrate the feasibility of the concept and further optimize the
device performance. The intellectual significance of this project is two folded.
From the fundamental science perspective, the physical switching mechanism of
metal-insulator-transition in strongly correlated oxides will be investigated.
From the applied engineering perspective, the oxide neuron device will be
integrated with the resistive crossbar array for demonstration of a neural
network for solving a practical problem, i.e. the image pattern classification.