* 1701583
* Dissertation Research: Conflict and the Evolution of Dimorphism in the Trinidadian Guppy
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,631.00

Evolutionary biologists study the diversity of life on our planet and how it has
been generated. One particularly important question is the diversity between
sexes. While males and females are different in obvious ways related to
reproduction, they also differ in other features. These additional differences
are puzzling because the sexes share nearly all of their genes, and this
suggests that different forms of some of those genes must be found in males and
females. These differences should create a conflict between genes favored in
females and genes favored in males. This research is looking for evidence of
that conflict and, more importantly, whether that conflict is an unavoidable
feature of having two sexes. The research will examine how males and females of
the Trinidadian guppy evolve in response to a new environment. It will take
advantage of an eight-year experimental study of evolution to ask if the
conflict between sexes has been visible from the start or whether it emerges
only after both sexes have adapted to the major features of a novel environment.
Outreach to the public and K-12 students will occur as part of this project, and
undergraduates from underrepresented groups will be involved in the research.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The strength and direction of natural selection on
phenotypic variation is not equal among all individuals within a population. In
particular, genetic correlations between the sexes can produce intralocus sexual
conflicts when selection acts antagonistically between males and females. 
Recent work has shed light on the evolutionary constraint that sexually
antagonistic selection can produce, but its role in the general process of
adaptation remains unclear. Theory suggests that intralocus sexual conflict will
be minimal in a population adapting to a novel environment and will emerge only
when populations approach their adaptive peaks. This research will address the
role of intralocus sexual conflict on the adaptive process by answering these
questions: (1) Does sexually antagonistic selection and the resulting sexual
conflict influence the adaptive process from the start or does it have more of
an influence later when trait values approach their optimum? (2) Does the
antagonistic relationship between the sexes change over time allowing for or
limiting the evolution of sexual dimorphism? This project integrates the
experimental study of evolution with the statistical tools of a large-scale
mark-recapture project and next-generation sequencing. Genetic and phenotypic
samples are available for nearly every guppy within these experimental
populations dating to the start of the experiment. These data provide the
opportunity to estimate fitness, mate choice, trait heritability, and the
genetic covariance between the sexes. Using this system and these methods, the
researchers will answer questions on the genetics of adaptation in a manner not
previously possible.&lt;br/&gt;