* 1701360
* Dense Solid Mixtures to Multifunctional Hybrid Carbon/Low Z Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Choong-Shik Yoo, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Most materials in the universe experience
extreme conditions of high pressure and high temperature, which exist deep in
the planets and stars. Under such conditions, first- and second-row (or low Z)
elemental solids, while existing as simple molecular or elemental solids at
ambient conditions, form unusual and highly dense network structures. These
materials are extremely hard, have high energy density, and exhibit novel
optical and electronic properties. These novel properties arise from collective
behaviors of 3D network structures of low Z elements with high phonon
frequencies, thermal conductivities, cohesive energies, and strong electron-
phonon couplings. The structures and properties of these densely packed low Z
solids, therefore, can be viewed as nature's windows to unexplored novel
structures and properties beyond those of diamond and transition metal
compounds. However, these materials are often formed at formidable pressures and
may be unstable at normal conditions; only a few systems have been recovered,
limiting the materials within a realm of fundamental scientific discoveries.
Therefore, an exciting new research area has emerged on understanding and,
ultimately, controlling the stability, bonding, structure, and properties of low
Z extended solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop multifunctional hybrid carbon/low-Z extended solids
amenable to stabilization at ambient conditions via kinetically controlled
processes in heterogeneous solid mixtures. State of the art dynamic-diamond
anvil cell experiments coupled with time-resolved Raman and synchrotron X-ray
characterization are used to probe metastable interfacial structures and exploit
the presence of internal chemical pressure and dynamic shears, thereby lowering
the external transition pressure while enhancing the miscibility between two
dislike solids. Through scientific discoveries and innovative material
developments, the project elucidates the fundamental principles of high-pressure
chemistry and demonstrate the revolutionary capabilities of hybrid carbon/low Z
framework materials for hydrogen storage, chemical energy depository, and
nonlinear optical and electronic applications. The project also provides
graduate and undergraduate students with significant hands-on opportunities to
learn experimental technologies at our institution, at the synchrotron and
neutron facilities, and in national laboratories. Because of the
multidisciplinary nature of this effort, these students are gaining fundamental
knowledge across many academic disciplines of solid-state chemistry, condensed
matter physics, and materials and planetary sciences.