* 1701378
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Center-of-Mass Control for Expressive and Effective Movement in Bipedal Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Joshua Schultz, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 63,476.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) collaborative project
will apply insights from the study of human athletes and dancers to enable
similarly effective and expressive movement in humanoid robots. The objective is
to create the capability for such movement without duplicating the full
complexity and articulation of the human torso. Specifically, the project will
implement a novel mechanism for shifting a heavy mass that shifts the robot
center of mass independently of limb movements using novel muscle-like
actuators, and evaluate the results based on a formal system of movement
analysis developed for dance, athletics, and physical therapy. In addition to
improving the robot's effectiveness at accomplishing locomotion, i.e., a walking
gait, these capabilities will provide new channels for communication between
robots and humans, i.e., modulating the style of the walking gait. Humans make
unconscious inferences about attitude and intent from observing movement. For
example, a robot co-worker will be more effective if its movements communicate
trustworthiness and competence to its human partners, and a robot first-
responder will be more effective if its movements communicate confidence and
leadership during an emergency situation. This project incorporates the
interplay of art and technology into outreach activities, such as using dance
movements to understand fundamentals of robot locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a novel approach to generating dynamic walking in
a humanoid robot, by exploiting the dynamics of a novel, core-located rolling
ball-and-tray actuation mechanism arising from exploration of embodied movement
theory. The impedance of the actuator is varied in real time, modulating the
robot dynamics to produce qualitatively different excitations. The focus of the
project is on controlling the expressive character of robot gait, with explicit
comparison to human movement. The goals of the project are to explore the role
of center-of-mass control in human walking and to demonstrate the feasibility of
the approach for bipedal robotic walking through modeling, simulation, and an
initial prototype. The work will model and validate the ball-and-tray actuator
via a set of motion primitives designed in accordance with Bartenieff
Fundamentals, a formal system of movement analysis. The research team brings
together experts in movement science, dynamic walking, and muscle-like
actuation. In addition to improving robot performance, this work has the
potential to increase the bandwidth of robot-human communications. Expressive
movement can convey many different emotional contexts, including urgency, calm,
enthusiasm, confidence, et cetera. The ability to engineer these contexts into
robot movement has many potential applications in human facing scenarios.