* 1701587
* Dissertation Research: Understanding the Functional Ecomorphology of Extinct Canids During the Cat-Gap
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* David Steadman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,756.00

The decline of species diversity is more apparent each decade. This decline is
correlated with local and regional climate patterns. Understanding how related
groups of animals will adapt in response to newly open community niches is
challenging. However, we can look to the past to see how animals adapted to the
loss of taxa. This project aims to describe how dogs in general (including
foxes, dogs, wolves, etc.) responded in their anatomy and behavior during a
5-million-year time span (21 to 16 million years ago) when there were no cats in
North America. This time period is known as the Cat-Gap. Working with 3D
scanning techniques, including scans at a tiny scale, and using various 3D
software, the researchers will analyze the anatomy of the forelimb of fossil
dogs before, during, and after the Cat-Gap. Comparisons will be made with modern
dogs and cats of known behavior to make interpretations of the potential
behavior of the extinct canids. The primary goal is to learn whether certain
canids evolved cat-like adaptations during the 5 million years when North
America had no cats. This project will provide undergraduate students with
opportunities to learn about research through involvement in all aspects of the
research. In addition, parts of the research will be developed into a three-day
high school level STEM-integrated module with the help of a local ninth grade
science teacher. Â  The researchers will use 3D imagining techniques (NextEngine
3D scanners, nanoCT imaging) to develop a database of surface images for the
humerus, radius, and ulna of extant and extinct felids and canids. These 3D
surface images will then be analyzed through 3D landmark morphometrics to
compare their morphology to that of fossil canids before, during, and after the
early Miocene Cat-Gap (21 to 16 Ma), with an understanding that an individual's
morphological adaptations are correlated with its predatory behavior.
Preliminary data suggest that canids during the Cat-Gap fall within felids and
outside of modern canids in their forelimb morphology. Researchers will examine
if this holds true before and after the Cat-Gap, with the hypothesis that the
canids were more cat-like in morphology only during the Cat-Gap. The 3D data
generated by this project will be uploaded for public access in MorphoSource.