* 1701952
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Diversification and Community Assembly in Melanesian Forest Frogs: Testing the Hypothesis of Replicated Adaptive Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Rafe Brown, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2018
* USD 16,286.00

Understanding the mechanisms that generate and regulate biodiversity patterns
can provide broad insights into how biological communities assemble and
diversify over different timescales. The importance of evolutionary processes
for the generation of biodiversity in isolated island systems is well
documented. However, the question remains: can processes like speciation and
adaptation lead to predictable outcomes during the assembly of biological
communities on islands? This study aims to address this question by examining
patterns of frog diversity in the Melanesian island archipelagos of the
Southwest Pacific. Melanesian forest frogs provide an ideal system to study
adaptive processes of diversification because they are distributed across
multiple island chains and exhibit a similar set of habitat specialists
(ecomorphs), which are unique to each island group. This study will test the
hypothesis that these ecologically similar frog communities evolved
independently in each archipelago, resulting in the convergence of entire
species communities. This project will document a remarkable case of convergent
evolution that could provide additional evidence bearing on the evolution and
assembly of biological communities worldwide. Portions of this research will
also include advanced undergraduate mentoring in science, including genomic
sequence capture data collection and analysis. Additionally, the results of this
project will be integrated into a classroom learning module geared toward
teaching evolutionary concepts to Kansas high school students.

A major goal of this study is to resolve the evolutionary relationships among
Melanesian Forest Frogs of the genus Cornufer using an exon capture sequencing
approach. Phylogenomic data will be integrated with morphometric and ecological
data from all species throughout the Melanesian archipelagos to test whether (1)
frog ecomorph communities evolved in each archipelago through independent
adaptive radiations, (2) ecomorphs evolved only once and subsequently dispersed
across archipelagos, or (3) a combination of both. Macroevolutionary models will
then be used to evaluate whether frog communities in each archipelago are more
or less ecomorphologically convergent that expected by chance, which may suggest
that adaptive diversification and community assembly has been nonrandom in
Melanesian Forest Frogs. This study will promote the development of another
rich, multi-faceted model system of adaptive radiation for a variety of
conceptual evolutionary studies on the process of biological diversification and
community assembly.