* 1701617
* Dissertation Research: Investigating the role of the maternally-inherited microbiota in dung beetle development and niche construction
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Armin Moczek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 18,720.00

Organisms change their surroundings in a variety of beneficial ways. Examples
include construction of physical structures, such as nests, and techniques to
process or store food. Dung beetles are especially skilled at food storage.
Females roll dung from large animals into a ball, inoculate it with special
microbes (bacteria), lay their eggs in it, and burry it in the soil. This study
will examine the types of microbes deposited by the mother and how they help
young dung beetles get nutrients from the dung. Understanding how species like
dung beetles can modify their environments may be crucial to understanding how
they can buffer themselves against environmental changes. This research also
contributes to the training of a graduate student and the mentoring of
undergraduate research assistants and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use larval dung beetles in the genus
Onthophagus as a novel system for investigating (i) the developmental,
ecological, and evolutionary consequences of niche construction, and (ii) the
mechanisms by which beetle larvae actively modify their developmental
environment (a ball of dung), with particular focus on the role of maternally-
inherited microbial symbionts. First, the researchers will experimentally assess
the degree to which known outcomes of larval niche construction (e.g., enhanced
growth) can be explained by the presence of maternally-inherited microbiota in
dung balls. Second, the researchers will use a biochemical technique to begin
assessing the metabolic capabilities of the microbiota, hypothesizing that the
gut and dung ball microbiota may break down complex macromolecules (e.g.
cellulose) that are otherwise indigestible by larvae. Finally, the researchers
will perform 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing on larval guts and dung balls to
characterize the dung beetle microbiota and identify those microbial taxa that
are associated with enhanced developmental outcomes. More generally, this work
will advance understanding of the causes and consequences of niche construction
in development and evolution, and will shed light on the importance of microbes
in the nutrition and development of organisms.