* 1701200
* PFI:AIR-TT:  One-step and Continuous Manufacturing of Sponge-like Nanostructured Bulks for High Energy Density and Low Cost Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Choongho Yu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2019
* USD 211,435.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating low-cost and
high energy density lithium-sulfur (Li-S) batteries to fill the need for
developing a mass-production method of a key material, a sponge-like carbon
nanotube (CNT) bulk, which is called a CNT sponge in this research. The invented
Li-S batteries are important because they can deliver up to five times higher
energy density compared to current commercial Li-ion batteries that have over
90% market share in various applications including computers, tablets, phones,
drones, and electric vehicles.  Furthermore, the invented Li-S batteries can be
charged and discharged 800 times with high (80~90%) capacity retention, and the
price of the raw material (sulfur) is at least 300 times lower than that of
cobalt-containing active materials used in Li-ion batteries. Since modern life
includes various electronic/electrical devices that have made electrical energy
storage indispensable, potential impacts from high energy density and low-cost
rechargeable batteries are important. The most important unique feature of the
invented Li-S batteries is a high sulfur (active material) loading in the sponge
cathode, which allows for storing a large amount of energy in actual battery
packs.  The project will result in a continuous bulk-manufacturing method of the
sponge for commercial mass-production as well as optimum synthesis conditions to
control the pore size and morphology of the sponge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the technology gaps related to mass-production as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. The high
sulfur loading is enabled by the sponge-like porous bulk, serving as an
excellent electron transport channel and polysulfide reservoir. The covalently
connected CNTs not only provide excellent electron transport channels, but also
completely eliminate insulating binders (inactive materials) that are used in
typical Li-ion batteries to hold powdery raw materials. To mass-produce the CNT
sponge, the researchers will investigate a method of continuously delivering the
catalyst to the reaction zone as well as optimum reaction conditions for
continuous bulk manufacturing. Then the pore size and surface condition of the
CNT will be optimized to maximally accommodate sulfur loadings for higher
performances. Finally battery prototypes will be fabricated for testing and
comparison with the current commercial Li-ion batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide graduate students with unique
opportunities in the process of technology transfer in addition to technology
development such as engaging the students in lab-to-market processes as well as
educating how to deliver technical information to business and non-technical
consumers. The project engages the Texas A&amp;M Technology Commercialization as
well as the Texas A&amp;M Engineering Experiment Station (TEES)
Commercialization and Entrepreneurship and TEES Industrial Relations groups to
seek licensees and investors for manufacturing commercial products out of the
research outcomes.