* 1701641
* Workshop: Advancing Understanding of Microbiomes in Drinking Water Distribution Systems and Premise Plumbing Using Meta-omics Techniques, Denver, CO, August 15-16, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Wen-Tso Liu, Water Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2019
* USD 49,949.00

1701641&lt;br/&gt;Jang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will examine
the feasibility and practicality of new advances in the analysis of
microorganisms to assess drinking water quality and to identify areas for
collaboration and synergy in research focused on the understanding of
microbiology of water systems. This two-day workshop to be held in Denver, CO
August 15-16, 2017 will bring together approximately 30 interdisciplinary and
international experts from fields that are using microbiome analyses (human
body, built environments) and drinking water research on microbial diversity
using meta-omics techniques. Experts will discuss current drinking water
microbiome monitoring techniques in water treatment, the state-of-art of meta-
omics techniques, and the impact of the drinking water microbiome on public
health in plenary sessions, breakout groups, and facilitated panel
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in DNA sequencing technology,
bioinformatics, and big-data technology have allowed scientists and researchers
to effectively use these meta-omics (e.g., metagenomics, metatranscriptomics,
and metaproteomics) tools to study microbiomes in various microbial ecosystems.
National, multi-agency programs have been developed to study and elucidate the
microbiomes of the human body and built environments. The NIH-funded Human
Microbiome Project Consortium has established a population-scale framework to
develop meta-omics protocols, resulting in a broad range of quality-controlled
resources and data including standardized methods for creating, processing and
interpreting distinct types of high-throughput meta-omics data. Similarly, the
National Academies? Board on Life Sciences has announced a large-scale project
to assess the state of knowledge on microbiomes of the built environment and the
implications for human health, sustainability, security, and the design,
construction, and operation of physical infrastructural systems and other
elements of built environments. Nevertheless, the use of advanced meta-omics
techniques to study the drinking water microbiome is at its infant stage. It
remains an important question whether a deep understanding of drinking water
microbiomes by meta-omic tools can be obtained in a systematic and cost-
effective way so that the knowledge can be used by water utilities to better
manage the water quality, shape the drinking water microbiome, and ultimately
protect public health. Current conventional and advanced treatment processes are
producing high-quality and safe drinking water. However, emerging research is
uncovering that drinking water distribution systems can harbor microorganisms in
biofilms and suspensions. Healthy tap water is teeming with microbial life,
typically 1,000-50,000 total microbial cells per mL, potentially reaching over a
million. The quality of this water begins to deteriorate in the current premise
plumbing infrastructure when water is stored for days to months and beyond the
time that residual disinfectants and anti-corrosive agents (e.g., phosphates to
protect against lead leaching) are effective. This deterioration can lead to
microbial regrowth in drinking water distribution systems and premise plumbing
which can cause undesirable water quality changes and violations of public
health regulations. Specifically, biofilms can act as natural harbors for some
opportunistic pathogens (e.g., Mycobacterium avium and Legionella pneumophila)
that affect immune compromised populations, allow invasive pathogens to attach
when intrusion events occur, and remain as a component of waterborne disease
risk that is hard to predict. Already, there has been a 3.5 fold increase in
Legionnaire?s disease outbreaks, caused by Legionella pneumophila, between 2000
and 2011. The problem is further compounded by the presence of pathogens that
are resistant to a wide spectrum of antibiotics, which would in turn increase
morbidity and mortality rates among infected individuals. Antibiotic resistance
genes present in the water can also be horizontally acquired from one pathogen
to another, hence further escalating the potential risks. There is an urgent
need to improve and disseminate our understanding of the microorganisms in our
drinking water distribution systems and premise plumbing (or drinking water
microbiome) to protect the public from increasing risk to chemical and pathogen
exposure. To improve and disseminate our understanding of the microorganisms in
our drinking water distribution systems and premise plumbing (or drinking water
microbiome), this workshop aims to: 1) provide an overview of current drinking
water treatment processes and methods used in studying drinking water
microbiome, and identify current challenges and gaps in applying meta-omics
tools to effectively understand the drinking water microbiome; 2) provide an
overview of the most advanced meta-omics tools used in studying microbiomes, and
identify the research needs for bridging the use of meta-omics techniques to the
analysis of drinking water microbiome; and, 3) provide an overview of known
microbiomes that are of public health concern in distribution systems and
premise plumbing, and to identify the knowledge gaps on how to effectively shape
drinking water microbiome using innovative engineering approaches, and better
manage healthier drinking water networks. Through this, analytical procedures in
meta-omics techniques can be standardized, and this effort will allow
researchers, scientists and utility engineers to effectively compare their
findings among different studies, select effective methods among all available
meta-omics techniques, identify novel key biomarkers for water quality
monitoring, and derive critical knowhow. At the same time, it allows educational
institutions to work closely with water utilities to develop effective education
programs and produce the next-generation researchers and engineers who have
real-scale research and working experiences. These advances will enable the
major breakthroughs needed to better understand the drinking water microbiomes
within the next 5-10 years to help protect the public from increasing risk to
pathogen exposure.