* 1701480
* Collaborative Research: Culture of Marine Protozoans Using Industrial Bioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Jose Fernandez-Robledo, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 10/31/2021
* USD 399,908.00

Diseases caused by intracellular parasites pose some unique challenges due to
the complex life cycle of these organisms and difficulty in obtaining sufficient
quantities of protein source material. Conventional expression systems can
address some of these challenges but in a limited way, and larger proteins are
particularly difficult to produce using conventional bacterial, yeast, or animal
cell systems. This project, which uses a marine protozoan parasite that infects
oysters, is aimed to optimize the growth of this protozoan in large volumes and
to domesticate it to produce large amounts of the proteins needed for vaccine
validation, drug screening, and industrial processes. The project is expected to
provide new insights on how to improve the yield of proteins at industrially-
relevant scale using a marine protozoan, and could generate potentially
transformative tools for use in the study and production of proteins difficult
to express in other systems. The project research activity will be carried out
at Bigelow Laboratory and the University of Maine, and integrated into the
biotechnology curriculum at Southern Maine Community College, encouraging
students in the formation and testing of hypotheses regarding media composition,
growth parameters, and purification strategies. This approach will strengthen
and expand the technical and intellectual abilities of the students and further
prepare them for continuing their education or participation in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of proteins from intracellular
parasites poses some unique challenges due to the complex life cycle of these
organisms and difficulty in obtaining sufficient quantities of source material.
Conventional expression systems can address some of these challenges but in a
limited way. This project seeks to develop and validate a heterologous protein
expression system based not on the conventional systems, but on the marine
protozoan Perkinsus marinus. The project is intended to scale up expression
protocols from tissue culture flasks to multiliter scale industrially-relevant
bioreactors. The effects of temperature, aeration, agitation, salinity, pH, and
nutrient formulation on growth and protein production and recovery will be
examined using process-controlled bioreactors. Also, two bioreactor operational
modes, batch, and fed-batch will be tested. The multiple Perkinsus spp. and
strains will be compared to determine spp./strain suitability/performance
depending on the gene/protein targeted. Transcriptomics and promoter-trap
mutagenesis will be used to develop the suite of transfection vectors (e.g.
secretion, organelle targeting, inducible and constitutive) and tools (e.g.
CRISPR/Cas9) that would facilitate the large-scale production of the protein of
interest. The project is also intended to develop large-scale purification
schemes for recombinant proteins produced in P. marinus including an assessment
of various purification tags for use in affinity chromatographic separation.
This research could revolutionize the development of oral vaccines. It will also
facilitate much deeper characterization of protozoans than has been previously
possible. The expression of large proteins is problematic, and this technology
could enhance capabilities to correctly express large amounts of such protein.