* 1701526
* Impact of Anthropogenic Air Pollution on Ice Clouds and Regional Radiative Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Kuo-Nan Liou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 279,999.00

This project will make use of satellite data to improve the understanding of how
pollution affects ice clouds. A significant fraction of the globe is covered by
cirrus and related ice clouds and these clouds have an important impact on the
radiation budget of Earth. Pollution can impact clouds by changing the size and
density of the ice particles that make up the cloud. However, there are still
significant uncertainties related to the kinds of pollution that affect clouds
and how that translates to changes in the radiative balance and climate. The
long-term impact of the project will be to improve global climate models by
addressing ice clouds, which are one of the key remaining uncertainties. The
project also includes training for an early-career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will improve understanding of
the ice nucleation process associated with anthropogenic aerosols. The focus of
the project will be on black carbon, biomass burning aerosols, organic matter
and solid ammonium sulfate with a goal to provide a comprehensive assessment of
the contribution of anthropogenic aerosols to ice nucleation, ice cloud
properties, and the consequent regional radiative forcing. Data from the A-train
constellation of satellites, including CloudSat, CALIPSO, and Aqua will be used
to: 1) investigate the correlation between aerosol loading and ice cloud
microphysical and macro-physical properties, 2) evaluate the impacts of various
meteorological parameters on the observed aerosol-cloud relationship to extract
the effect of aerosols, and 3) perform a comprehensive analysis of observations
of collocated aerosols and ice clouds to quantify the radiative forcing exerted
by aerosols interacting with ice clouds.