* 1701278
* Forced and Natural Turbulence Allowing Studies of Turbulent anIsotropic Conditions (FaNTASTIC- 1)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Andrew VanLoocke, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2021
* USD 690,206.00

The lower part of the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) - the part of the
atmosphere extending ~300 m from Earth's surface - undergoes rapid transitions
with nocturnal cooling, resulting in rapidly evolving temporal and spatial
properties of coherent eddies. Using a unique and highly instrumented
observation region, this project will observe these variations (eddies) in
detail. One set of in-situ and remote sensing instruments will be sited inside a
200-turbine wind farm (forced turbulence) and another set ~22 km away in a
matched landscape of natural turbulence. The research team will build on prior
modeling and measurement experience to produce new understanding of the boundary
layer by comparing forced and natural
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The
innovativeness of this study derives from the fact that turbulence generated by
turbines or other landscape structures has a distinctly different spectral
signature and subsequent distinct influence on atmospheric exchange processes
than do natural landscapes, such as fields of corn/soybean. Coherent eddies,
known to be the central feature of the ABL, are not represented correctly by
Monin-Obukhov Similarity Theory (MOST). The high-resolution in situ measurements
will provide a physical alternative&lt;br/&gt;to MOST for stable conditions,
which in turn will improve the skill of weather forecasts and simulations,
particularly under stably stratified conditions. The project has three
objectives: Objective 1. Characterize anisotropic and large coherent turbulence
eddies (natural and forced) by use of a high-resolution near-surface turbulence-
measurement tower, strategically placed two tall towers, and a sodar. How are
they initiated during and after the early evening transition (EET)? What are the
contributing factors to energy conservation as the ABL evolves under stably
stratified conditions? Objective 2. Employ multi-resolution decomposition (MRD)
and wavelet transform methods to identify events of coherent structures that
show minimal low frequency (e.g., mesoscale) compared to high frequency (local
turbulence) influences on turbulent covariances. How can these methods help
refine descriptions of surface fluxes driven purely by local turbulence from
those influenced by uniquely forced (turbines) or mesoscale (e.g., gravity
waves, surface heterogeneities, and terrain) influences? Objective 3. Combine
measurements and analyses of Objectives 1 and 2, together with mesoscale and LES
simulations with WRF and other models, to develop new understanding of coherent
eddy evolution and the role of turbulent potential energy (TPE) near the surface
in response to radiative changes in the EET of the ABL. What is the model
sensitivity to the relative magnitudes of TKE and TPE under various levels of
stratification? What principles should guide the choice of coherent eddy length
scales for simulating flow in stable
stratification?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;1) Improved
Scientific Understanding from this research will have broad scientific, societal
and economic ramifications. The research results will cross-cut many STEM
disciplines and provide new fundamental understanding in research areas of high
national priority.&lt;br/&gt;2) Student Learning and Training. Results from the
study will enhance the education and experience for students at all levels, with
emphasis on developing scientists with disciplinary depth and ability to reach
across disciplinary boundaries, capable of working effectively in
teams.&lt;br/&gt;3) Outreach to Underserved Populations. At the graduate level
the research team will take advantage of the Iowa State University's NSFIGERT
award's aggressive plan for recruiting students from the University of Puerto
Rico. At the undergraduate level, the team will collaborate with the IINSPIRE-
LSAMP Alliance, of which ISU is a partner institution.&lt;br/&gt;4) K-14
Engagement. The research team will partner with ISU's new Wind Energy Student
Organization (WESO) that has active outreach to both the K-12 and community
college level.&lt;br/&gt;5) Bi-Directional Mentoring Hierarchy. Built on current
and recent ISU NSF-funded wind energy projects under EPSCoR, IGERT, MRI, and
REU, the research team has established near-peer mentorships recognizing roles
of gender, ethnicity, personal interests, and temperament in pairing-for-
success.