* 1701790
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic Effects of Plant Defense on Above- and Below-ground Ecological Interactions and Natural Selection
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Lauren Carley, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 20,641.00

Using a plant species native to the Rocky Mountains in the mustard family,
Boechera stricta, the investigators will test how differences in mechanisms of
natural selection across environments influences the maintenance of variation of
natural plant chemical defenses. In natural populations, the persistence of
variation of traits among individuals allows for adaptation to occur. Despite
the central role of variation in the process of adaptation, it is poorly
understood how and why variation persists in the face of natural selection
eliminating less fit varieties. Chemical defense strategies (various types and
concentrations of mustard oils) are highly variable across natural populations
of the study species. These defensive compounds have known ecological effects,
both as deterrents of insect feeding on leaves (above-ground effects) and as
drivers of microbial community composition in the soil (below-ground effects).
The researchers will test how plant growth and reproduction are influenced by
the above- and below-ground effects of different chemical defense strategies on
plant-insect and plant-microbe interactions. The project provides opportunity
for undergraduate training. Planned outreach activities will target middle and
high school students, and also the general public during the Crested Butte
Wildflower Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pleiotropic effects of plant
defensive chemicals and the genes that underlie them are well documented. In
addition to influencing fitness by mediating herbivory in aboveground
environments, defensive chemicals can affect microbial communities in the soil
immediately surrounding root tissue. It is likely that interactions between
above- and belowground selective pressures influence overall patterns of natural
selection on plant chemistry. The investigators will test for pleiotropic above-
and belowground effects of a chemical defense gene utilizing near-isogenic lines
of the ecological model species, Boechera stricta (Brassicaceae), that vary in a
gene controlling mustard oil biosynthesis to. They will first characterize the
effects of defensive chemical profiles on microbial community assembly in the
rhizosphere. Second, they will assess how rhizosphere selection affects plant
fitness. Finally, they will test how the belowground context may modify
aboveground effects of mustard oils as anti-herbivore defenses, and how
interactions between the above- and belowground fitness effects of mustard oils
result in the maintenance of genetic and trait diversity over space and time.