* 1701038
* PFI:AIR-TT: Personal Whole Slide Imaging Device with Liquid Lenses
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Yi Zhao, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on reducing the system
dimension and process complexity of whole slide imaging in digital pathology.
This is important because optical examination of pathological slides is a
primary approach for disease diagnosis and peer consultations. Whole slide
imaging that can capture the entire slide with high optical resolutions has been
proven effective to advance an understanding of genetics, proteomics, genomics,
and cellomics, which has greatly improved clinical outcomes. However, the
prohibitive cost and limited availability of whole slide imaging (WSI) equipment
have set a huge barrier for wide adoption of this technology. This project will
address the unmet market need for affordable digital pathology equipment by
developing a personal WSI device that allows pathologists to acquire and share
pathological slides using their smartphones or tablet
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do this, the project will translate prior
research results on an adaptive liquid lenses technology using a composite
elastomer-liquid zoom lens with one single actuation unit, which will reduce the
system dimension and process complexity of whole slide imaging. It can change
the zoom ratio with only one actuation input without compromising the optical
resolution and miniaturization nature of the adaptive imaging system. It also
eliminates the need for displacing or replacing solid optical elements for
changing the optical magnification. The project will result in a prototype of
personal whole slide imaging device with a composite elastomer-liquid zoom lens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This personal whole slide imaging device has the following
unique features: the two liquid lenses within the composite zoom lens can be
actuated simultaneously and synchronously; only one actuation unit is needed for
driving the composite zoom lens; and the dimension of the device is
substantially smaller than the currently used imaging systems in digital
pathology. These features provide the advantages of making digital pathology
affordable, accessible and easy-to-operate when compared to the leading
competing digital pathology systems and other whole imaging devices using solid
optical elements in this market space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. The use of composite elastomer-liquid
zoom lens greatly simplifies the optical configuration and the overall size of
the imaging system. This makes it possible to have the imaging device be
portable and work smoothly with mobile personal devices (smartphones and
tablets). To ensure that sufficient optical resolution can be reached, the
thickness profiles of the vari-thickness elastomer membranes to be used in the
liquid lenses will be investigated through iterative optomechanical simulation
and experimental validation. This will generate new knowledge to advance the use
of elastomer-liquid lenses for many high quality imaging applications. Besides
the optical performance, the device also leverages the mobile devices'
unparalleled capability of instant sharing for efficient transmission of whole
slide pathological images. Given the prevalence of mobile devices, their
increasing processing and transmission speeds, and the versatility of mobile
apps, the personal whole slide imaging device with liquid lenses is expected to
serve as a valuable solution of digital pathology for enhancing research and
clinical outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel involved in this
project including graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students will
receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences
through the interactions with potential customers, the co-creation workshop and
the comprehensive mentoring by engineering scientists, pathologists, and
business educators.