* 1701352
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Morphological evolution, specialization, and functional ecology in a diverse genus of ants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Benjamin Blanchard, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2019
* USD 15,043.00

This project will address a fundamental question in biology: the mechanisms that
allow many species to persist in any single environment. Ants are highly diverse
in many different habitats and are important for ecological processes worldwide.
To understand what promotes the persistence of ant diversity, the association
between physical traits, such as spines and stings, and ecological interactions,
like competition and defenses against predators, must be experimentally
determined. This project will investigate one of the most widespread and
commonly encountered ant groups in tropical Africa, Asia, and the Pacific, the
spiny ant, Polyrhachis. Using ecological field experiments, this research will
assess the effect of a wide range of anatomical defenses on ant competition and
anti-predator defense. It will contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms
that promote biodiversity in tropical habitats. Furthermore, this project will
foster international collaborations between researchers in the U.S. and those in
China. The researchers will also actively participate in numerous outreach and
public engagement opportunities in Chicago, including various science education
programs at the Field Museum of Natural History, and academic tutoring of middle
and high school students from groups that are underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To elucidate the ecological selective forces
driving spine adaptation and specialization in Polyrhachis, the researchers will
conduct a series of competition and predator-prey experiments at the
Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden (XTBG) in Yunnan, China. These
experiments will include a range of species that are present at this site and
that span the full range of spine morphology, from absent to extremely long. In
the first set of tests, the researchers will assess the impact of spines on
interspecific ant competition. In the second, the researchers will quantify the
survival benefit conferred by spines as defenses against frog predators. These
experiments will be conducted in the lab using colonies collected in the field.
A common chamber design with experimental spine length manipulation will allow
for differentiating the survival effects of spine length in terms of two
fundamental ecological interactions. Using data from these experiments, the
researchers will evaluate the evidence for an ecological trade-off between
competitive ability and anti-predator defense mediated by spines. These
empirical tests of the trade-off hypothesis in Polyrhachis, a remarkable animal
radiation, will expand scientific understanding of the processes that promote
community coexistence and ecological success.