* 1701257
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Molecular Artificial Retina For Vision Restoration After Photoreceptor Loss
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Robert Chow, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research on
light-induced modulation of the activity of electrically excitable cells to fill
the need for a treatment for the retinal degenerative diseases retinitis
pigmentosa and dry age-related macular degeneration. The molecular artificial
retina is important because over a million Americans suffer from advanced vision
loss and this research has the potential to restore some level of vision in
these patients, significantly improving quality of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will confirm efficacy of the lead molecules
based on ruthenium nanophotoswitches, evaluate their toxicity and optimize the
scale up of the top candidates for pre-clinical and clinical trials of the
molecular artificial retina. The nanophotoswitches (NPS) have the following
unique features: it is a small molecule that is easily delivered (through
injectable solutions or implants) to the eye, where it embeds in the membrane
and ambient light activates neurons. The mechanism is universally applicable,
both for any type of retinal degenerative disease and for any patient suffering
from retinal degeneration. This is important, because many retinal degenerative
diseases have multiple genetic components, making gene therapy complex and
difficult. The class of molecules currently being investigated for a molecular
artificial retina may be catalytic, therefore requiring only small, infrequent
doses, and inexpensive, due to the simplicity of the system. These features
provide the following advantages restoring vision with infrequent injections
when compared to AREDs, a daily dose of vitamins that potentially delays the
progression of the disease, the only FDA approved treatment in this market
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps
as it translates from research discovery toward commercial applications:
Determine the biosafety of the lead NPS molecules and identify NPSs with low
toxicity/ immunogenicity, evaluate therapeutic potential of the lead NPS, scale
up the production of NPS to meet the market demand in quantity, and develop the
polymer implant for sustained intraocular release of the NPS. In addition,
personnel involved in this project, undergraduate students and postdoctoral
scholars, will receive entrepreneurship and pharmaceutical/drug development
experiences through customer discovery and collaborations with ophthalmologists
conducting pre-clinical and clinical trials.