* 1701721
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Co-estimating species responses to climatic variation in the Pleistocene using comparative phylogeography of closely related flying frogs across Sumatra
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Matthew Fujita, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,695.00

This research investigates the evolutionary processes that have led to the
extensive species diversity on two of the largest islands in Indonesia: Sumatra
and Java. Very little is known regarding how species originated on these
islands, but it is likely that past geologic and climatic events facilitated the
diversification of plants and animals. This project will use genetic data to
investigate how historical climate variation has influenced the diversification
of twelve species of parachuting frogs (genus Rhacophorus). By using several
species, this study will tease apart the common factors that influenced their
diversification. Results will shed light on how species originate on islands,
and provide broader insight on how changing climate affects species
distributions and diversification. The project will train and mentor U.S.
students, broadening participation in science by underrepresented groups,
facilitating extensive international collaboration, and informing conservation
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test how Pleistocene climate
variation influenced species distributions and diversification on Sumatra and
Java. Using Rhacophorus flying frogs as a system, this project will utilize
comparative phylogeography to co-estimate species assemblage responses to
climate variation of both highland and lowland species. This study will employ
an exon target capture approach to sequence ~1000 exons for twelve Rhacophorus
species from Sumatra and Java. This project will test hypotheses of species
expansions or contractions during the last glacial maximum using an Approximate
Bayesian Computational model-testing approach. Using genomic data, the
researchers will test for contraction in highland species, and expansion in
lowland species as sea levels lowered, but forests contracted across the Sunda
Shelf. Additionally, they will estimate a robust phylogeny for all Rhacophorus
from Sumatra and Java, building upon previous mitochondrial and double-digest
RADseq data generated for this project. The results of this study will
complement previous studies investigating both Pleistocene climate-driven
diversification in tropical forests, and tropical island diversification by
revealing the assemblage-wide and species-specific processes that have driven
diversification on the Sunda Shelf.