* 1701750
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The dynamics of socio-chemo cues across a contact zone in the California vole (Microtus californicus)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,400.00

This study will investigate how evolution of olfactory (odor) cues helps
maintain genetic differences between two recently evolved subspecies of the
California vole. Voles, like many mammals, use olfactory cues to choose their
mates. This can lead to behavioral isolation between groups of individuals
(populations) and ultimately lead to genetic separation (divergence) and
speciation. The researchers will document how olfactory cues change across a
contact zone, an area where these two closely related vole species meet and
potentially interbreed. Chemical profile data and genetic data will be collected
from across the contact zone and then statistically compared to determine
whether patterns mirror each other; a close correlation will suggest that
chemical cues and mating preferences are responsible for genetic divergence.
Studying contact zones between recently diverged subspecies can reveal important
information about how species form and are maintained as distinct entities. In
addition, the project will provide independent research opportunities for
undergraduate students. Outreach includes the development of educational
activities appropriate for public school students.

This project will characterize geographic variation in the olfactory cues used
by two subspecies of the California vole, Microtus californicus, when choosing
mates. The main goal is to determine if differences in olfactory cues are
correlated with the degree of genetic differentiation between subspecies. The
investigators will analyze urine samples collected from across a contact zone
between the two sub-species. Chemical profiles (chemical composition and
relative abundances) of volatile and semi-volatile molecules in urine samples
will be quantified using solid-phase microextraction (SPME) coupled with gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Cline analysis will be conducted to determine
whether chemical changes reflect environmental differences (e.g. habitat
differences or geographic gradients) or conversely whether they mirror the known
genetic break between the two vole lineages. A pattern of geographic variation
in urine chemical profiles that mirrors the genetic data would suggest that
behavioral reproductive isolation contributes to maintaining these two
genetically distinct lineages.