* 1701224
* Dissertation Research: Investigating genomic signatures of speciation in tropical montane kingfishers (Aves: Halcyonidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Ethan Linck, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,084.00

This study will use genomic data to investigate the evolutionary mechanisms that
led to the divergence of two Mountain Kingfisher species from a single common
ancestor. Both of these two closely related bird species live in the highlands
of Papua New Guinea; one species occurs at lower elevations, the other occurs at
higher elevations. Scientists have long known that tropical mountain ranges,
like these in Papua New Guinea, have many more species of plants and animals
than expected based on their small total area. However, a fundamental unanswered
question is whether random or adaptive evolutionary processes are more important
in generating this increased biological diversity. This study will use
mathematical models and DNA sequence data collected from field and museum
specimens to test alternate explanations for the evolutionary divergence of
these two species. Identifying the processes responsible for the evolution of
new species is important for understanding the history of life on Earth and for
predicting how environmental complexity and change leads to new biological
diversity. Results of this work are expected to provide important insights for
conservation management of montane bird species. In addition, the project
includes creation of public museum displays and other educational outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sister species with differing elevational
ranges present a powerful system for understanding the interplay between
evolutionary processes and geographic and environmental complexity. This project
will explore patterns and drivers of whole genomic differentiation in Syma genus
forest kingfishers (Aves: Halcyonidae), a young species pair with parapatric
lowland and highland distributions in Papua New Guinea. The researchers will
generate single nucleotide polymorphism data and whole genome DNA sequences from
samples collected in the field and from natural history museum collections.
Using these data they will describe phylogeographic patterns and infer
demographic history in both species, estimate phylogenetic relationships and
conduct species delimitation, and assess the relative contribution of neutral
and adaptive evolutionary processes. In combination, these analyses will provide
a test of a hypothesis of ecological speciation in Syma due to disruptive
natural selection across an elevational gradient. The research will additionally
reveal important clues regarding the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for
disproportionate species richness in tropical montane systems.