* 1701708
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The Evolutionary Significance of Gametophyte Morphology in Epiphytic Ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Emily Sessa, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 19,816.00

During the Cretaceous, flowering plants diversified rapidly and quickly became
the dominant group of plants on the planet. Their rise pushed several other
plant lineages to extinction or severely reduced their diversity. Ferns are the
only exception to this pattern. Rather than being marginalized or driven to
extinction, ferns actually thrived and diversified in both the forest understory
and the newly available canopy. Ferns and lycophytes are unique among land
plants in having two independent stages of the life cycle (haploid gametophyte
and diploid sporophyte), both of which had to adapt to the new environmental
conditions created by the rise of flowering plants. Many tropical, epiphytic
fern gametophytes evolved to produce more leaves than their terrestrial
counterparts, which enable them to live longer and to reproduce without
producing spores. These are highly beneficial traits in the competitive canopy
environment that may actually have enabled ferns to diversify rapidly in these
habitats. The increased independence of the gametophyte means that ferns can
postpone the production of sporophytes if conditions are unfavorable. As a
result, in several epiphytic species we observe a pattern of spatially separated
generations, in which the gametophyte can grow in a much broader range of
conditions than its sporophyte. Several of these fern species with long-lived
gametophytes grow in Hawaii, where ferns remain understudied. This project will
investigate the ecology of these ferns in Hawaii, particularly the environmental
conditions that favor the evolution of independent gametophyte populations.
Temperature, light levels, and precipitation will all be measured in order to
understand the ecological dynamics that govern sporophyte and gametophyte
production. One graduate student and several undergraduates from the University
of Florida and University of Hawaii at Manoa will be trained in diverse field
and laboratory methods. Results from the study will be broadly disseminated via
popular science articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will survey
sporophyte and independent gametophyte floras at five stations in the Koolau and
Waianae Mountain ranges of Hawaii at 200, 400, 800, and 1,000 m intervals. At
each site, researchers will collect epiphytic sporophytes in 10 X 10 m square
plots located off the trail, measure the size of fronds, and preserve tissue for
herbarium collections and DNA extraction. Temperature and light levels will be
measured using Onset HOBO data loggers, and precipitation will be recorded with
standard tipping bucket rain gauges. Environmental conditions will be measured
over the course of one year. The results of this study will allow researchers to
determine what conditions prevent sporophyte production in ferns, and provide
new insights into the diversity and evolution of ferns on the Hawaiian Islands.