* 1701469
* Dissertation Research:  Drivers of community composition, species interactions, and gene flow in urban landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Shalene Jha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 20,345.00

Animals contribute to the pollination of 90% of all plant species; therefore
they are essential for maintaining healthy ecosystems. Of these animals, bees
are some of the most effective and important pollinators of wild plants and
their service as pollinators to agricultural systems is worth hundreds of
billions of dollars each year. In addition to the familiar domesticated European
honeybee, there are at least 20,000 other species of wild bees worldwide. Many
of these wild bee populations, however, are declining in number due to human-
caused landscape changes, including urbanization. This research explores how
urban landscapes alter the types of bee species found in cities, how urban bees
use and pollinate native plants, and how different-sized bee species move
through urban areas. As a part of this project, researchers will make
recommendations to land owners to promote healthy pollinator communities. In
addition, this project will enrich the scientific community by employing college
and high school students from underserved communities as research assistants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will investigate the impacts of urban land use
patterns on plant-pollinator interactions using a network analysis approach. The
plant-pollinator networks across an urban gradient will be developed through
observations of floral visits by bees and the examination of pollen diversity
collected from bees found along a gradient of urbanization (40 sites ranging in
urban coverage from 0-100 %). As previous observations indicate that urbanized
areas contain fewer food resources than rural areas, the researchers predict
that bees at urban sites may visit a greater variety of floral species, whereas
bees in rural sites may be more specialized in their food choices. To
investigate dispersal and colonization patterns within urban landscapes, this
study will also examine the genetic make-up of two closely related carpenter bee
species. These species are similar in nesting behavior, but vary in size and
thus their dispersal potential. The researchers predict that the larger species
(Xylocopa virginica) will show fewer genetic signatures of population isolation
(ex. inbreeding) than the smaller species (Ceratina strenua) because they can
disperse farther through urban areas. Ultimately, results from this study will
allow inferences on how pollinators can persist in urban landscapes over time.