* 1701128
* PFI: AIR-TT:  Ultrapure Lignins Recovered from Paper-Mill Black Liquors as Renewable Biopolymers
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Mark Thies, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2022
* USD 268,199.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the
invention of an environmentally friendly extraction process for producing
ultrapure lignins to fill the need in society for inexpensive, renewable
biopolymers. Lignin is one of the world's most abundant biopolymers (second only
to cellulose), but is unique because of its aromatic nature, giving it special
properties. With the invention of the Aqueous Lignin Purification with Hot Acids
(ALPHA) process, lignins with very low levels of impurities and of controlled
molecular weight (i.e., "ultra pure") can now be recovered from biomass by-
product streams, such as the black liquor from paper mills. These ultrapure
lignins have the potential to replace petroleum-derived, nonrenewable polymers
in a wide variety of applications, including foams, coatings, and carbon fibers.
Today, the so-called Kraft lignins available on the market have over 100 times
the metals content of ultrapure lignins (i.e., 10,000 vs 100 ppm), with little
or no control of molecular weight. In this project, ALPHA will be integrated
with the Sequential Liquid-Lignin Recovery and Purification (SLRP) process of
Lignin Enterprises to convert black liquor to Kraft lignin and then to ultrapure
lignin. Both processes use renewable aqueous acetic acid (SLRP as an
acidification reagent and ALPHA as an extractive solvent) and both are
continuous processes, so overall costs will be minimized compared to the current
batch technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses several
technology gaps so as to translate ALPHA from discovery towards commercial
application. First, the fundamentals of the conversion of the hydrated liquid-
liquid phase formed in the SLRP process to raw Kraft lignin via aqueous acetic
acid needs to be better understood, so that operating conditions can be
optimized for integration with ALPHA. Second, the liquid-liquid extraction,
mixing-and-settling setup for the ALPHA prototype needs to be designed and
constructed so as to obtain the desired purities and molecular weights of
ultrapure lignin in 2-3 stages. Third, the technical difficulties of integrating
the ALPHA prototype with the existing prototype SLRP unit need to be addressed,
the final objective for this project being the production of 10-20 kg/day of
ultrapure lignin from a typical softwood or hardwood black liquor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate, graduate and post-doc students will receive
experience in both technology translation and the successful start-up of a small
company through their interaction with Lignin Enterprises.