* 1701901
* Dissertation Research: A Phylogenomic and Specimen-based Bioinformatics Approach to Reconstruct  Freshwater Mussel Evolution and Biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Lawrence Page, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,490.00

Freshwater mussels of the family Unionidae are ecologically and economically
important, and the most species-rich family of freshwater bivalves worldwide.
However, current understanding of tropical freshwater mussel relationships
limits basic and applied research on the family, especially within mainland
Southeast Asia (Indochina). This area is the global epicenter of unionid
diversity and the most species-rich region for the group outside of North
America. This research seeks to estimate the evolutionary history of freshwater
mussels to examine species limits and geographical history of the group. The
project will train one graduate student and two undergraduates in diverse
systematics methods. Data from the project will be disseminated broadly via the
MUSSEL Project database. Given the economic importance of the group, the
resulting classification and phylogeny will provide a well-supported
evolutionary framework for the future basic and applied research projects on the
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses a phylogenomic and specimen-based
bioinformatics approach to transform the current understanding of the
evolutionary history and biogeography of freshwater mussels of Indochina. The
diversity and distribution of the Indochinese freshwater mussel assemblage will
be evaluated using hybrid enrichment of over two hundred exons and thousands of
digitized museum records. This research aims to complete three primary
objectives: 1) reconstruct the supraspecific relationships of the three major
freshwater mussel radiations in Indochina; 2) revise the species-level diversity
and geographic ranges of freshwater mussels in the region; 3) and analyze
spatiotemporal patterns of freshwater mussel diversity.