* 1701329
* Collaborative Research: Evaporation-Driven Optofluidic Biosensors using Photonic Crystal Biosilica
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Li-Jing Cheng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 306,000.00

The goal of this research project is to explore sensing of biological substances
using naturally occurring diatoms, which are a group of single-celled algae
found in nature that have been shown to possess unique properties suitable for
biosensing applications. This research could lead to new methods to detect many
types of biomolecules, which would in turn positively impact pollution
monitoring, hazardous material detection, and early disease diagnosis. The
integration of this research with education and outreach efforts benefits both
graduate and undergraduate students at Oregon State University and Washington
State University-Vancouver. Programmatic topics on nanophotonic technology and
microfluidics are being added to curricula of these institutions, and efforts
are underway to try to broaden the participation of under-represented
minorities, women and K-12 students at these institutions through the summer
research programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaporation-induced capillary flow in
micro- and nano-scale structures can sustain a liquid flow without external
pumps, and this can be a desirable feature for biosensing. The goal of this
research project is to develop a new type of evaporation-driven, optofluidic
biosensor using diatom photonic crystal biosilica. Diatoms are a group of
single-celled photosynthetic algae that use biochemical pathways to
biomineralize and self-assembled three-dimensional photonic crystals with unique
photonic and micro- and nano-fluidic properties. Three aims are being pursued:
1) investigation of evaporation-induced capillary forces in the arrayed micro-
and nanopores of diatom biosilica; 2) development of an optofluidic biosensor
with enhanced light-matter interactions through in-pore plasmonic nanoparticles
and 3) enabling a lab-on-chip optofluidic sensing system for trace level of
biomarker detection, specifically for histamine as allergy biomarkers, using
surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) sensing. This research could lead to
label-free sensing of many small biomolecules, which would positively impact
pollution monitoring, hazardous material detection, and early disease diagnosis.
The synergy of the research and education parts of this project benefits both
graduate and undergraduate students at Oregon State University and Washington
State University-Vancouver by enhancing their curricula with nanophotonic
technology and microfluidics topics. The research project also has a component
of broadening the participation of under-represented minorities, women and K-12
students through summer research programs.