* 1701489
* Discovering and Characterizing Protoplanetary Systems Using Novel Imaging Techniques
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Stephanie Sallum, Sallum                  Stephanie      E
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2020
* USD 288,500.00

Stephanie Sallum is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the University of
California, Santa Cruz. Sallum will develop methods to take the sharpest
possible images of dusty disks around nearby stars. Because these disks are
potential birthplaces of planets, the images will allow astronomers to
understand how planets form around stars. Alongside this research, Sallum will
develop an astronomy course for inmate education.

Understanding how planets form requires direct observations of accreting
protoplanets. By developing and refining new imaging methods that can detect
companions at a telescope's theoretical resolution limit, Sallum will advance
high contrast imaging techniques to study protoplanetary disks. She will then
apply these techniques to ground-based observations of protoplanetary disks
containing inner clearings that might indicate the presence of accreting
planets. Sallum will also prepare for future planet searches with the James Webb
Space Telescope, which can detect close-in planetary companions around stars
that are orders of magnitude fainter than those observable from ground-based
telescopes. For the educational component of her work, Sallum will create and
teach an astronomy course at the UC Santa Cruz Program for Inmate Education.