* 1701323
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phylogenomics and Evolutionary Rates associated with Salinity and Thermal Shifts in Centrarchiformes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* William Ludt, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 17,967.00

Bony fishes are more diverse than any other class of vertebrates. However, we do
not have a clear understanding of their history. Determining what led to this
diversity will greatly help us understand how life has formed on our planet. It
will also allow us to understand how future environmental perturbations might
affect this diversity. Transitions to new habitat types, such as from freshwater
to marine habitats, or tropical to temperate, may have increased fish diversity.
Previous studies have examined the transition of fishes between these habitats
and found varying amounts of support for the importance of each transition type.
However, these transitions have only been examined in distantly related groups
of fishes. This study will be the first to examine the evolutionary transitions
between these habitats within a group of relatively closely related fish. These
groups contain familiar and economically important species such as largemouth
bass and sunfish. Outreach to the public and K-12 students will occur through
presentations, social media, and museum displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will take a novel approach to answer two macro-evolutionary questions:
How have diversification rates in the Centrarchiformes varied between (1)
tropical and temperate habitats and (2) between freshwater and marine habitats?
To answer these questions phylogenetic relationships among Centrarchiform
species will be resolved using dense taxonomic sampling and thousands of
unlinked nuclear loci. The phylogeny will be fossil calibrated and used in a
variety of analyses to test for shifts in the diversification rate and their
potential associations with salinity or thermal habitat transitions.
Furthermore, this project may provide general insight on the diversification of
other aquatic groups that span diverse habitat types.