* 1701810
* DISSERTATION RESEACH: Does phenotypic evidence support ecological speciation in western long-eared Myotis bats?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Bryan Carstens, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,020.00

How species are formed is a central question in evolutionary biology. One
process involved in species formation is known as ecological speciation, which
occurs when different environments promote genetic diversification in a
geographically widespread species. It is particularly useful to investigate and
model this process in organisms that naturally disperse widely, such as bats.
This project will explore differences within and among closely related species
of the western long-eared Myotis bats. A novel aspect of this work will be the
development of an analytical framework that tests for correlations between
phenotypes and genotypes while controlling for environmental variation. This
analytical pipeline will be made publicly available, and may be used to test the
predictions of ecological speciation in a variety of different organisms.
Results from this work will also have important practical implications to bat
conservation efforts. To communicate findings from this research to a broader
audience, an online interactive museum focused on the tempo and mode of
speciation of Myotis bats will be developed.

This research will identify phenotypic evidence of ecological speciation in
western long-eared Myotis bats of North America by co-analyzing genomic,
morphological, and environmental data. Previous findings demonstrate that these
species follow a pattern of speciation-with-gene-flow that might have been
promoted by environmental changes. Therefore the hypothesis that morphological
differentiation among these bat species is associated with both divergence-with-
gene-flow patterns and environmental variation will be tested. Specifically,
craniodental shape and size variation among these species across different
environments will be examined, using geometric morphometric approaches. A novel
approach that accounts for both genetic and environmental covariation on
morphometric differences within and among species will be developed. This
framework will use geometric morphometrics coupled with environmental niche and
genomic scan analyses to identify outlier loci that may have evolved under
divergent selection. Finally, this new framework will be applied to predict
morphometric variation among the western long-eared bats and differentiate
between phenotypic convergence and gene flow among species. This integrative
approach will allow us to understand the tempo and mode of speciation of Myotis
bats from a phenotypic, genetic and environmental perspective.