* 1701230
* PFI: AIR-TT:  Preflex versus Reflex Control of a Multijoint Robotic Exoskeleton
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Kiisa Nishikawa, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 207,903.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a bio-
inspired algorithm, based on a transformative new theory of muscle contraction,
to develop safer, faster, and more maneuverable robotic exoskeletons. The bio-
inspired control algorithm seeks to address significant challenges that remain
in the control and development of robotic assistive devices despite recent
technological advances.  The project will result in a robust control algorithm
for active ankle actuation using a lower limb exoskeleton as a
platform. This control algorithm has demonstrated high potential to provide
robust control of ankle torque and power while walking on varied terrain. The
benefits of a robust exoskeleton with ankle actuation include improved standing
postural balance, increased walking speed, and improved maneuvering over varied
terrain for in-home gait rehabilitation in persons with spinal cord injury when
compared to the leading competing lower extremity exoskeletons in this market
space.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As it translates research discovery to commercial
application, this project addresses the need for lower extremity exoskeletons
with active ankle actuation. The ankle joint plays a critical role in whole-body
stability and forward propulsion during walking, yet no exoskeletons currently
available on the market have ankle actuation or the stability and robustness
required for independent and effective function at home and in the community.
These limitations affect quality of life for individuals that rely on mobility
assistance by hindering participation in daily activities and maintenance of
physical fitness. In this project, a bio-inspired algorithm will be used to
control active actuation at the ankle joints, in addition to actuation at the
knee and hip joints, to explore leg coordination in standing balance, walking
speed, and ambulation over complex terrain. The project will test whether the
algorithm is sufficient for control of coordinated multi-joint movement, or
alternatively whether reflex feedback control is also required. Personnel
involved in this project, including undergraduate and graduate students, will
participate in innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation
experiences through specialized research and coursework at Northern Arizona
University, as well as business and engineering internships at Ekso Bionics,
Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Ekso Bionics, Inc. will provide a
lower extremity exoskeleton and test environment for implementation of the bio-
inspired control algorithm in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.