* 1701121
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Prototype Development of Recipe Optimization for Deposition and Etching (RODEo)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Roger Bonnecaze, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,734.00

This PFI:AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a research
code for plasma etch and process optimization into a user-friendly industrially
validated software tool. This will reduce the costs of recipe development by
over 65% and shorten time to market for the products of semiconductor tool and
chip makers. A single semiconductor chip requires over 50 etching steps. Each of
these etch steps is a unique chemical process that requires specifications of an
exact process condition or recipe (e.g., pressure, temperature, chemical
ingredients and amounts, and time in the etch or deposition tool). The
underlying patent-pending methodology and software implementation for this
project, Recipe Optimization for Deposition and Etching (RODEo), uses kinetic
process models and statistical analysis to reduce the time and cost of process
development by a factor of three as compared with current industrial standards.
Greater than $1.2B is spent on etch and deposition process development per year.
This cost is projected to grow as new technologies and smaller features require
new materials and greater numbers of etch and deposition steps. By reducing the
number of experiments necessary to create a recipe by a factor of three, RODEo
can reduce this by $800M. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of plasma-based
semiconductor processes is extremely costly and time consuming, severely slowing
technology growth and constraining semiconductor equipment and chip sales. This
project addresses this technology gap as it translates the RODEo methodology
from research discovery toward commercial application. RODEo uses Bayesian
statistics to uniquely combine the physics-based models and experiments and the
expert or so-called tribal knowledge of etch engineers to accelerate the process
of recipe development. Elements to be created for commercial translation of the
research code include: 1) 3D profile simulator to couple with the existing
plasma model; 2) Database of etch chemistry models and kinetic parameters for
ease of use; 3) Optimized code for increased computational speed; 4) User
interface; and 5) Industry demo of RODEo recipe development for sidewall control
for etch of a high aspect ratio trench, against methods used by one of our
industrial partners. In addition, personnel involved in this project, including
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students, will receive experiences in
technology translation through interactions and user feedback from our partners
and future customers, which include Lam Research, Intel, and Tokyo
Electron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Industrial Innovation and Partnerships and the Division of Engineering Education
and Centers; reflecting the alignment of this project with the respective goals
of the two divisions and their programs.