* 1701975
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Characterization of vertebrate host communities through mosquito blood meal-derived DNA for biodiversity conservation and epidemiological applications
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Akito Kawahara, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,825.00

Female mosquitoes typically cannot reproduce without taking blood from a
vertebrate host, making them effective vectors of disease-causing pathogens such
as malaria parasites, West Nile virus and Zika virus. For this reason,
mosquitoes have an enormous impact on humanity, as illustrated by the recent
episodes of local Zika virus transmission in Florida and Texas, and the epidemic
in Latin America. Preventing and mitigating the effects of mosquito-borne
pathogens requires a detailed understanding of the interactions between
mosquitoes and hosts. Globally, there are around 3,500 mosquito species, each
with distinct preferences for certain hosts. Some take blood from any available
vertebrate, but most prefer only certain animals (mammals, birds, reptiles,
amphibians, even fish). By understanding these relationships, researchers can
assess how a pathogen moves through an ecosystem, and predict the risk of human
infection. To investigate mosquito-host interactions, researchers use a method
called blood meal analysis. Mosquito blood meals contain the DNA of their hosts,
which is used to determine the host animal's identity. While these data provide
insight on pathogen transmission, they can also improve understanding of
vertebrate host communities. Results from this research will be disseminated via
social media platforms and published in peer-reviewed scientific journals. A
graduates student will be trained and involved in all aspects of this work.

The taxonomic composition of host DNA within a sample of mosquito blood meals
reflects the vertebrate host community. Data generated through mosquito blood
meal analysis are traditionally collected, analyzed, and interpreted under an
epidemiological context. Following the emergence of methods for molecular
species detection and environmental DNA analysis, host DNA derived from the
blood meals of hematophagous invertebrates has been recognized as a source of
molecular data that is informative to vertebrate conservation. This research
integrates epidemiological methods of mosquito blood meal analysis and
vertebrate diversity assessment, with the aim of generating datasets that are
simultaneously valuable to both conservation and the characterization of
mosquito-borne pathogen transmission networks. Current blood meal analysis
approaches rely largely on polymerase chain reaction amplification and Sanger
sequencing of the DNA barcoding regions of host genes. Because host DNA derived
from the mosquito gut is inherently degraded by digestion, next generation
sequencing approaches are likely to enhance the ability of making successful
identifications. This research will identify the hosts of mosquitoes collected
at two sites in Florida, Everglades National Park and the University of Florida
campus, through next generation sequencing. Mosquito blood meals will be used to
characterize the host communities of both sites, detect the presence of Burmese
pythons and other invasive vertebrates in the Everglades, and enhance the
understanding of relationships between mosquito species and host communities.