* 1701058
* Collaborative Research:   GP-EXTRA:  Broadening Geosciences Preparedness through Cross-Campus Experiential Partnership
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Karla Heidelberg, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 136,083.00

Non Technical&lt;br/&gt;Mount Saint Mary?s University (MSMU), a geoscience-
limited institution, addresses the need for diversity in geoscience fields, both
in academia and in industry, through its IUSE GEOPATHS-EXTRA program. MSMU?s
partnership with the University of Southern California (USC) expands
environmental and geoscience opportunities for female, underrepresented, low-
income, predominantly first-generation college students. Leveraging the STEM
capacity of USC and its Wrigley Marine Science Center on Catalina Island, the
project will generate greater academic interest and awareness among early-level
MSMU undergraduates in geoscience and environmental fields. It will also provide
participants with the academic and field experience necessary to succeed in
advanced degree programs and careers in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented minority university students enter
majors in STEM fields at a similar rate to other students, but completion rates
are lower (National Academies, 2011). MSMU?s GEOPATHS program provides female,
minority, low-income, predominantly first-generation college students with
undergraduate hands-on research experiences, active learning in introductory
courses, and membership in a STEM learning community aimed at increasing
interest in the sciences and improving student outcomes. The GEOPATHS program
will recruit early undergraduates at MSMU for year-round catalytic experiences
designed to: 1) introduce participants to oceanography and environmental science
fields through project-based learning at USC?s marine research station on
Catalina Island, 2) conduct field/laboratory studies mentored by faculty and
researchers, 3) build expertise and confidence for subsequent participation in
national programs and advanced USC courses not available at MSMU, and 4) inform
students about geoscience graduate school and workforce opportunities. At the
same time, the program will fortify MSMU?s goals to develop an environmental
science track for students, develop cross-campus practices between USC and MSMU
geoscience programs, and broaden USC?s ongoing initiatives to attract diverse
populations into STEM graduate programs. Through these activities, the project
intends to contribute significantly to the existing body of knowledge concerning
strategies for entraining and retaining underrepresented students in geosciences
majors and career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Research
indicates a lack of racial and ethnic diversity in graduate STEM programs and
among STEM faculty. In particular, the geosciences are cited as having the
lowest diversity of all the STEM fields at all levels of higher education
(National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, 2015). In 2010, while
20% of all U.S. bachelor?s degrees were awarded to underrepresented minorities,
fewer than 7% of geoscience bachelor?s degrees were awarded to the same groups
(Stokes et al., 2014). These statistics highlight the need for creative
investments in evidence-based and evidence-generating strategies to broaden
geoscience access and improve retention among underrepresented groups. Mount
Saint Mary?s University?s (MSMU) GEOPATHS-EXTRA program will expand
environmental and geoscience opportunities for underrepresented and
predominantly first-generation female college students in Los Angeles,
California. This will be accomplished via a sustainable, scalable partnership
between MSMU?a minority-serving geosciences-limited 2-year/4-year women's
institution?and the University of Southern California (USC)?a large R1
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage USC?s significant
STEM capacity to engage MSMU students in geoscience extracurricular activities,
and will evaluate the success of such strategies for entraining and retaining
students from a geoscience-limited institution in STEM majors and career paths.
The program will enroll 14 MSMU students per annual cohort, directly impacting a
total of 42 students?predominately Biological Sciences majors, with priority to
first-generation and underrepresented students. Programming at MSMU and USC
campuses will be scaffolded to extend MSMU introductory STEM coursework,
providing diversified teaching methods and emphasizing 1) early research
experiences, 2) active learning, and 3) membership in STEM learning communities.
The program will provide students with catalytic experiences to: 1) introduce
oceanography and environmental science fields through project based learning at
USC's marine station, the Wrigley Marine Science Center ; 2) conduct
field/laboratory studies mentored by USC and MSMU faculty and researchers; 3)
build expertise and confidence for subsequent participation in national programs
and advanced USC courses not available at MSMU; and 4) inform students about
geoscience graduate school and workforce opportunities. Assessments will
contribute to the knowledge base by 1) documenting the efficacy of project
activities on student retention in STEM courses and majors; 2) reinforcing
minority STEM identities; 3) promoting peer and professional networks; 4)
bridging MSMU's introductory STEM curriculum with external geoscience research
opportunities and upper-division USC courses; and 5) enhancing student
preparedness and increasing interest in geoscience graduate programs and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSMU?s GEOPATHS program aims to increase the
number and diversity of geoscience-prepared and engaged undergraduates.
Furthermore, its broader contribution will be a formalized, scalable and
replicable cross-institutional partnership model designed to improve student
outcomes and increase interest and success in geoscience careers and graduate
study.