* 1701115
* PFI:AIR-TT: Wi-Rhythm: Scheduled WiFi for Next Generation Wireless Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Raghupathy Sivakumar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the Wi-
Rhythm, a suite of WiFi algorithms for wireless local area networks that uses
distributed scheduling to avoid interference between users in dense deployments.
It fills the need for higher performing wireless networks in residences,
enterprises, and industries relying on internet-of-things (IoT) technologies.
The Wi-Rhythm suite of algorithms is important because WiFi routers enabled with
them will better serve environments with high-density deployments such as those
expected with IoT (e.g. factories), mixed-use networks where high-priority
traffic needs to be protected from low-priority traffic (e.g. homes), and public
environments where there is likely to be a high-degree of WiFi heterogeneity
(e.g. office buildings).

The project will result in software and hardware for Wi-Rhythm enabled wireless
routers, software and hardware for Wi-Rhythm enabled clients, performance
measurements for Wi-Rhythm operating in different environments, cost analysis,
and a list of compatible devices on which Wi-Rhythm could be deployed. The Wi-
Rhythm suite of algorithms will allow WiFi networks to operate in a scheduled
fashion and tackle a variety of practical challenges including the presence of
non-backlogged nodes, partial connectivity, backward compatibility, power-saving
related sleeping, and schedule changes. These capabilities provide the following
advantages: higher throughput performance, more precision in service, better
energy efficiency, and the deployment of arbitrary scheduling algorithms on the
fly, when compared to the leading competing solutions such as those offered by
Cisco, Juniper, Brocade, and Huawei in this market space. 

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application: design and proof of concept
for how Wi-Rhythm can be deployed on off-the-shelf WiFi devices including
wireless routers and client devices, and how Wi-Rhythm can be deployed in
scenarios with different degrees of adaptability. Specifically, the research
will explore and address issues pertaining to design, performance, scalability,
cost, presence of legacy nodes, compatibility, and generality. Possible issues
with time synchronization, register settings, computational constraints, and
memory usage will be addressed. Fine-tuning of the Wi-Rhythm algorithm
parameters will be performed, and a hierarchical system architecture to address
scalability problems will be developed.

In addition, personnel involved in this project, including doctoral and master's
students, will receive innovation and entrepreneurship experiences through both
Georgia Tech classes and the Georgia Tech Venture Lab commercialization process.

The project engages the Georgia Tech Venture Lab to help in the process of
accelerating the technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality.