* 1701546
* Unveiling the connection between star-formation and galaxy structure in the early Universe
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Christina Williams, Williams                Christina      C
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Christina Williams is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at The University of
Arizona. Williams will study the properties and processes that affect star
formation and influence the structure of galaxies. Results from her research
will allow a better understanding of how galaxies form and change over time.
Alongside this research, Williams will reestablish an astronomy course at a
tribal community college, and she will develop a mentoring network for the
community college students to enhance their access to higher education.

This project will explore the physical origin of the connection between star-
formation activity and morphology in galaxies at high redshift. Empirically,
suppressed star-formation activity in galaxies is correlated with high stellar
mass density (compactness), but the nature of this connection is poorly
understood. Williams will investigate this relationship between star formation
and structure through three analyses. She will use deep spectroscopy in
conjunction with high-resolution imaging to study the kinematic properties and
ionization conditions (diagnostics of the energy input into the interstellar
gas) in star-forming galaxies. This study will indicate if compact morphology in
galaxies enhances feedback. She will also use imaging and spectroscopy from the
James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) to test theories about the mode of stellar
mass buildup in the first galaxies to quench star formation. Finally, she will
combine the JWST data with a molecular gas survey that will address the
relationship between star formation efficiency and structure in galaxies. For
the educational component of her work, Williams will revive an astronomy course
at the Tohono O'odham Community College. She will also establish a mentoring
network, which will encourage students to continue their education beyond
community college.