* 1701648
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrative research in gastropods: Phylogeny and shell shape evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Gonzalo Giribet, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 21,970.00

Understanding what drives the evolution of diverse animal forms is a largely
unanswered key question in evolutionary biology. This research project will
investigate the tree of life of living and fossil groups of marine snails, and
the changes that happened in the shape of their shells through geological time.
Snail shells are an iconic example of an organisms' effective defense against
predators. With more than 30,000 described living species and countless fossils,
snails are the most diverse group of invertebrate animals in the oceans; the
diversity of their shell forms being equally impressive. Their rich fossil
record shows a transition of shell features starting in the middle of the
Mesozoic Era, around 160 million years ago. At that time, while dinosaurs
thrived on land, fishes and crabs with increasing capacity of crushing shells
were diversifying in the oceans. Changes in shell shape are thus hypothesized to
be an evolutionary response to increased predation. If predation pressure was
indeed an important driver during the evolution of shell shape, a general
dominance of better-defended forms would be expected after the mid-Mesozoic. The
researchers will gather data from an ample set of shells from fossil and living
species to infer how they are related to each other and to estimate the times of
origin of snail groups with different shapes; these results will be used to
investigate the trajectory of the shell shape during the Mesozoic. Results from
this research will be published in peer-reviewed journals and science blogs
broadly accessible to the public. A large number of shell images will be
produced and made available online, including websites for science
communication. In addition, high school and undergraduate students will be
mentored in their first experience in science. The members of Vetigastropoda,
the specific group of marine snails under study (including abalone, key-hole
limpets, top-shells and others), present great variation in shell height and
level of coiling. Shorter and less coiled shells are particular features that
could offer mechanical resistance against shell crushing. This study will test
the hypotheses that: (1) the morphospace of shells became more restricted in
response to predator selective pressure, and (2) the trajectory of shell shape
trended towards shorter and less spired forms. Hypothesis testing will be
accomplished by adding shell morphological data to a molecular phylogeny
inferred from high-throughput sequence data. The fossil data will provide the
basis for estimating divergence times in the phylogeny of vetigastropods, and
for the comparison among distinct models of trait evolution.