* 1701831
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Influence of Antibiotic Compounds on Soil Microbial and Invertebrate Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jane Lucas, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 16,138.00

The discovery of antibiotics was one of the scientific breakthroughs of the 20st
century. While many people are familiar with how antibiotics are used for human
health, the vast majority of antibiotics produced today are used to promote the
health and growth of livestock. As with many medicines, up to 80% of the total
dosage of active antibiotics are eliminated through animal waste, like feces and
urine, and introduced to the surrounding environment. Although previous research
has found more antibiotic-resistant organisms near livestock farms than
generally, scientists do not fully understand how antibiotics coming from
livestock waste impact important organisms in soils that are exposed to them:
soil microbes, like bacteria and fungi, and invertebrates, like millipedes,
pillbugs, spiders and insects. Healthy communities of microbes and invertebrates
are responsible for recycling nutrients in soils and making them available to
plants and the animals that eat them. This research will help scientists
understand how the common practice of adding antibiotics to soils, by applying
contaminated livestock manure to crop soils, may be disrupting the nutrient-
cycling soil organisms, and how well these organisms can make nutrients
available. Through this research, scientists, farmers and the public can promote
responsible waste management practices that will help protect our ecosystems and
benefit human health. The project will also train a graduate student, and
American Indian volunteer researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using antibiotic
(tetracycline)-laden manure from cattle, this research will consist of a series
of field experiments that assess how antibiotic compounds change decomposition
rates in the soil, microbial respiration (an important factor in carbon and
nutrient cycling), and microbial and invertebrate community composition. The
researcher will also test how the microbiome of invertebrate communities raised
on antibiotic-laden manure compares to those raised on untreated manure. This
research fills a critical gap in our understanding of three important ecological
phenomena: (1) how antibiotics affect community structure of soil microbes and
invertebrates, (2) which invertebrate and microbial taxa are most important to
decomposition and greenhouse gas emission, and (3) how disrupting invertebrate
microbiomes drives mortality in invertebrate communities. Furthermore, by
conducting our proposed study at an agricultural field site, we provide insight
into what governs the health and function of a globally prominent and
economically important ecosystem.