* 1701006
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Epigenetic Effects of an Invasive Parasite on an Avian Host
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Dale Clayton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,434.00

The goal of this research is to understand how processes that modify the
function of genes without changing the DNA sequence affect the defense of
Galapagos mockingbirds against an introduced and sometimes lethal parasitic fly.
This modification may enable the host to respond quickly to parasitism and
reduce its negative effects. The parasite lives in the nests of this and other
species of birds in the Galapagos and feeds on nestlings, and is a threat to
their survival. Studying how this modification acts as a rapid defense against
parasites will provide insights into how animals adapt to new environmental
threats. This project will involve training undergraduates in field biology
techniques and scientific writing. It will also incorporate workshops for
Galapagos National Park rangers and tour guides to help develop strategies for
monitoring and controlling this pest species in the
Galapagos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze DNA methylation
patterns of mockingbirds studied during four field seasons: two in which
mockingbirds were tolerant to the fly parasite, P. downsi, and two in which the
fly caused high mortality. During the field study, mockingbird nests were either
fumigated with permethrin, a dilute insecticide, that killed the parasite, or
sham-fumigated as a control, that let the nests be naturally infested. Growth,
health and fledging success of parasitized and non-parasitized nestlings were
compared and nestlings were sampled for blood twice during the nestling period.
These blood samples, along with samples collected from study birds later
recaptured as adults, will be analyzed for variation in methylation patterns.
DNA methylation analysis will allow the researchers to identify genes that are
affected by parasitism in tolerant vs. non-tolerant years as well as to
investigate whether methylation alterations persist to adulthood and are
potentially even heritable. The results of this research will provide new
insights into epigenetic mechanisms of rapid adaptation in wild populations.