* 1701522
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding how land use alters ecosystem function and population dynamics of key pollinator species
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Shalene Jha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 20,345.00

Cotton is the world's most widely-grown and economically important non-food
crop, with a yearly harvest worth nearly $25 billion in the United States.
Before cotton?s fluffy heads ("bolls") emerge, the plant produces large white
flowers that attract insects, which visit the flowers to collect food (nectar
and pollen) and to act as pollinators, moving pollen between flowers. While
cotton plants can produce marketable bolls without the help of pollinating
insects, pollinators greatly increase the size of bolls, with larger bolls
producing greater yields and higher profits for growers. However, as human
activities transform cotton-growing landscapes, there is concern that cotton
fields are becoming are inhospitable to pollinators, preventing them from moving
between fields in search of food and sites to reproduce. If this is happening,
pollinators may disappear along with their valuable pollination services. The
first steps in conserving cotton pollinators and the services they provide are
to identify which insects are the best pollinators, and which human activities
may be preventing them from persisting in rapidly-changing landscapes. This
project will accomplish these first steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the tools
of landscape genetics and ecology, this research looks for ways to restore and
maintain pollinators in agricultural landscapes. Through behavioral observation,
single visit pollen deposition, pollen load analysis, and the estimation of
visitation frequency, researchers will determine the efficacy of all cotton
pollinators. They will then use next generation genetic sequencing techniques to
determine the population dynamics of the three most effective pollinator species
as a function of landscape composition. The goal is to identify specific
landscape barriers that may hamper pollinator dispersal and colonization. This
research will develop genomic resources to investigate pollinator dispersal,
migration, and colonization, which will in turn offer an opportunity to increase
crop yields and profits while also benefiting the environment. Additionally, the
project will provide research experience and mentoring for an early-career
ecologist.