* 1701390
* Van der Waals Heteromaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Matthias Batzill, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 714,690.00

Nontechnical Description: Layered materials consists of two-dimensional
molecular-planes that are stacked on top of each other and held together by only
weak forces. Although the interactions between layers are weak, it has been
recently shown that they are critical in controlling the properties of these
materials. In nature, layered compounds exhibit identical layer composition. In
this project, the research team is combining diverse layered materials with
atomic layer precision and thus creates artificially layered materials with
novel properties. Specifically, the team is gaining insight how interfaces
between dissimilar layered materials controls material properties and this has
far reaching implications for designing materials at the nanoscale. Better
understanding of interlayer interactions enables discovery of novel materials
with applications as diverse as superconductivity or solar energy harvesting.
The program advocates the increase of minority students in STEM research and is
embedded in activities which allows graduate students to gain experience
internationally at research facilities in Europe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Quantum confinement and interlayer
hybridization in van der Waals materials strongly modify the properties of
single layers compared to bulk materials. The research team aims to understand
how such weak interlayer interactions modify the properties of artificial van
der Waals heterostructures and explores how these modifications can be utilized
for designing materials with desirable properties. In this project, van der
Waals heterostructures are synthesized by direct growth of layered materials on
van der Waals substrates. The variation of their electronic properties due to
interlayer interactions are characterized by angle resolved photoemission
spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy. Scanning probe
techniques also allow the characterization of artificially grown nanostructures
and lateral interfaces. Quantum critical phenomena, such as charge density wave
transitions, are anticipated to be sensitively dependent on interlayer
interactions and thus the tuning of transition temperatures is being studied in
metallic materials. Band gap tuning as a function of layers and/or interfaces
with dissimilar materials are being studied in semiconducting materials.
Finally, modifications of single layer electronic properties by molecular
adsorption, charge transfer doping, or field effect is explored by combining the
capabilities of growing single layers with a new nanoprobe transport measurement
under ultra-high vacuum conditions.