* 1701777
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Forecasting potential effects of climate on tick-borne disease dynamics in Central Panama
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Brian Allan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,542.00

Ticks can pass on diseases to all animals they bite, including humans. These
"tick-borne" diseases can be very harmful, causing illnesses, deaths, and
economic losses. To prevent and reduce tick-borne diseases, it is important to
understand how risk of passing on these diseases may differ among geographic
regions and times of year. Because ticks live outside, their ability to survive
and reproduce is likely affected by rainfall and temperature. In climates where
ticks survive well, there may be a higher chance of them carrying and passing on
diseases. This research will help determine how climate affects the risk of
tick-borne disease by examining tick activity and survival across different
climates and times of year. The study sites are close to each other yet have
very different climates, providing a rare opportunity to examine the effects of
climate on ticks and tick-borne diseases. Results of this project can be used to
develop public health programs aimed at preventing or reducing the spread of
tick-borne disease.

This research will evaluate how abiotic and biotic variables affect spatial and
temporal variation in the abundance of ticks and prevalence of tick-borne
pathogens across central Panama. To fully characterize the effects of climate on
tick-borne disease risk, researchers will integrate field sampling of ticks and
wildlife hosts with pathogen analysis and climate modeling. They will then
construct a comprehensive model to quantify the abiotic and biotic pathways by
which climate variables determine the frequency of tick-borne diseases across
the region. The model will inform regional policy and public health decisions
and will provide a broad framework upon which other climate and tick-borne
disease studies may be built.