* 1701920
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Will Ecosystem Recovery From Acid Precipitation Jeopardize Soil Carbon Storage?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Emily Bernhardt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,478.00

While acid rain has significantly decreased across the United States over the
past thirty years, many forested ecosystems are only beginning to recover, with
full recovery expected to take decades to centuries. Recent evidence suggests
that, while forests will grow better as they recover from acid rain, the soil in
forests may also lose a substantial amount of the carbon and nutrients. In this
Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant (DDIG) project, the student is working
to understand the mechanisms by which forest recovery from acid rain may
increase the vulnerability of soil organic matter that contains soil carbon and
nutrients. The investigators are particularly interested in understanding how
rising soil acidity and calcium content may alter the solubility and lability
(decomposability) of soil carbon. The project will test this by studying the
physical, chemical and microbiological properties of soils in response to
changing acidity. This research is necessary to predict future trends of forest
growth and carbon storage throughout the Northeastern United States. To
facilitate and inform evidence-based management decisions, this research will be
incorporated into a web-based application that is geared toward letting the
general public explore and understand long-term ecological data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To examine the mechanisms by which ecosystem recovery from acid rain
may alter soil organic matter (SOM) dynamics, the researchers will perform a
long-term greenhouse mesocosm experiment. Soils will be collected from Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest, a Northeastern hardwood forest that is impacted by
acid rain. The team will reconstruct soil mesocosms by horizon, both with and
without sugar maple seedlings, a co-dominant species in the forest where the
soils were obtained. Soils will be experimentally amended to increase soil pH
and Ca in a fully factorial design. The student will measure SOM solubility and
microbial respiration of SOM to determine the responses of SOM pools to these
treatments. In addition, researchers will measure proximate mechanisms of SOM
dynamics (Aluminum-SOM complexation, soil exoenzyme activity, bacterial:fungal
microbial biomass ratios, etc.) that may drive changes to SOM solubility and
microbial respiration. These measurements will be compared between planted and
unplanted mesocosm to identify possible plant-mediated effects on SOM dynamics.