* 1701177
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Community Revitalization and Race Relations in Northwest Detroit
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Sharon Cornelissen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,740.00

This project will analyze the challenges of inclusive neighborhood
revitalization in Northwest, a poor, depopulated, Black Detroit neighborhood. In
the last five years Northwest has become a surprising destination for white
urban farmers, who have bought cheap homes to fix up, and have converted vacant
lots into gardens, parks and farms. Most recent scholars of neighborhood poverty
have studied the benefits of moving disadvantaged families out of poor
neighborhoods with subsidized housing vouchers - of moving the poor to
opportunity. This project, by contrast, will highlight the promises and
challenges of moving opportunity to poor residents. It examines whether and how
green gentrification in one of the nation's most struggling neighborhoods,
combined with federal, city, and philanthropic investments, can help improve
neighborhood conditions and the lives of poor residents who remain in place.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer this question, this dissertation will draw on
multiyear ethnographic fieldwork, in-depth interviews with residents, former
residents and community leaders, and historical and quantitative data. The
researcher will also conduct fieldwork at the Detroit Land Bank, a city
institution that owns a quarter of all property in Detroit. Most previous
research on gentrification has focused on working class neighborhoods with a
high percentage of rental apartments, located near downtown in densely populated
cities. Such research has shown that gentrification has a transforming impact on
neighborhoods, but has rejected it as a viable mechanism for inclusive
neighborhood revitalization. Northwest, by contrast, is a different kind of
neighborhood than those in which gentrification has been studied. It is far from
downtown, depopulated, and poor, with a high percentage of homeowners. By 2016
half of all properties in the neighborhood were vacant lots, and one third of
remaining houses stood abandoned. If gentrification is such a powerful mechanism
for neighborhood change, how and to what extent can this potentially be used to
turn around disadvantaged, struggling neighborhoods? Dissertation chapters will
draw on the ethnographic case study of Northwest to uncover the tensions between
racial residential integration and social segregation in public and
organizational life in the neighborhood. Chapters will also examine the
potential of "greening" to turn around blight, how tax foreclosures shape
ongoing displacements of low-income residents, and how the city helps shape the
future of land distribution in the neighborhood. In conjunction, these
dissertation chapters describe the interactional, organizational and structural
challenges to inclusive neighborhood revitalization, as well as the potential
that "farming hope" brings to Northwest Detroit. Drawing on this study, the
researcher will make policy recommendations on how to move opportunity to
depopulated, poor neighborhoods across the country.