* 1701918
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Plant Drought Tolerance and Gene Function Across Historic Frequency Gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Grey Monroe, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,760.00

This research will investigate the function of genes possibly involved in
drought adaptation in wild populations of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
Droughts are one of nature?s most devastating forces, affecting millions of
people each year. Yet as agents of strong selection on plant populations, they
are also valuable for understanding basic evolutionary processes, such as
discovering the genes involved in adaptation. Furthermore, studying plant
evolution in the context of drought may produce the critical knowledge needed to
develop drought tolerant crops. Using a global map of historic drought frequency
based on remote sensing data, populations were identified that experience very
different drought frequencies. From data on genetic differences among those
populations, 20 genes were identified that will be studied for their molecular
and phenotypic effects. This work is expected to yield key insight into the
evolution of gene function, and to confirm genes underlying drought tolerance
traits. The results of studying these genes may be of great value to breeding
programs working to improve drought tolerance in crop species. In addition, the
project will involve mentoring both undergraduate and high school students,
including individuals from groups that are underrepresented in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historic drought frequency significantly predicts
important drought tolerance traits, flowering time and water use efficiency,
among natural accessions of Arabidopsis thaliana. The project will investigate
the effects of loss of function alleles on 20 genes involved in flowering time
or water use efficiency. A reverse genetics approach based on T-DNA gene
knockouts will be used to artificially induce mutations in these genes in a
common genomic background. The project will quantify the effect sizes of these
hypothesized genes on flowering time and water use efficiency. It will also
characterize effects on whole genome expression profiles and abiotic signaling
cascades using RNAseq.