* 1701858
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phenological shifts in seed-dispersal networks of the Sierra Nevada, California
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Morgan Tingley, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2018
* USD 17,443.00

Many recreational and cultural events are based on the seasonal timing of
natural events. For example, visitors flock to New England to enjoy fall leaf
colors and birdwatchers congregate in May to welcome migrating birds. Seasonal
timing also matters to plants and animals. To fuel their fall migrations, birds
rely on calorie-rich wild fruits. Likewise, the plants that make those fruits
rely on migrating birds to carry their seeds to places where they can grow into
new plants. This mutually beneficial interaction works because the timing of
wild fruit production matches the timing of bird migration. In many places,
however, the seasonal timing of bird migration and fruit production has become
misaligned. With not enough fruit to fuel their migratory flights, birds may
suffer during migration. And, without birds to disperse their seeds, some plants
could fail to produce the next generation. This research will measure how much
fruit production and bird migration are misaligned. Investigators will study the
environmental cues for fall migration and fruit production as well as the
factors that control how many fruits are produced by wild plants. Members of the
public will participate by providing observations on bird-fruit interactions and
will learn about scientific research through field trips led by the
investigators. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The relationships between environmental
cues and fall seasonal events in birds and plants remain largely unexplored.
This project will use multi-year, multi-species, publicly available datasets to
estimate year-to-year differences in the timing of fall migration in birds and
fruiting in fleshy-fruited shrubs. Two methods will be employed to determine
relationships. First, researchers will use Bayesian survival models to regress
data on yearly timing of migration and fruiting from the National Phenology
Network and eBird, respectively, with data on environmental drivers. Second, a
common garden experiment with five genera of shrubs will be set up to
mechanistically determine for the first time how increased temperature, drought,
and the interaction between the temperature and drought affect the timing and
abundance of fruits. Results will be useful in predicting the ability of birds
to migrate and fruiting-plants to disperse their seeds.