* 1701105
* EAGER:   Optical Coherence Elastography (OCE): A novel tool for rapid, nondestructive, spatially resolved quantification of mesoscale biofilm mechanical properties
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Oluwaseyi Balogun, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 02/28/2018
* USD 60,000.00

1701105&lt;br/&gt;Wells, George F.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial communities
attached to surfaces form biofilms which are important in both engineered
bioreactors and natural environments. Despite the importance of biofilm
structure as an essential mediator of biofilm growth and activity, little is
known about the relationship between biofilm structure and mechanical properties
that control retention of biomass in biofilms. To address this knowledge gap,
the PIs propose to develop a novel methodology, termed Optical Coherence
Elastography, for rapid quantitative 3D mapping of mechanical properties in
biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop the Optical
Coherence Elastography method and use it to assay properties and dynamics of
mixed-culture biofilms representative of those employed for biological nitrogen
(N) removal. Efforts will be organized around two specific objectives: 1)
Develop a dynamic Optical Coherence Elastography method for mesoscale
nondestructive mapping of elastic moduli in environmental biofilms; and, 2)
Employ Optical Coherence Elastography to quantify the relationship between
mesoscale biofilm mechanical properties, morphology, and performance in mixed
culture N-cycling biofilms. Initial applications of Optical Coherence
Elastography will relate mesoscale gradients in Young's and Shear moduli to
variation in biofilm roughness, internal porosity and thickness. Nondestructive
elastography will enable time-series measurement of mesoscale structural and
mechanical features during development of these essential environmental
biofilms. Thus, this project advances understanding of critical yet poorly
understood interrelationships between physical structure and mechanical
properties in environmental biofilms. Macroscale biofilm characteristics such as
biomass accumulation and chemical transformation rates are known to be linked to
mesoscale biofilm structure and mechanical properties, yet the vast majority of
work on biofilm structure has focused on the microscale. Optical Coherence
Elastography will enable, for the first time, co-located, real-time, non-
invasive, in situ mapping of biofilm morphology and mechanical properties at the
mesoscale. The proposed Optical Coherence Elastography methodology employs a
shear wave transducer to propagate localized deformations in biofilms.
Deformations are then continuously imaged via phase sensitive optical coherence
tomography. The spatially resolved mesoscale biofilm mechanical property
distribution is obtained by relating the speed of propagation of deformations to
local density and elastic or viscoelastic properties. Optical Coherence
Elastography has recently been applied for biomedical research, but is an
entirely new approach to biofilm characterization. Results of the proposed work
will open new possibilities to elucidate the interplay between mesoscale biofilm
properties, microscale biofilm composition, and emergent system function in
environmental biofilms. This project will support one Ph.D. student and as
undergraduate student. Project experimental systems will be used to design
experiments for a core laboratory course at Northwestern and demonstrations for
outreach to K-12 students and community groups.