* 1701774
* In-situ and Operando Studies of Metastable and Transient States of Organic Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 487,123.00

Nontechnical Description: Organic semiconductors are designed at the molecular
level to exhibit useful properties, and they promise the realization of a new
generation of electronic circuits and solar cells. This research activity
utilizes highly controllable methods of depositing ordered crystalline thin
films from liquid solutions bearing small organic molecules. Experiments are
being performed to understand ways that molecules organize from a disordered
solution state into highly ordered crystalline solids. These molecular
arrangements can also be sensitively tuned by stretching or compressing thin
films, which may dramatically affect their properties. The experiments utilize
polarized optical microscopy and X-ray scattering - two techniques which can
help determine molecular ordering in the films. Electronic measurements are used
to determine how easily electrons move in these materials. Calculations are also
being performed to test theoretical predictions of the link between the
molecular arrangement and electron motion. The societal impact of the research
is amplified by innovative community outreach activities, including lectures and
demonstrations designed to engage the public in a discussion of science and
applications of energy, light, and nano-materials. This project provides
graduate student training in a highly interdisciplinary area, and it introduces
undergraduate students to X-ray science and thin film deposition
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The rectangular hollow
pen writer method can produce highly oriented films with controllable grain size
that can exceed one centimeter, while in comparison, vapor deposited films
typically have randomly oriented nanometer-scale grains. This project involves
studies of the relationships between process parameters and film properties,
such as grain size and orientation, strain, and defect density. Recent work
suggests that many small molecule materials pass through a precursor stage
during crystallization from solution, and this state can be unambiguously
observed through a combination of optical and X-ray studies. Polarized optical
video microscopy is sensitive to the nucleation and development of grain
structure, while real-time optical spectroscopy is highly sensitive to local
ordering, such as aggregation and molecular packing geometries. Real-time
synchrotron X-ray diffraction is highly complementary because it is sensitive to
long-range order, allowing time-resolved studies with millisecond resolution.
Carrier transport in organic field effect transistors will also be studied as a
function of applied strain by elastic stretching of thin films and substrates.
The results will be related to ab-initio studies of the effect of strain on the
electronic band structure and carrier transport properties. This research may
lead to new environmentally responsible manufacturing methods based on roll-to-
roll processes. These methods will underpin new technologies for low-cost,
flexible electronics and solar cells.