* 1701005
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Supporting Complex Sensemaking on Mobile Phones
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Aniket Kittur, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating distributed
sensemaking platforms to fill the need for understanding complex online
information.   Distributed sensemaking is important because people spend over 70
billion hours on gathering information online each year for tasks ranging from
making sense of their medical symptoms to learning a new scientific field.
However, all the work done in gathering and structuring this information is
lost, with each person having to start from scratch every time.  Instead, this
project will develop a new information gathering platform in which the work that
individuals do for themselves can be captured and made useful for others with
similar needs. This distributed sensemaking approach will go beyond existing
search engines, which focus only on providing relevant web pages, to helping
users build rich information landscapes that capture information, evidence,
judgments and perspectives across multiple sources and sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. Although the
distributed sensemaking approach can be tremendously useful in accelerating a
person's knowledge of a new domain and improving their decision-making, a
fundamental barrier to this approach being adopted in the real world is that
without enough initial users and the processing they provide, using the system
is perceived as less valuable than just starting from scratch. This proposal
aims to develop a new platform that will be useful to individuals themselves in
managing complex searches, while simultaneously capturing the rich sensemaking
they do while searching. In the short term, this platform will help people find,
manage, and synthesize information for themselves from multiple web pages and
for multiple tasks on a variety of devices ranging from smartphones to desktops.
In the long term this platform will be the foundation to kickstart a virtuous
cycle of distributed sensemaking, moving the web from a pattern of increasing
fragmentation to increasing synthesis as more people use it. In addition,
personnel involved in this project, including graduate students and
undergraduates, will receive innovation experiences through iterative, user-
centered development and testing opportunities.