* 1701520
* Seasonality of East African Rainfall
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kerry Cook, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 683,578.00

The seasonality of rainfall in East Africa from Ethiopia in the north to Malawi
and Mozambique in the south is complex, including bimodal and unimodal rainy
seasons. Regions with bimodal rainy seasons, with precipitation maxima and
agricultural growing seasons in the spring and fall, occur generally within
about 7 degrees of the equator in Kenya, southern Somalia, southern Ethiopia,
and northern Tanzania. This rainfall distribution is traditionally explained as
being related to having two overhead passes of the sun each year. However, this
explanation is not complete since regions 10 or 15 degrees from the equator have
one rainy season each year despite two overhead passes of the sun at these
latitudes. In addition, equatorial central and western Africa experience humid
climate with rainfall throughout the year. This suggests that a more complete
understanding of the seasonality of East African rainfall should consider such
factors as the roles of the Indian Ocean, topography, and near-equator
atmospheric dynamics (with a small or absent Coriolis force) in addition to the
solar forcing. This research project is aimed at advancing our understanding of
how the seasonality of rainfall in East Africa is determined, and to apply that
improved understanding to issues of climate variability and change, including
impacts. Analysis of observations, comparing multiple datasets in this data-poor
region, and output from high-resolution model simulations will be used to
investigate these physical processes to produce a more comprehensive
understanding of how the seasonality of rainfall is distributed across East
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is crucial to understand the seasonality of
rainfall to improve our ability to predict change and variability, especially in
regions such as East Africa where the population is highly vulnerable.
Variations in rainfall, including its seasonality, strongly impact the region's
agriculture, economy, and water resources which, in turn, affect livelihoods and
political stability. These issues will be directly addressed within the project
by relating observed and simulated variations and trends in climate variables to
variables more directly related to impacts. Changes in climate variables will be
used to calculate changes in natural vegetation using a model that relates
vegetation type to climate conditions. Changes and trends in growing season days
and surface water availability will also be evaluated. These representations
will provide direct input for impacts analysis. The research project benefits
the climate modeling field more generally in contributing to the development of
regional-scale climate simulation, including high-resolution models that can
explicitly resolve convection within the governing equations. This is important
since the parameterization of convection in models with coarser resolution, such
as global climate models, is known to degrade simulations. Broader impacts of
the research program also include the education of graduate students in STEM
fields.