* 1701470
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring novel leaf phenology of invading shrubs
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Margot Kaye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 20,436.00

Invasive shrubs are a major concern in eastern U.S. forests where their success
is at the cost of native species diversity and tree regeneration. One of the
reasons invasive shrubs may impact native ecosystems so greatly is that they
have an extended period with leaves, as compared to native woody species, also
called extended leaf phenology (ELP). Phenology is the timing of biological
phenomena that correspond to climatic conditions. This earlier leaf emergence in
the spring and/or later leaf fall in the autumn creates shade at unique times of
the year. So far, studies comparing ELP of invasive compared to native shrubs
have been done at single locations. However, we know that cues that drive leaf
phenology, for example temperature, vary greatly from region to region and from
year to year. So, when we compare regions across the eastern U.S., will we find
differences in leaf phenology between native and invasive shrubs? Are there
regions where it is important to focus management efforts because ELP of
invading shrubs is greater? How will leaf phenology change with temperature
changes? To address these questions, researchers have developed a citizen
science campaign called "Shady Invaders" to collect leaf phenology observations
across the eastern U.S. Through participant training and eNewsletter and webinar
updates, both the public and scientific research are enriched from this
collaboration.

Species-specific leaf phenology data are impossible to collect simultaneously
across a regional scale without numerous observers. Fortunately, data collection
is straightforward, allowing the growing efforts of citizen scientists to be
applied to this problem. Regional citizen science phenology observations for
native and invasive shrubs will provide insight into the spatial extent and
consistency of the novel leaf phenology of invasive shrubs across eastern U.S.
and will contribute to our understanding of the broader applicability of local-
scale research on this topic. The landscape-scale, multi-year approach can be
used to predict the potential implications of climate change for leaf phenology
by developing a predictive model for phenology. Through collaboration with
researchers from China, phenology data are being incorporated from the native
range of the shrub species invading forests of eastern U.S. to understand
whether novel phenology arose as a product of evolutionary pressures in the
native range (pre-adaptation), or more recently in the introduced range (rapid
adaptation with range expansion). This will contribute to pressing research
questions as well as informing whether leaf phenology is a useful tool for
predicting and preventing future invasions.