* 1701946
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Mean State and ENSO Variability in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific under Glacial Forcing: A Combined Geochemical and Organic Proxy Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Thomas Bianchi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 80,043.00

The El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon is the largest natural
interannual signal in the Earth's climate system and has widespread effects on
global climate that impact millions of people worldwide. A series of recent
research studies predict an increase in the frequency of extreme El Niño and La
Niña events as Earth's climate continues to warm. In order for climate
scientists to forecast how ENSO will evolve in response to global warming, it is
necessary to have accurate, comprehensive records of how the system has
naturally changed in the past, especially across past abrupt warming events.
Nevertheless, there remains significant uncertainty about past changes in
tropical Pacific climate and how ENSO variability relates to the millennial-
scale warming events of the last ice age. Therefore, this project will use both
inorganic and organic geochemical proxies from a sediment core recovered from
near the Galapagos Islands to reconstruct a comprehensive record of Eastern
Equatorial Pacific (EEP) climate change and ENSO variability across multiple
extreme climate events over the last 65,000 years. Results generated from this
research will aid in the prediction of how ENSO will change over the next
century and greatly improve future mitigation efforts.  Results of the project
will also be integrated into multiple educational and public outreach programs
at both Old Dominion University and the University of Florida. At ODU, the lead
investigator will mentor a postdoctoral researcher who will supervise an
undergraduate research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research outlines the
most comprehensive study to date evaluating how the EEP mean state and ENSO
varied across the Dansgaard-Oeschger (D-O) cycles of Marine Isotope Stage 3 (MIS
3). The magnitude, duration, and number of these abrupt climate events make them
the ideal natural experiment to test how the system will evolve in the near
future. By utilizing a unique combination of multi-proxy methods together in a
single study, this project will generate records of surface and subsurface
temperature, thermocline temperature variance, upper-water column hydrography
and upwelling variability from eight time slices in the EEP between 30 to 65
kyr. These objectives will be achieved by using a high-sedimentation rate core
recovered from the heart of the cold-tongue EEP upwelling region during R/V
Melville cruise MV1014 in 2010. Sedimentation rates in this core are among the
highest in ENSO-sensitive regions of the tropical Pacific, ~10.5 cm/kyr,
allowing for the resolution of millennial-scale climate events. The project will
use a combination of foraminiferal stable isotope and trace metal geochemistry
to reconstruct long-term changes in the EEP mean state across MIS 3. Next, 8
time slices spanning the extremes of MIS 3 climate (D-O interstadials, stadials
and Heinrich Events) will be selected for further analyses. For each time slice,
ENSO variability will be determined using thermocline temperature variance
derived from single shell foraminiferal Mg/Ca analyses. In addition, upwelling
intensity and nutrient variability will be characterized by the Diol Index and
the Long Chain Diol Index. Together, this multi-proxy approach will allow for
the most complete characterization of how the EEP varied across millennial-scale
climate events of MIS 3 and will provide critical insight into how ENSO is
related to extreme climate states of the past. This study will also provide
climate modelers with critical information needed to simulate future climate
change.