* 1701515
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecologically variable immunity and its consequences for parasite dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Carla Caceres, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2021
* USD 20,539.00

An important goal of researchers who predict disease epidemics is to know how
the parasites that cause them move through a population of hosts. In making
predictions about epidemics, people consider how and when susceptible and
infected hosts come into contact with one another, but they generally do not
consider what happens after the parasite gets inside its host. However, the
within-host battles between host and parasite could also be important for
disease spread. These within-host battles happen because a host's body is
constantly resisting and defending against parasites. It is important to
consider these dynamics in predicting disease dynamics because not all hosts are
equally equipped to fend off parasites and diseases. Ultimately, hosts that have
lower immunity are more likely to allow parasites to spread. In this project,
the researcher will focus on populations of an invertebrate that lives in lakes
in which they experience large parasite epidemics every year. The researcher
will improve our understanding of disease spread by incorporating information
about how variability in immunity affects it with host-to-host contact
information. The results of this project will help scientists better understand
the importance of immune defenses when parasites infect humans, farm animals,
and wildlife populations. It will also enable the training of a graduate
student, and support projects aimed at encouraging underrepresented minority,
female and low-income undergraduate and grade school students to be involved in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of how ecological and
immunological factors interact in natural populations to determine both an
individual's probability of infection and the subsequent overall disease
prevalence remains limited. Working with a model host-parasite system (Daphnia
host and fungal parasite), this research examines the mechanisms underlying
immune function, as well as the consequences of variable immunity for parasite
transmission. Specifically, the researcher will examine how environmental
stressors (e.g. resource quality and availability) shape natural Daphnia
populations' mean levels of and variation in immune function. The establishment
and spread of the highly virulent parasite within these populations will then be
quantified, while tracking each population's levels of exposure and infection
success through time. The research relies on tools from multiple disciplines,
including ecology, quantitative biology, transcriptomics, and immunology.
Moreover, the project integrates theories from disease ecology and ecological
immunology to examine disease processes across scales: from the genome, to the
individual, to the population and community.