* 1701467
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A trait-based approach for understanding the relationship between microbial community assembly and metabolic function
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Vincent Denef, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 18,610.00

Bacteria compose the majority of the planetary biodiversity and inhabit almost
every corner of our planet. Bacteria are the engines that drive Earth's
biogeochemical cycles and help to sustain life. Scientific papers are published
daily on what types of bacteria live in every imaginable ecosystem. Scientists
have found patterns of bacteria community composition in relation to
environmental (e.g. temperature, pH, etc.) or host (e.g. disease history, cancer
state, etc.) characteristics, but the underlying reasons for the observed
patterns remain unclear. Connecting these patterns to a general conceptual
framework of how microbes interact with each other and their environment will
help scientists to better manage microbes in systems that directly affect people
such as human pathogens and wastewater treatment plants. This research will be a
step towards addressing this gap in knowledge by adapting frameworks developed
in plant systems based on functional characteristics (traits) to microbial
ecology, allowing examination of connections between lake bacterial diversity
and ecosystems processes using a mechanistic approach. A computational workflow
of this project's analysis will be publicly available and used to create open
access online educational tools to aid in teaching computational analyses,
scientific reproducibility, and programming literacy. Finally, this workflow
will be put together to teach a half day workshop at the Ecological Society of
America conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines how the
relationship between bacterial diversity and secondary productivity is
constrained by the traits that determine community assembly. Through a
comparative genomic analysis of published and newly reconstructed bacterial
genomes from environmental genomic data, this project will identify DNA-inferred
(a) response traits that control the differences in bacterial community
composition and (b) effect traits that determine the presence or absence of a
diversity-productivity relationship. The identified genes and inferred traits
will help expand current understanding of how bacterial community assembly and
processes affect ecosystem function. This understanding will improve linkages
between microbial community and ecosystem ecology principles.