* 1701109
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Fast Multi-Echelon Optimization via Grouping
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Manuel Rossetti, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 199,917.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating optimization
and inventory segmentation research to fill the need for fast multi-echelon
inventory optimization within complex supply chains. The U.S. has over $2.2
trillion invested in business inventories; thus, companies require
computationally efficient algorithms that can minimize the cost associated with
managing these inventory assets. Multi-echelon inventory optimization determines
the correct levels of inventory across a network based on demand variability at
the various nodes, or echelons. It considers inventory levels holistically
across the entire supply chain while taking into account the impact of
inventories at any given point (or echelon) in the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in prototype algorithms in
the form of software services that result in a multi-echelon inventory
segmentation analyzer. This multi-echelon inventory segmentation analyzer has
computationally efficient optimization run times, near optimal solution quality,
and the ability to perform fast "what-if" analysis. These features provide the
following advantages: shorter times to find optimal solutions, higher quality
solutions, and the ability to mitigate risks through "what-if" analysis when
compared to currently available segmentation analytics
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology
gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application.
First, this research addresses the best group size when applying the
segmentation analytics to large-scale industrial datasets. Secondly, this
research optimizes the parameter settings associated with the algorithms in
order to determine the best settings with respect to the trade-off between
computational speed and solution quality. Lastly, this research performs
experiments in order to determine the best grouping criteria to use within the
segmentation analytics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel involved in
this project, including the graduate and undergraduate students, will receive
innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences through
experimental research methods, interaction with a small business, and software
development processes. The project engages Invistics Corporation in this
technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.