* 1701027
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Untangling Aboveground versus Belowground Plant Contributions to the Soil Organic Carbon Pool
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mark Bradford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 21,775.00

The largest terrestrial reservoir of carbon is in the soil, and most of this
carbon comes from plants. Yet, despite its importance, the factors that regulate
the movement of carbon from plants to soils remain poorly understood,
particularly the relative contribution of leaves and stems versus roots.
Assessing the vulnerability of soil carbon to disruption by environmental
changes depends on understanding the factors that control aboveground versus
belowground carbon from plants. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant
research will provide funds to conduct laboratory experiments to simulate the
movement of plant carbon to the soil, and to quantify how the source of plant
carbon dictates its fate in the soil. For example, the researchers will evaluate
whether carbon entering the soil from the shoots of the plant is stored more or
less effectively than carbon being supplied via roots. The objectives of this
work are: 1) to improve global carbon models to better describe the terrestrial
carbon cycle, and 2) inform practices in forestry, agriculture, and other types
of land management that are looking to maximize the amount of plant carbon
stored in soils. The investigators will also train students and develop
multimedia outreach activities with a natural history museum to inform the
broader public on the relevance of this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considerable
scientific debate exists around the relative roles of aboveground versus
belowground plant inputs as sources of soil organic carbon. This debate must be
resolved if the terrestrial carbon cycle is to be accurately modeled because
preliminary evidence suggests substantial differences in the fate of above- vs.
belowground inputs that may strongly influence rates of accumulation of soil
organic carbon pools and their dynamics. This research will conduct empirical
studies that test mechanistic differences that underpin aboveground versus
belowground plant carbon pathways, independent of the quantity and quality of
carbon flowing through them. This project uses a series of microcosm experiments
to test hypotheses about the mechanistic differences in how carbon flows through
aboveground and belowground plant pathways to the soil. The common plant carbon
compound glucose (isotopically labeled with the heavy stable isotope of carbon)
will be added to soil microcosms to assess key differences underlying
belowground versus aboveground pathways to the soil carbon pool. This research
will deepen knowledge of how soil carbon is formed from plant carbon and improve
the ability of models to predict carbon dynamics under future environmental
conditions.