* 1701406
* Debris Disks as Probes of Planetary System Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Meredith MacGregor, MacGregor               Meredith       A
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 01/31/2020
* USD 256,226.00

Meredith MacGregor is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the Carnegie
Institution Department of Terrestrial Magnetism. Using large telescopes,
MacGregor will undertake detailed observations of debris disks around nearby
stars. Studying debris disks in detail will allow astronomers to understand how
planetary systems form. Alongside this research, MacGregor will develop and
teach an astronomy course for high school students and teachers-in-training.

MacGregor will perform a comparative study of debris disk structure around
nearby stars using the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). The
ALMA observations will allow her to address basic dynamical processes that
control the evolution of debris disks and their interactions with planets. She
will also conduct observations of these disks with the upcoming James Webb Space
Telescope (JWST). Combined with the ALMA observations, the JWST observations
will allow her to examine radial variations in grain composition, connections
between grain composition and gas content, and possible evidence of dynamical
evolution. For the educational component of her work, MacGregor will develop and
teach a six-week course on 'Life in the Universe' for high school students and
teachers-in-training at the Carnegie Academy for Science Education.