* 1701284
* Studies of Large Mass-Ratio Black Hole Binaries Using Time-Domain Perturbation Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Richard Price, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 71,967.00

The field of gravitational wave astronomy has just experienced a major
transformation as a result of a recent breakthrough - the first ever discovery
of gravitational waves from a black hole binary system by the US LIGO detectors
in Louisiana and Washington. These waves were predicted by Einstein himself a
century ago, and had never been directly observed before. Upcoming observations
of these waves from similar binary systems will be used to obtain additional
information about exotic astrophysical objects in the Universe like black holes,
neutron stars, and others. LIGO has also generated significant spin-off
technologies, and drawn public and youth attention towards STEM disciplines.
This research project aids in the development of the theory-based science that
plays a very critical role in LIGO's mission. The main objective is to
understand important aspects of black hole systems using theoretical and
computational techniques. The project includes support for students and
therefore directly contributes to student mentorship, traineeship and retention
in an important STEM area. The computational skills that students develop are
highly "portable", and therefore will allow them access to a variety of career
options, including in areas of great national need. Previous research projects
by the PI have been discussed in the general media, and this work also has great
potential at being successful for outreach to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will contribute to a number of
challenging and important problems in the area of gravitational physics. The
main objective is the development and application of a time-domain computational
model for the gravitational wave emission from a large mass-ratio black hole
binary system using point-particle perturbation theory. Significant
contributions will be made to the development of effective-one-body and other
models for gravitational waveform generation, that will positively impact the
data analysis of current and future detectors (such as LIGO and future space-
borne missions). In addition, the planned work will bring about a much better
understanding of the plunge phase radiation and quasi-normal ringing in the
context of decaying black hole binary systems. The project will also contribute
to the gravitational wave data-analysis effort via the open and public
Einstein@Home project. All the research activities in the context of this
project will involve students and collaborations with other US and international
groups.