* 1701925
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The evolution of symbiotic polydnaviruses in Parapanteles parasitoid wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Kyle Parks, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,597.00

When two different species have a long-term and consistent interaction they
reciprocally influence each other's evolutionary fate. Understanding how these
interactions with other species have shaped an organism over time is key to
understanding how and why that organism is the way it is today, which is
fundamentally important to understanding the complexity and diversity of nature
and very useful when trying to control an organism with an economic consequence.
Many types of wasps inject their eggs into the body of another living insect,
which hatch into larvae that consume the host. Wasps in the subfamily
Microgastrinae (Hymenoptera: Braconidae) use a specialized virus, polydnavirus,
to prevent their hosts, caterpillars, from destroying their eggs and larvae.
Microgastrine wasps are one of the most important ecological and agricultural
natural enemies to the caterpillars of butterflies and moths, including many
agricultural pests. This research will compare the genomes polydnaviruses from a
small group of closely related microgastrines. This group of microgastrines was
at one point a single species that attacked 1-3 species of host caterpillars,
but evolved over time into about 20 species that each attack different
caterpillar species. The goal of this project is to identify which virus genes
changed the most and which changed the least as this group of wasps evolved into
several different species which have adapted to different hosts. This will
identify which virus genes have universally important functions for disabling
caterpillars' immune defenses and which genes may have specific functions that
are adapted to work in a specific host. This will contribute to understanding
how polydnaviruses help microgastrines adapt to new host caterpillars, how they
are able to adapt to thousands of different caterpillar immune systems, and why
there are so many species of microgastrines. This is especially important for
understanding why some groups of organisms evolve into many more species than
other groups of organisms, and for discovering new ways to control caterpillar
species, many of which are important agricultural pests.

Polydnavirus genes that interfere with host immunity are hypothesized to evolve
rapidly in an evolutionary arms-race with the host immune adaptations.
Polydnavirus genomes are integrated into the microgastrine wasps' nuclear
genome. Parapanteles Ashmead is a small microgastrine genus with well-studied
microgastrine host use patterns. A draft genome of Parapanteles continua has
already been sequenced and assembled and putative polydnavirus genes have been
identified within it. This research will sequence and assemble the genomes of 20
more Parapanteles species, annotate their polydnavirus genes, and
phylogenetically investigate how these genes have evolved, especially in
relation to host-switches.