* 1701842
* Digitization PEN: Mollusca and Arthropoda Biodiversity in the Colorado Plateau Region
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Lawrence Stevens, Museum of Northern Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2021
* USD 174,638.00

The insect collection at the Museum of Northern Arizona (MNA) spans nearly 100
years, focusing on the iconic Grand Canyon ecoregion and surrounding landscapes.
Many specimens were collected at springs - critical ecosystems that support
unusually high levels of biodiversity and unique species compared with the
surrounding landscape. Through this award 120,000 well-documented insect
specimen records and 1,000 high-resolution images will be digitized and
contributed to the InvertEBase Thematic Collection Network (TCN). MNA staff will
conduct three workshops on specimen identification and imaging, and will train
and mentor students, including those from under-represented groups, to learn
about museum curation, imaging, data management, and biodiversity research. The
MNA will also present an interactive exhibit on the biodiversity of
invertebrates on the Colorado Plateau and Grand Canyon. Designed to appeal to
all age groups, the exhibit will consist of photographs and information about
the region's most compelling species, with taxonomy, distribution, evolutionary
history, ecological roles, and conservation status. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
data digitized through this project will fill critical gaps on species
geographic ranges and contribute taxa currently not included in InvertEBase,
with a representation of Odonata, Mantodea, Blattodea, Hymenoptera, Coleoptera,
and non-insect terrestrial Arthropoda (Myriapoda, Arachnida and Crustacea).
Specimens include records of rare, endangered, and undescribed species.
MNAInverts, an online relational database, will serve as a platform to
facilitate identification and georeferencing of specimens, and to streamline
quality control procedures. Georeferencing of collection localities will
increase their value for range mapping and biogeographical studies. The resource
will include annotated, stacked, high resolution images of exemplar specimens
from the region. To facilitate identification, important morphological character
states essential for diagnosis at the species level will be noted. The project
will advance public and scientific understanding of the complexity and
importance of aquatic and terrestrial invertebrates to the ecological integrity
of the Southwest. The MNA's contribution of occurrence data and images will
augment the representation and distribution of Mollusca and Arthropoda in the
InvertEBase TCN and will be shared with iDigBio
(www.idigbio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.