* 1701781
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Female ornamentation in the White-shouldered Fairywren: Proximate mechanisms and adaptive function
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 19,529.00

Showy traits, or ornaments, have long captured the imagination of naturalists
and evolutionary biologists. One theory of selection provides a robust
explanation for variation in male coloration, or ornamentation, through the
process of females choosing increasingly elaborate males over numerous
generations. In contrast, the evolution of female ornamental coloration has
received comparatively little attention, and is not intuitively explained using
current theory. The White-shouldered Fairywren (Malurus alboscapulatus) of New
Guinea is an unusual species of bird in which female coloration varies across
populations, while male plumage remains constant. Experimental evidence suggests
that more ornamented coloration in females is associated with heightened
aggression and increased levels of testosterone. However, the connection between
behavior and the underlying process that has led to the appearance of female
ornamentation in this species remain unclear. This research aims to determine
what genes are responsible in male and female fairywrens for producing
ornamentation. The research addresses a core goal in evolutionary biology in
identifying the underlying mechanisms that are responsible for generating
specific appearances, but from a uniquely female-perspective approach.
Understanding the processes involved in generating patterns of biodiversity will
be communicated to local communities at our study sites in New Guinea and to
local school aged children in New Orleans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A contemporary
goal of evolutionary biology is to understand the genomic changes that control
phenotypic variation and how genomic variation generates diversity in traits.
The investigators will use high throughput sequencing techniques to explore the
underlying genetic control of plumage variation in the White-shouldered
Fairywren. They have two complementary goals: to use whole genome resequencing
to identify regions of the genome that may be under selection and to use RNA
sequencing to test for differences in gene expression between distinct female
phenotypes. The study will advance the understanding of the evolution of sex-
specific coloration by testing hypotheses for how changes in female ornaments
may arise on a mechanistic level, which can then be contextualized with data the
researchers have gathered on current adaptive function of the trait. The
strength of this system is that it presents an opportunity to compare variation
in female ornaments, rather than the more commonly observed and better studied
variation in male traits. Female ornaments are influenced not only by selective
forces acting on the traits, but also by the genetic mechanisms that produce the
phenotype. The proposed genetic work will build on prior research in this
species to provide a broad understanding of the evolution and function of female
ornamentation that integrates field observation, experimental manipulation, and
laboratory techniques. In doing so, the research is expected to provide a
comprehensive understanding of both the proximate basis for and ultimate
consequences of elaborate female coloration.