* 1701917
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Technology Translation: Demonstration and Validation of a Novel Field Drug Test System for Law Enforcement
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Richard Blair, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a new system
for identifying and detecting controlled substances to meet the needs of the
public and law enforcement for enhanced accuracy and flexibility.  This
technology will reduce the incidence of false identifications that can seriously
impact the lives and families of innocent individuals.  The combination of new
indicators, a cell phone enabled reader, and a dedicated analysis app is
important because it improves the accuracy of the identification and limits the
waste of public law enforcement resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will result in a beta system consisting of a test, a reader, and an app suitable
for deployment in volunteer departments. This low-cost, easy-to-use
identification system has the advantages of improved accuracy, data management,
and evidence preservation when compared to the leading competing presumptive
chemical tests in this market space. It is also more cost effective than current
field deployable instrumentation, which will facilitate wider adoption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses technology gaps in utility, scope
and user safety as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application. The team has very preliminary data on the identification of illicit
substances. Although these results are promising, this data set must be
improved. By working with crime labs and academic forensic labs with access to
these substances, as well as "street" drugs, the team will improve the quality
of the substance identification database to make it an effective tool. Critical
to producing a useable database is the ability to identify a wide range of
substances. The current drug-indicator works best for compounds with cyclic
amines like cocaine, PCP, and fentanyl. Relatively simple amines such as
methamphetamine, MDMA, JWH-synthetic cannabinoids, LSD, and DMT require a
different indicator. There are several candidates and the team will assess them
while improving their dataset for scheduled substances that contain cyclic
amines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is also the possibility of unwanted exposure
to the substance under test. The ability to identify a wide range of substances
does not, in itself, reduce the exposure risk. Currently users must handle the
unknown by applying a small sample onto a test strip. The team will work with
volunteer departments to produce a new sampling device that will allow substance
sampling with reduced exposure risk to the user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, the post-doctoral scholar in this project will receive technology
translation and managerial experiences through beta testing with volunteer law
enforcement agencies and the direction of software development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages IDem Systems to guide
commercialization aspects and Softechnologies Corporation to improve the mobile
app usability in this technology translation effort from research discovery
toward commercial reality. This effort will also rely on partnerships with crime
labs in Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Texas, Virginia, and California.