* 1701635
* Elliptic Fibrations and String Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Esole, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 08/31/2019
* USD 65,730.00

Research at the interface of physics and mathematics has a long history of being
beneficial to both fields. This project concerns string theory, one of the most
vibrant areas of research at this interface. As we explore the boundaries of the
regime of validity of string theory and address some of its theoretical
shortcomings and the conditions of its peaceful co-existence with the theory of
gravity, we rely on increasingly sophisticated mathematical models. F-theory is
one of the most geometric corners of string theory and relies on elliptic
fibrations to geometrically engineer models for particle physics and gravity at
very high energy. This project explores the mathematics that governs the physics
of F-theory in order to bring new insights to the mathematics of elliptic
fibrations. Elliptic fibrations are geometric spaces that locally look like a
long-exposure picture of an elliptic curve moving over another space. Elliptic
curves are some of the oldest but yet most prominent objects across mathematics.
They are studied in algebraic geometry and number theory and play a central role
in representation theory, cryptography (where they are used to secure internet's
transactions), computer modeling, and theoretical physics. This multi-
disciplinary project will explore connections between these mathematical and
physical concepts and will also encourage graduate students both in mathematics
and physics to study problems at the interface of physics and mathematics. The
PI will also reach out to students from underrepresented groups to inspire them
to participate in the scientific endeavor.

Geometric engineering is the construction of physical systems by geometric
methods. This is a natural approach in the context of string theory, where the
geometry of extra dimensions and the dualities between different formulation and
regimes of the theory allow for a geometric formulation of many physical
constraints. This project focuses on the geometry of elliptic fibrations as seen
from the point of view of string theory, with strong interest in their topology,
arithmetic properties, and connection to gauge theories, Grand Unified Theories,
and topological defects. The research will also address the problem of
resolution of singularities of Weierstrass models and its connection to Mori's
theory and representation theory and will explore the structure of the singular
fibers of elliptic fibrations over higher dimensional spaces. The PI will also
study the physics of topological defects such as cosmic string solutions using
new models of elliptic fibrations. A central theme of this project is the
prominent role of singularities, their resolutions, and their topological
invariants.