* 1701101
* GEOPATHS-IMPACT: Geosciences Opportunities with Fossils, Rocks, &amp;Water to Attract underRepresented Discoverers (GO FoRWARD)
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Margaret Fraiser, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 319,494.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Of all STEM fields, the geosciences student and workforce
populations are the least racially and ethnically diverse. Increasing
participation of underrepresented groups in the geosciences is not only a social
imperative with inherent benefits to better society through more diverse
perspectives in the workforce, but it is a necessity for the prospect of the
geosciences discipline which has a predicted shortage of skilled scientists
within the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;The extremely low numbers of underrepresented
students majoring in geosciences may be a reflection that the geosciences
disciplines have barriers beyond other STEM fields. This project addresses some
of those barriers through a pilot project at two partner institutions in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin: an urban research university and a two-year technical
college. Early career college students from underrepresented groups will be
invited to participate in geosciences research opportunities, community
development, and education about public- and private-sector jobs while receiving
close mentoring from faculty and more advanced students. The primary goals of
this program are twofold: 1) to increase the numbers of students from
underrepresented minority groups selecting geosciences majors, and 2) to smooth
a pathway for students from a two-year college to become geosciences majors at a
neighboring 4 year institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;GO
FoRWARD (Geosciences Opportunities with Fossils, Rocks, &amp; Water to Attract
underRepresented Discoverers) is an initiative for underrepresented minority
students in their first two years of college to explore geosciences research and
career options. The two institutions working closely together are the University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and Milwaukee Area Technical College. &lt;br/&gt;The
paucity of underrepresented persons in the geosciences can be attributed to
several barriers, including lack of exposure to the discipline; stereotype
threat; and imposter syndrome. The aim of GO FoRWARD is to help mitigate these
impediments via five proven strategies which are integrated throughout the
project activities: 1) Early exposure to Geosciences; 2) Emphasis on employment;
3) Dynamic experiences; 4) Creating a sense of community; and 5) Strong
mentorship. Two additional strategies will be utilized to further facilitate the
academic transition for students from MATC to a four-year institution: 1)
targeted advising; and 2) smoothing educational pathways. &lt;br/&gt;Students
will be invited to participate in an intensive summer geosciences research
experience and follow-up research options throughout the academic year. Career
information and community building will be integrated throughout the program to
address barriers.&lt;br/&gt;Success for the GO FoRWARD pilot study will be
determined by student participation at various stages of the project and
documented participation of underrepresented minority student participants in
additional geosciences courses and degree programs. This pilot project will test
whether strategies employed in other STEM fields can be modified and used to
attract underrepresented learners to geosciences degree programs and careers.