* 1701259
* GP-EXTRA: Expanding GeoFORCE Alaska, a Pathway to STEM Degrees for Rural, First-Generation, and Alaska Native Students
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Sarah Fowell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2021
* USD 248,110.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Residents of predominantly Alaska Native villages holding
degrees in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields bring
valuable perspectives to decisions regarding management of cultural and natural
resources. However, during the 2014-2015 school year, 37.6% of Alaska Native
students dropped out of Alaskan public schools (education.alaska.gov/stats/). At
the college level, Alaska Native students are underrepresented in University of
Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) STEM majors. GeoFORCE Alaska is a four-year, field-based,
summer geoscience program that has successfully raised graduation rates in rural
Alaskan high schools and increased the diversity of students pursuing college
degrees in STEM fields. The program applies the cohort model, leading the same
group of high school students on 10-day field academies during four consecutive
summers. The curriculum builds across the program, giving students a chance to
apply the scientific method to relevant questions at spectacular geological
locations. Now in its fifth year, GeoFORCE Alaska has served 54 students in two
cohorts. 76% of these students identify as Alaska Native, reflecting the
demographics of their communities. A stable base of industry sponsors funds one
summer academy per year, limiting recruitment of a new cohort of 8th and 9th
grade students to once every four years. By funding participant support for a
second summer academy during 2018 and 2019, this expansion grant will double the
frequency of recruiting and expand the region served, thereby offering the
GeoFORCE experience to interested applicants in remote communities throughout
northern and interior Alaska. Based on results thus far, doubling the number of
GeoFORCE participants will raise high school graduation rates in the school
districts served and increase the number and diversity of rural Alaskan students
attending college and pursuing STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;Launched in 2012 by the University of Alaska Fairbanks in
partnership with the longstanding GeoFORCE Texas program and adapted for a
cohort of rural, predominantly Alaska Native students, GeoFORCE Alaska employs
best educational practices as established by research in order to engage and
prepare future STEM majors. Through a combination of active learning, high
academic standards, mentorship and teamwork, participants acquire habits that
promote academic success and gain the confidence to pursue STEM degrees. The
goals of GeoFORCE Alaska are: 1) Promote high school graduation; 2) Increase the
number of rural students attending college and pursuing STEM degrees; and 3)
Diversify Alaska?s technical workforce. Program success in achieving these goals
is assessed via qualitative metrics, including an annual survey of participants,
and quantitative metrics, including participant retention, comparison of
participants? high school graduation rates with rates for their school districts
as a whole, and long-term tracking of college matriculation, persistence,
majors, and degrees earned. &lt;br/&gt;The inaugural cohort of 18 students from
the North Slope Borough completed the Fourth-Year Academy in summer 2015. 94% of
these students graduated from high school and 72% are going to college. Of
these, 85% chose STEM majors, and 38% will pursue undergraduate degrees in
geoscience. A second cohort of 34 rising 9th and 10th graders entered the
program in 2016. At the request of Alaska Native Regional Corporation sponsors,
this cohort was recruited from both the Northwest Arctic and North Slope
boroughs. On an exit survey following the 2016 First-Year Academy, 100% of
participants indicated that they learned a lot, 97% made new friends, and 94%
increased their interest in science. The success of the first two cohorts
indicates that GeoFORCE Alaska is highly effective as a means of raising high
school graduation rates in remote Alaskan villages and increasing the
participation of rural, Alaska Native, and first-generation college students in
STEM majors. An expansion grant will significantly increase the number of
students and school districts served by the program over the next two years,
with the goals of doubling the number of GeoFORCE alumni entering STEM majors by
fall 2022 and attracting additional regional sponsors to sustain a biennial
recruiting schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.