* 1701921
* WiFiUS:  Collaborative Research:  Ultra-low latency and High Reliability for Wireless IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Randall Berry, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 149,823.00

The emerging Internet-of-Things (IoT) offers the promise of a wide range of new
applications including control of critical infrastructure, mobile health-care,
and industrial control. A key challenge for supporting many of these
applications is to enable wireless networks to provide ulta-low latency and high
reliability services. This project is developing new approaches to meet this
challenge by furthering fundamental understanding of the control of wireless
networks. As part of WiFiUS, the project is strengthening ties between the
United States and Finland. Through the involvement of graduate students and the
incorporation of results from the research into courses, the project is helping
to develop the next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is developing a new framework for supporting ultra-low latency and high
reliability network services for emerging Internet-of-Things applications. These
emerging applications often impose stringent requirements on both latency and
reliability that cannot be met with existing techniques. The main idea behind
this project is that latency and reliability are inherently coupled and must be
addressed not just at the physical layer but also at higher network layers. The
project's comprehensive research agenda addresses latency and reliability at
various time scales, ranging from packet time scale and MAC layer scheduling to
network deployment and the economics of their services. Specific tasks being
targeted include: &lt;br/&gt;1)Packet time scale optimization: Issues here
include how messages are divided into packets, the length of time-slot used to
send packets, and various physical layer parameters; &lt;br/&gt;2)MAC time-scale
optimization: The focus here is on scheduling traffic across different flows so
as to meet the latency and reliability requirements of IoT tasks;
&lt;br/&gt;3)Network level time-scale: The focus here is on end-to-end
reliability over a multi-hop network, by exploiting network diversity to ensure
an adequate level of reliability; and &lt;br/&gt;4)Network planning time-scale:
Issues here include how networks are deployed and how sharing agreements are
formed among network operators to enhance network diversity and reliability.