* 1701691
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Quantifying Rapid Adaptation in an Aquatic Invasive Algal Species.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kenneth Karol, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,751.00

This project will investigate genetic factors that have enabled the non-native
algal species, starry stonewort, to establish and invade northern lakes in the
United States. Aquatic invasive species have serious impacts on human and
natural communities, and are very expensive to manage. Starry stonewort is
considered rare in its native range of Europe and Asia, but has spread
prolifically and become invasive since it was discovered in North America in the
1970s. The researchers will compare whole genomic data for algal specimens
collected from both the native and non-native range and at different time
periods to identify genes responsible for the rapid adaptation of this species
to novel habitats in the United States. Results of this work will help in the
development of tools and strategies for managing harmful invasive species. The
project will involve mentoring of undergraduates, including of individuals from
groups that are underrepresented in the sciences. In addition, the project will
develop an algae diversity curriculum for high school and other K-12 students in
New York City. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomes and genes of Nitellopsis obtusa
will be surveyed to test the hypothesis that allele frequency shifts in this
species are associated with rapid adaptation to novel chemical and nutrient
regimes and novel climatic conditions of the invasive range. Genetic data will
be collected from both fresh material and natural history collections, in the
form of dried herbarium specimens, from the native and invasive ranges, at time
points early and late in the invasion. This spatial and temporal sampling will
allow allele frequency shifts to be tracked through time, to determine if
significant changes have occurred in the introduced range. The nuclear genome of
N. obtusa from native and invasive individuals will be sequenced to test gene
content and organization relative to other green algae and land plants. A total
of 48 candidate genes, representing an array of key functions, will be sequenced
from the temporally stratified native and invasive samples. Results will lay the
groundwork for future genotype-to-phenotype studies in this species and
phylogenetic and genomic analyses of green algae.