* 1701289
* Dissertation Research: Revealing the spatial distribution of risk in animal groups
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Matthew Grobis, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 13,190.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Animal groups are remarkable for their ability
to interact with the environment in a way that individuals are unable to, such
as through migration, collective intelligence, or predator avoidance. For
example, predators attacking highly coordinated fish schools have little success
due to how efficient information transmission is in the group. The technological
challenges of filming and tracking large groups of animals have limited our
understanding of how they are so effective at predator avoidance, but recent
advances in computer vision and high-speed filming now allow us to accurately
recreate these information transmission networks and show how information moves
through animal groups. Insights into these networks have put forth predictions
that are at odds with long-established hypotheses on where in the group animals
are safest: classic behavioral ecology theory suggests the center, while new
network data suggests the edge of the group. The research carried out here will
for the first time test these competing hypotheses. Live interactions between a
northern pike predator and schools of golden shiners will be filmed in the
laboratory and then recreated from a sensory network perspective using
sophisticated computer vision software to better understand how information is
transferred and the ramifications of individual location in the group. The
experiment will provide insights into the fields of behavioral ecology, sensory
ecology, game theory, and network science. It will provide scientific and
statistical training to graduate and undergraduate students, and findings will
be disseminated at scientific conferences, through blogging, and through science
outreach to local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;For decades, Hamilton's Selfish Herd theory has served as the
expectation for the spatial distribution of predation risk in animal groups. In
this model, cohesive grouping emerges as animals move to position other
individuals between themselves and a potential hidden predator, hence minimizing
their "domain of danger". Support for this theory has been mixed for mobile
animal groups such as fish schools, however, because the Selfish Herd theory
does not allow for prey to respond to the predator. Real predator-prey
interactions, on the other hand, are dynamic. Until very recently, directly
testing Hamilton's Selfish Herd theory in fish schools has been impossible due
to technological limitations on the quality and quantity of behavior data.
Recent advances in computer vision and high-speed cameras, however, now allow
for accurate measures of the fine-scale movements of all members of fish
schools, as well as estimations of the visual information available to them.
Networks constructed from this visual information are an accurate predictor of
how movement decisions transfer through schools of fish. Here research will
directly test the non-exclusive hypotheses of whether spatial positioning or
network structure is a more accurate predictor of mortality risk by filming
predator-prey interactions between golden shiners and a northern pike predator
in the laboratory.