* 1701942
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution and Function of Farina in the Desiccation-Tolerant Notholaenid Ferns (Pteridaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Tzu-Tong Kao, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,670.00

Ferns are commonly thought to be restricted to shady and moist habitats, but
notholaenid ferns are adapted to, and have diversified within, the deserts of
the southwestern United States and Northern Mexico. Notholaenids ferns become
dormant during the dry season but quickly rehydrate and restore photosynthetic
activity when moisture returns. This drought adaptation is hypothesized to be
related to a waxy substance called 'farina', primarily composed of plant
pigments, that form a whitish-to-yellowish layer on the leaf undersurface. When
leaves curl up in response to water stress, this leaf surface is directly
exposed to sunlight. Two primary functional hypotheses for the waxy layer have
been proposed: 1) it acts as a 'barrier' to help reduce water loss from
evaporation; 2) it acts as a 'sunscreen' to protect water-stressed leaves from
damage caused by overheating and UV-radiation. This study aims to investigate
the evolution and function of farina in notholaenid ferns and address a critical
gap in understanding how plants cope with drought stress and high solar
irradiance by using a combination of anatomical, biochemical, biogeographical,
ecophysiological, and molecular phylogenetic approaches. These data will provide
new insights into the functional role of farina on fern leaves and drought
resistance more generally that may be applied to other plant groups. One
graduate student will be trained in a diversity of approaches, and a new
undergraduate training module will be developed using ecological niche modeling
to investigate the patterns of plant evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
has three primary objectives: The first is key to understanding the evolution of
farina in this group, and involves reconstructing the interspecific phylogenetic
relationships among notholaenid ferns using DNA sequences from both nuclear and
plastid markers. Objective two will focus on Notholaena standleyi, a widespread
species with three well-recognized flavonoid chemotypes. The phylogenetic
relationships, flavonoid constituents, ploidy levels, and geographic
distribution of these chemotypes will be explored to determine whether
polyploidy and abiotic niche divergence have helped to shape their current
parapatric distributions. Objective three will investigate the proposed
ecophysiological functions of farina by measuring gas exchange rates, water-use
efficiency, and photosynthetic-recovery rates after drought treatment, before
and after removing the farina. Detailed anatomical and optical properties of
farina will also be examined.