* 1701384
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Early social experience and epigenetic mediation of adult phenotypes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Kay Holekamp, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,151.00

Rodent models, studies of captive primates, and data from human populations
indicate that early life experiences have long-lasting effects on health, and
that early life experiences and longevity often vary with socioeconomic status.
This study utilizes existing data and archived biospecimens from a long-term
field study of a gregarious mammal with a social structure permitting
comparisons among status classes to assess effects of the early social
environment on temperament and fitness. Effects of the early environment to be
assessed include quality of maternal care, peer interactions and social status.
Available data and specimens permit exploration of relationships among the early
social environment, mechanisms of gene expression, circulating stress hormones,
individual temperament, and longevity. The methods employed include high-
throughput next-generation DNA sequencing techniques, bioinformatics and
advanced statistical methods. Broader impacts of this work include a deeper
understanding of social and molecular determinants of adverse stress phenotypes.
Ultimately, characterization of the early life social factors that shape adult
stress phenotypes in free-living, gregarious mammals will facilitate
generalization of the research findings to other social species, including our
own. In addition to supporting the scientific work above, this project will
facilitate a workshop series on research methods and data analysis designed
specifically for members of the African Graduate Student Association at Michigan
State University. Social experiences early in life have lasting effects on adult
temperament and stress phenotype, often through epigenetic modification of
genes, and thus patterns of gene expression, that coordinate the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis. Using data from the MSU Mara Hyena Project, a 28-year
study of free-living, gregarious hyenas in Kenya, this proposal will investigate
how social factors relate to adverse stress phenotypes, and elucidate the extent
to which this relationship is mediated by DNA methylation. Funding from this
project will support two research goals. First, this proposal will use Reduced
Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS) to identify differentially methylated
regions (DMRs) of the hyena genome that are associated with high vs. low stress
phenotypes based on assessment of adult hyena temperament and stress hormones,
as well as differences in early social experiences including maternal rank,
maternal care, and interactions with clan mates. DMRs that are predictive of the
adult stress phenotypes will be identified using Mixed Model Association for
Count data via data Augmentation. The second goal is to use mediation analysis
to assess whether the identified socially-induced, stress-related epigenetic
pathways mediate the effect of early experience on longevity. Findings from this
work will improve mechanistic understanding of how social factors affect
behavioral and physiological stress phenotypes in an important new animal model.
Because a proximate epigenetic mechanism (DNA methylation) is assessed in
relation to an ultimate consequence (fitness), this work represents a large step
forward in terms of understanding the role of epigenetics in evolution - a
concept that has been largely unexplored.