* 1701706
* Dissertation Research:  Adaptive responses to urbanization in the tropical lizard Anolis cristatellus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Liam Revell, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,756.00

This project will study the process of adaptation to urban environments by the
tropical lizard, Anolis cristatellus. Urbanization involves drastic habitat
modifications that very frequently has negative effects on biodiversity, but a
few plants and animals have the ability to persist and thrive. Understanding how
these organisms are adapting to urbanization is therefore necessary for
predicting future changes to the biosphere. Prior research has shown that Anolis
cristatellus has adapted to urban environment through changes in its morphology
and physiology. This project will identify genes associated with that
adaptation. the result will be new insights into the genetic basis of rapid
contemporary adaptation in this and other species and will inform conservation
decisions in a world increasingly transformed by human activity. The project
will also train undergraduate students, including individuals from groups
underrepresented in the sciences, and will create a citizen science project to
catalogue urban wildlife in Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
employs a genomic approach to identify previously unknown trait shifts related
to urban adaptation. The project will use genomic techniques to target
transcribed genes of lizards from urban and forest populations across its native
range in Puerto Rico. Three common approaches to detect natural selection at the
genetic level will be used: the measurement of between-population
differentiation, the identification of selective sweeps, and the identification
of gene regions with function-altering polymorphism. These methods will enable
the identification of gene regions under selection, differential adaptive
responses between urban and forest populations, and parallel adaptive responses
between urban populations. In addition, the research will identify functional
associations of gene regions under selection and will test for correlations
between loci under selection and environmental differences between urban and
natural habitats.