* 1701427
* Spin Polarization Spectroscopy in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 594,999.00

Nontechnical description: As the miniaturization of electronic circuits
approaches its limitation, there is a need to find alternative ways to generate,
manipulate, transfer and detect information while reducing the energy needed for
such operations. One approach to achieve this is to use the magnetic behavior of
electrons, otherwise known as spin. Using the spin in order to implement such a
new type of information processing is called "spintronics". The research in this
project focuses on studying physical mechanisms that allow for spintronics in
carbon-based, so-called organic semiconductors. These studies include in
particular the control and manipulation, the transport and the very sensitive
detection of magnetic phenomena in thin plastic films. Spintronics devices based
on such novel materials are engineered, fabricated and tested using electrical,
magnetic and optical measurements. In addition, the integration of the large
arsenal of experimental efforts serves to efficiently educate graduate and
undergraduate students participating in these interdisciplinary research
projects. Separately, the research team is also reaching out to pre-college
students in order to inform them on career opportunities and the technological
potential of the Physical and Natural Sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The goal of this project is to improve the understanding of
electron spin polarization effects in organic semiconductors with tunable
strength of the spin-orbit coupling. Specifically, the project aims to develop
an understanding of the physical nature of spin transport in this materials
class. The research is focused on spin polarized charge carrier ensembles using
two spin-polarization techniques: (i) spin-pumping by resonantly generated spin-
waves in ferromagnetic substrates, which is detected by the inverse spin-Hall
effect; and (ii) thermally induced equilibrium spin-polarization obtained from
high magnetic fields at cryogenic temperatures, which is detected by field-
induced circular polarization emission. Spintronics devices such as spin-valves,
spin-diodes, and spin organic light emitting diodes are engineered, fabricated
and tested using electrical, magnetic and optical means. This project integrates
the University of Utah's large arsenal of experimental capabilities, including
polymer and small molecule deposition, magneto-transport, electrically-detected
ferromagnetic resonance, magnon-related spin-pumping, modeling as well as device
fabrication, processing and testing. Together, these unfold the broad impact of
an entirely new class of electronics for educating a cadre of graduate and
undergraduate students who are involved in the execution of this project, and
the outreach that is made to local High School and Middle School communities.