* 1701057
* PFI:AIR-TT: Aircraft Icing Detection System
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 199,992.00

This Accelerating Innovation Research-Technology Transfer (AIR-TT) project
focuses on the transformation of a microwave microstrip resonator developed for
measuring soil water content into an aircraft icing detection instrument.
Microwave microstrip resonators have been used to measure soil water content for
decades. A new technique for fingerprinting the presence of de-icing fluid,
liquid water or ice and quantifying their amount on the surface of the resonator
was developed at the University of Michigan. This project focuses on
translating this discovery into a new type of instrument for aircraft ice
detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Icing is hazardous to aircraft and occurs in
ways that are difficult for pilots to detect. In addition, icing can occur
throughout the year in nearly all regions of the globe, making detection and
avoidance an important component of flight safety procedures. Unfortunately,
existing icing detection systems are not capable of detecting ice directly on
the structure of airplanes, where ice accumulation could disrupt the airflow and
cause loss of control. The aircraft icing detection system developed in this
project fills this gap. A prototype microstrip resonator will be developed that
will be mounted flush with the aircraft surface. Work will be done to correlate
the frequencies and resonance modes to distinguish between ice, water, and
spongy ice for a range of ice thicknesses on the aircraft surface. It is
expected that the work will show that the prototype can measure the thickness of
films of water and de-icing fluid ranging from sub-millimeter to a few
millimeters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also contributes to the education
of various graduate students. The project engages master students in technology
translation efforts from research discovery toward commercial products. The
students will gain hands on experience while being mentored by academics and
practitioners.