* 1701843
* Designing Novel Tunable Colloids Via Inverse Statistical Mechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Salvatore Torquato, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 423,413.00

CBET - 1701843&lt;br/&gt;PI: Torquato, Salvatore&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design
of many advanced materials relies on the ability to devise building blocks, such
as colloids and polymers, that interact with each other in specific ways to
self-organize and form materials with novel electronic, mechanical or optical
properties. Scientists and engineers predict this process by specifying an
interaction potential between the building blocks and then computing the
material structure and its properties that arise from self-organization. This
award will support theoretical and computational research to discover new
materials using the opposite or "inverse" approach. In the inverse approach,
designers start by specifying the desired material structure and properties and
then discover the required interactions between the building blocks that will
produce the desired structure The project will emphasize finding interactions
that can be realized experimentally by combining currently available colloidal
interactions. Hence, the results should provide guidance to experimentalists to
fabricate designer colloids. The inverse approach will provide new ways to
control the degree of order/disorder of the material to achieve novel
properties, which will accelerate the discovery of materials by design. The
project will support training of graduate students and will provide
opportunities for undergraduates to participate in research. Algorithms
resulting from the research will be made freely available to researchers and
will be used to enhance student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research for materials discovery by
inverse statistical-mechanical optimization techniques. Inverse statistical-
mechanical methods will be formulated and applied to optimize many-particle
interactions to achieve targeted colloidal structures with desired physical
properties. Inverse statistical-mechanical methods allow for a new mode of
thinking about the structure and physical properties of condensed phases of
matter and are ideally suited for materials discovery by design. However,
inverse techniques thus far have considered potential functions that were not
constrained to be experimentally realizable. A central aim of this project is to
optimize both isotropic and anisotropic pair interactions that are constrained
by what can be achieved by a combination of currently available colloidal
repulsive and attractive interactions, including excluded-volume repulsions,
depletion interactions, Van der Waals forces, forces induced by functionalizing
the particle surface, and electrostatic repulsions. Potential functions will be
"tailored" to achieve robust self-assembly of unique targeted crystal, liquid
and amorphous states of matter, including exotic disordered hyperuniform
systems. Examples of novel materials that will be designed include those for
photonics and color sensing applications, negative or vanishing thermal
expansion coefficients, tunable negative and positive Poisson ratios, optimal
transport, electromagnetic and mechanical properties, and mesoporous solids for
applications in catalysis, separations, sensors and electronics.