* 1701072
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biotic interactions and the geographic range limit of Clarkia xantiana across a complex environmental gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* John Benning, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2019
* USD 19,921.00

It is a longstanding question why some species are found across vast portions of
the earth (e.g., dandelions), and some species only occur in small patches of
habitat. Similarly, the fact that some species are expanding their ranges
rapidly (e.g., invasive species) while many are not remains difficult to
explain. Figuring out what enables, or prevents, plants from growing in certain
areas has far reaching consequences for management of invasive species,
continued productivity of crops in variable environments, and protection of
threatened organisms. This project uses a Californian plant species, (Clarkia
xantiana), restricted to a small area of Southern California to explore the
environmental factors limiting species distributions. Studies often only
consider climatic factors, such as temperature and precipitation, as drivers of
these distributions. But researchers are increasingly realizing the role
microorganisms play in affecting plant growth and distribution. This project
will characterize soil microbial communities within and outside C. xantiana's
native range, and use a novel field experiment to test how microbes and rainfall
may interact to limit C. xantiana's range. The researchers will also conduct a
series of educational field trips with a local middle school to teach students
about hypothesis testing, scientific experiments, and the natural history of
Southern California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses next generation
sequencing and a manipulative field experiment to explore interactions between
soil microbial communities, precipitation, and plant traits, and how these
factors influence the geographic distribution of Clarkia xantiana ssp. xantiana
in the foothills of the Southern Sierra Nevada. Multivariate statistical
analyses will be used to examine patterns of community shifts across geographic
space, focusing on those microbial taxa differentiating sites within and outside
C. xantiana's distributional limit. An in situ soil microbial transplant
experiment, paired with a rainfall manipulation treatment, will quantify the
main and interactive effects of these factors on fitness outside the range. PVC
growth cores installed in the ground at sites outside the range edge will be
used to manipulate local soil microbial environments surrounding individual
xantiana plants via inoculation with microbial communities from inside the
range. This is paired with a rainfall manipulation treatment in a split-plot
design, where half of the plots will receive 50% rainfall addition. The effects
of site, rainfall treatment, inoculum, and all two-way interactions on
components of lifetime fitness and phenology will be analyzed using ANOVA.