* 1701659
* Rationality and Irrationality in Families of Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Brendan Hassett, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2022
* USD 179,376.00

When can we write down all the solutions of a polynomial equation? We seek
equations that can be parametrized with rational functions. These are used in
mapmaking (stereographic projection), computer graphics, and modeling problems.
Indeed, parametrizations are often the most efficient way to render geometric
objects as screen images. Mathematicians have developed a rich theory for
deciding when such parametrizations are possible. This project will advance this
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An algebraic variety is rational if it can be
obtained from projective space by a sequence of algebraic modifications. Given a
family of smooth complex projective varieties, it is difficult to say which
members are rational or irrational, or even to formulate qualitative results
about the locus of rational members. The PI will use the technique of
decomposition of the diagonal, and related tools from deformation theory, Hodge
theory and classical geometry, to shed light on this question. The PI and his
collaborators have recently shown that rationality is not a deformation
invariant property: There are families of smooth complex projective varieties
with both rational and irrational members. Despite examples, like cubic
fourfolds, that have been extensively studied, there are no cases where the loci
of rational and irrational members have been precisely described. The PI will
refine and make effective the decomposition of the diagonal technique to clarify
which members of a family are irrational - can they be expressed in Hodge-
theoretic terms? At the same time, the PI will advance constructive techniques
to exhibit rational and unirational parametrizations with prescribed properties.