* 1701797
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: oVert: Open Exploration of Vertebrate Diversity in 3D
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Carol Spencer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 79,308.00

The oVert (openVertebrate) Thematic Collection Network (TCN) will generate and
serve high-resolution digital three-dimensional (3D) data for internal anatomy
across vertebrate diversity. Via a network of digitization centers across the
US, more than 20,000 fluid-preserved specimens representing over 80% of the
living genera of vertebrates will be CT-scanned. This will provide broad
coverage for exploration and research on all major groups of vertebrates.
Contrast-enhanced scans will be generated that reveal soft tissues and organs.
This collection of digital imagery and three-dimensional volumes will be open
for exploration, download, and use to address questions related to the discovery
of new species, documenting patterns of anatomical diversity and growth, and
testing hypotheses of function and evolution. The resource will provide
unprecedented global access to valuable specimens in US museum collections and
will develop best practices and guidelines for high-throughput CT-scanning,
including efficient workflows, preferred resolutions, and archival formats that
optimize the variety of downstream applications. Museum specialists will be
trained on the generation, curation, and distribution of 3D data, researchers in
using 3D anatomical data, and high school and undergraduate students in the
tools for creating 3D anatomical models. To drive the use of these digital
specimens by K-12 STEM educators, teacher-driven workshops that generate freely
available lesson plans focused on specific science standards that are based on
digital and printed 3D models of specimens in US museum
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data generated by oVert will serve as a
catalyst for diverse research projects focused on understanding the vertebrate
morphological diversity and will dramatically increase the accessibility of
specimens housed in US scientific collections. These anatomical phenotypes
represent a common currency that facilitates integration across the fields of
taxonomy, evolution, developmental biology, comparative physiology, functional
anatomy, paleontology, and ecology. The x-ray computed tomography (CT) scanning
gemerates high-resolution digital anatomical data, represented as both 2D image
stacks and 3D volumes and surfaces. With these 3D digital specimens, US and
international research communities will be able to (1) diagnose, describe, and
infer patterns of relationships among both living and extinct vertebrates, (2)
test hypotheses of morphological evolution such as patterns of disparity,
modularity, and phenotype-environment correlations, (3) develop structure-
function models for testing hypotheses about morphological adaptations related
to, e.g., feeding and locomotion, and (4) explore relationships between brain
and nervous system anatomy and both sensory and musculoskeletal function. The 3D
data will be distributed globally through MorphoSource, an on-line data
repository for 3D biological specimen data, which will capture standardized
metadata, ingest legacy data from previous and existing projects, and will
supply media information to data aggregators including iDigBio
(www.idigbio.org). Training workshops, both on-site at participating
institutions and national society meetings of scientists and educators are
planned to foster innovation and capabilities for users of 3D image data.