* 1701931
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Determining anucleated sperm function in Lepidoptera
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Andrew Mongue, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 19,651.00

The function of sperm cells is traditionally thought to be a way for males to
transfer DNA to eggs and create offspring. Sperm cells that do not carry DNA
cannot fertilize an egg, thus the existence of such sperm cells in butterflies
and moths is puzzling. Almost all of these insects make two types of sperm: both
traditional, DNA-bearing sperm, and a second type that lacks DNA. In all of
these cases, males make far more of this DNA-lacking sperm than traditional
sperm. The sheer abundance of this sperm type implies it plays some yet-unknown
functional role in reproduction. This proposal aims to uncover the evolutionary
significance of these DNA-lacking sperm cells. The research will also aid in the
development of technologies that will allow scientists to maintain important
genetically modified lineages in a way that is both cheaper and less vulnerable
to failure than traditional rearing methods. Such protocols could even be
extended to threatened species to create a gene bank. Outreach to the public
will occur via summer science workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of
multiple sperm types by a single male has independently arisen in many animal
lineages. In all well-studied cases, evidence suggests that only one type of
sperm retains its ability to fertilize eggs but the function of these non-
fertilizing sperm remains unclear. Nowhere is this more apparent than in
butterflies and moths; males of this order produce a secondary sperm type that
lacks nuclear DNA. These anucleated cells represent a significant investment for
a male, outnumbering their nucleated sperm by 20-to-1, but cannot possibly
fertilize eggs to directly increase male fitness. Several hypotheses have been
proposed since the discovery of anucleated sperm to explain the existence of
anucleated sperm, but to-date no rigorous tests have been undertaken. This
project will develop and refine artificial insemination protocols in two
lepidopteran species that differ in mating strategy in order to thoroughly test
the function of anucleated sperm in different selective backgrounds with a
common framework.