* 1701656
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Macroevolutionary drivers of digit reduction in fossil horses
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Stephanie E Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2019
* USD 15,983.00

This study uses the rich fossil record of the horse family, combined with
information about changing habitats and anatomy in horse evolution, to test the
causes and consequences of digit reduction. Domestic horses and their relatives
(zebras and donkeys) are large, grazing animals with slender limbs that end in a
single digit (the hoof). The evolution of today?s horses is traditionally
explained as simple ongoing adaptation to grasslands: as grasslands gradually
took over from forests, the early dog-sized, three-toed horses evolved into
large, single-toed grazers. Their teeth also became longer to deal with abrasive
grass, while their digits reduced so they could run faster or more efficiently
across open spaces. However, this textbook explanation is oversimplified and
remains largely untested. This study will shed light on a significant
evolutionary transition that culminated in one of humans? most culturally and
economically important species. Results will be featured in the Harvard Museum
of Natural History (HMNH), whose fossil horse exhibit currently shows the
oversimplified pattern of evolution. They will also be shared via lectures
designed to engage with members of the public, as well as teacher education
events at the HMNH that will bring this project into the classroom. A variety of
hypotheses have been proposed for the selective pressures driving digit
reduction in the horse lineage: speed for predator escape, economy of movement
over open grasslands with scarce resources, and compensation for increasing body
size. However, none have been explicitly tested with modern methods. By
integrating information on fossil occurrences, trait change, phylogenetic
relationships, ecology, and environment, this project aims to directly test
potential evolutionary causes of digit reduction in horses. Specifically, this
research will use ecological and phylogenetic comparative methods to assess the
following questions: 1) Did tridactyl and monodactyl horses overlap in space and
time or did they occupy separate niches? 2) Are changes in digit morphology,
body mass, tooth height, or habitat correlated across the horse phylogeny? 3) Do
changes in digit morphology or environment influence speciation and extinction
rates in the fossil record? The results of this project will provide
quantitative support (or lack thereof) for the cause of digit reduction in
fossil horses, filling in a key gap in our understanding of why this major
evolutionary transition happened.