* 1701450
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Consequences of environmentally-mediated resistance and immunity for disease dynamics in a changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Leslie Decker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,097.00

All animals, from butterflies to humans, must defend themselves against
diseases. Like us, many animals have immune systems that help them to fight
diseases. However, many animals also use medicines. Animals often use plants as
sources of medicine and must search their local ?green pharmacy? for the
appropriate drugs. These natural medicines are used together with the immune
system to help the animal fight infection. But what happens when the quality of
plant-based medicines changes because the environment changes? Scientists do not
fully understand how our rapidly changing world will affect animal immunity and,
through it, disease in natural populations. Monarch butterflies are attacked by
a parasite that is related to those that cause malaria and toxoplasmosis in
humans. When monarchs get infected with their parasite, they find it difficult
to fly and to reproduce. However, monarchs can use natural medicines in milkweed
plants in combination with their own immune systems to help combat their
parasites. This research will help scientists understand how the medicinal
compounds that are available in milkweed change with the environment, and how
changes in medicines available to the butterflies affect their ability to use
them to fight the parasite. New diseases are emerging at an unprecedented rate
and the impacts of environmental change on animal immune function may make this
trend worse. Understanding the influence of environmental change on animal
immunity will help scientists and managers to predict which animals are most at
risk and where, as well as facilitate improved management
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address how
changing medicinal and nutritional quality affects parasites' ability to harm
their hosts. It will do so by exploring the effects of elevated concentrations
of atmospheric CO2 on the medicinal (secondary chemistry) and nutritional
(carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus) quality of host diet. The researchers will
examine how dietary effects on immunity underlie corresponding shifts in a
host?s ability to limit parasite infection success, and mitigate the fitness
costs of infection at a given pathogen load. This work will be conducted using a
system with a high degree of diet dependency: the monarch butterfly, Danaus
plexippus, and its protozoan parasite, Ophryocystis elektroscirrha (OE).
Secondary and primary metabolites of the milkweed (Asclepias) plants that
monarchs consume convey increased performance against OE. Critically, elevated
CO2 alters the medicinal and nutritional quality of milkweed foliage. This
research will be the first to elucidate the effects of whole plant chemistry on
host immunity and performance.