* 1701830
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Biomechanical Evolution of Echinoderm Locomotion
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Derek Briggs, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 17,286.00

Brittle stars, close relatives of sea stars, move in a different manner from all
other mobile animals. Their arms consist of hundreds of moving parts. As a
result, brittle stars can travel rapidly in any direction. They also easily
adapt their method of locomotion in response to limb damage and loss. This
project will identify the mechanical steps that characterize the evolution of
this unique pattern of locomotion. Fossil brittle stars show much greater
diversity of arm structure than living brittle stars, making interpretation of
their mode of locomotion a challenge. These researchers will characterize the
anatomy of fossil brittle stars using 3D imaging and infer their movement
capabilities based on biomechanical modeling. This is the first project to
employ state-of-the-art 3D imaging and biomechanical modeling techniques to
study the mechanics of movement in any non-vertebrate animal. A broader impact
of this research is that it opens the door for the systematic investigation of
diverse movement strategies across the animal kingdom and their application to
mechanical engineering. The unique movement strategy employed by these animals
may also help improve robot design. &lt;br/&gt;The first step in modeling
brittle star movement is to digitize their internal skeleton using 3D x-ray
imaging. A computer program is then used to make a skeletal model and to
reconstruct movement at the articulations. Muscle attachment sites are
identified in the fossils using high-resolution 3D imaging; the microstructure
of the skeleton reveals where muscles insert. A second program is used to
incorporate the muscle reconstructions into the skeletal models. The force
applied by each arm segment and by the entire arm can be calculated to reveal
whether fossil brittle stars could move like their modern relatives, or used a
different strategy more similar, for example, to that in living sea stars. These
models will allow the mechanical steps leading to the unique form of movement in
living brittle stars to be determined, and show how their mode of locomotion
evolved.