* 1701092
* Dissertation Research:  Interactions of pH on molybdenum and phosphorus limitation of nitrogen fixation in the Amazon Basin
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Robert Howarth, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,280.00

Tropical forests are highly productive ecosystems and represent one-third of
terrestrial primary production, but require nitrogen to support plant growth.
Nitrogen fixation is a process carried out by microorganisms that allows
tropical forests to replenish this nutrient. The highest documented nitrogen
fixation rates are found in tropical forests, but few measurements have been
made in the Amazon Basin, home to the world's largest tropical forest.
Phosphorus and molybdenum are two elements that play an important role in the
nitrogen fixation process. Indeed, phosphorus availability is known to limit
nitrogen fixation, but no one has determined whether molybdenum has a similar
effect in nature. Because molybdenum is rare, and is easily leached from soils,
it's low concentration could lead to low nitrogen fixation rates in the Amazon
Basin, where soils are nutrient depleted, and where regions receive little to no
new inputs of molybdenum. These so-called "weathered" soils in the Amazon Basin
are also acidic, and this condition can make it even more difficult for
nitrogen-fixing microorganisms to access molybdenum. Research for this Doctoral
Dissertation Improvement Grant will investigate how these factors interact to
constrain nitrogen fixation, which affects how tropical forests will grow in
response to environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The southeastern Amazon
is an understudied but important forest ecosystem where (1) nitrogen fixation
has not yet been quantified and (2) where molybdenum and phosphorus
concentrations are low, likely due to low atmospheric inputs of these elements.
Funds from this award will support experiments to test whether nitrogen fixation
by free-living soil microorganisms in the southeastern Amazon is directly
constrained by low phosphorus or molybdenum, or indirectly limited via pH
effects on phosphorus and molybdenum complexation in soils. The researchers will
conduct phosphorus, molybdenum, and lime plot addition experiments, and will
measure long-term changes in nitrogen fixation rates and in the availability of
phosphorus and molybdenum. Results will be disseminated in review papers for
extrapolation of global nitrogen fixation rates for earth system models. In
addition, the researchers will train and collaborate with Brazilian students and
use the results to develop a teaching module for the annual Expanding Your
Horizons workshop for middle school girls interested in science.