* 1701459
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   A phylogenomic window into trophic niche evolution in frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Joanna Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,134.00

Across the Tree of Life, diet varies widely among species. Some species have
very specialized diets that consist of only one or a few items, while other
species appear to eat a broad range of food items. Why some animals have highly
specialized diets and how species adapt to new food items remain unanswered
questions in the field of biology. This project will use frogs as a study system
to understand how and why animals become specialized on different food
resources. To do so, it will develop new applications of DNA sequencing to
generate data on diet and new methods for analyzing complex datasets. The new
methods will be broadly applicable to any system beyond just frogs and the
resultant data can provide insight into other major biodiversity questions, such
as why there are more species in the tropics compared to temperate areas. This
project will develop international partnerships, provide research training to
undergraduate students at the University of Michigan, generate large quantities
of publicly accessible data for future scientific research, and produce basic
natural history data that can be used to inform conservation strategies for
endangered frog species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will integrate methods from phylogenetic community ecology and macroevolution to
answer questions about the evolution of diet and how trophic ecology correlates
with diversification. It will utilize high-throughput sequencing to analyze
stomach contents of frogs from sites across the New World. This work will
generate a dataset of prey items identified to species level with information
about the relative abundance of each in a frog's diet. The proposed research
will use the mitochondrial genomes of the prey items to construct a phylogenetic
tree of the prey to pair with a phylogeny of frogs that will be estimated with
genomic data. With these two trees, measures of diet breadth and overlap that
reflect the phylogenetic variability in the diet and the relative abundance of
each prey type will be calculated and used to infer rates of species
diversification and trophic evolution. These metrics and estimated rates will
then be used to examine phylogenetic conservatism in frog diet, the effect of
dietary specialization on speciation, and the correlation between rates of
trophic evolution and diversification rates.