* 1701025
* PFI:AIR-TT: Novel Materials Scale-Up and Prototype Development for Air Quality Control in Confined Spaces
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Roberto Casas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 239,997.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on the commercialization of
porous materials for the control of air quality in confined spaces. This
application is important because it allows the removal of carbon dioxide as it
builds up in the air due to human respiration in enclosed spaces such as
submarines, space cabins (International Space Station), and commercial
airliners. The build-up of CO2 in these environments must be mitigated to avoid
health issues such as cognitive impairment, drowsiness, increased heart rate,
dizziness, and shortness of breath. The principle innovation to be exploited in
this work is the controlled and tunable synthesis of carbide-derived carbons
(CDCs). These porous materials have been found to act as efficient "molecular
sponges", capable of "soaking up" toxic chemicals such as ammonia, formaldehyde,
and other chemical agents. The materials are also amenable to various chemical
treatments such as acid/base washes and functionalization, which extends their
applicability to a variety of target separations.

CDCs have the potential for high impact in the air purification and gas
separations fields, but there are major knowledge gaps in scale-up of the
materials and integration at the device level, which are both essential for
commercializing these materials. The researchers in this project will develop
the methods necessary to scale-up the synthesis of carbide-derived carbons to
the 20-gram scale. The procedures for producing CDCs beyond simple lab scale are
currently unknown and are expected to have a significant impact on the use of
CDCs in industry. Further, the project will focus on the development of a
prototype test bed, where the performance of a proof-of-concept adsorption cycle
can be demonstrated. Ultimately, the project will provide the synthesis means
and performance data to create an adsorption unit capable of controlling CO2
concentrations in confined spaces to specified levels (< 1000ppm). The expected
output of this work will fall into three major categories: (i) materials scale-
up procedures; (ii) prototype/test bed design and construction; (iii)
demonstration of CO2 removal performance under realistic conditions. The
personnel involved in this project, including a chemical engineering
undergraduate student and postdoctoral fellow, will interface with project
partners NASA Johnson Space Center and experts in entrepreneurship at VentureLab
for training in customer discovery and business development methods. This
training will provide the student and postdoc with a unique experience that
includes customer discovery practices and exposure to fast-paced research of a
more applied nature.

The project engagesÂ NASA Johnson Space Center for testing of the prototype. Such
device-level testing is too large for lab scale, but still too small to adapt
for larger industry testing. Thus, the NASA partners will provide a critical
bridge across the performance gap to move this innovation from the lab to
commercial scale. They will provide realistic performance data by project end to
support the continued development of the device from research discovery toward
commercial reality.