* 1701108
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Achromatic lenses with an unprecedented spectral range
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Eric Potma, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project enables the translation of an
optical lens that provides achromatic focusing of light over an extended
wavelength range, from the visible to the mid-infrared range. Achromatic
focusing allows different wavelengths of light, for example red and blue, to be
brought into focus at the same focal length, enabling a clearer image. It is
useful for a wide range of optics applications, from microscopy to photography
to hyperspectral imaging. Previous achromatic lenses have been limited in their
wavelength range, whereas other broadband achromatic lenses use materials and
production techniques that are expensive. The product to be developed in this
project offers a combination of materials that are not only affordable but also
production friendly, resulting in the fabrication of a relatively inexpensive
optic with superior achromatic properties. The project will result in a
prototype lens that can be readily used in optical microscopy applications,
providing imaging opportunities from the visible to the mid-infrared.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovered during a research-oriented project, the
proposed achromat is composed of calcium fluoride and sapphire. Initial
simulations have confirmed that the combination of these two materials produces
achromatic lenses over an extended range. The project will further fine-tune the
material parameters before the components are fabricated and the lenses are
assembled with high precision. The prototype will be extensively tested before
copies are disseminated for purchase to users in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will form an extensive training experience for
a graduate and an undergraduate student, who will be involved with the
engineering, testing and commercial decision making process. The project also
engages engineers and business development personnel from the Zygo, a market
leader in custom optics fabrication, to drive this technology translation effort
from research discovery toward commercial reality.