* 1701393
* Artificially Intelligent, Autonomous Microreactors for the Discovery of Polyolefin Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ryan Hartman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 297,999.00

The current technology gaps of laboratory-scale reaction systems have limited
the commercial availability of: 1) automated microreactor platforms that deliver
first principles kinetics, 2) automated microreactor platforms for catalyst
activity screening, 3) online analytics that capture real-time concentration-
response profiles, and 4) computational data analytics able to analyze, report,
and recommend. Process development and reaction engineers could potentially
implement such reaction systems to expedite their laborious research and
development activities. The research project aims at closing these technology
gaps in laboratory-scale catalyst screening and characterization to broadly
accelerate materials development and polymer commercialization timelines. The
study of artificially intelligent, autonomous microreactors (microAIRs) is
proposed to address the technical challenges that currently limit the next-
generation needs in catalyst discovery research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
governing hypothesis for the study is that microAIRs engineered with online
analytics can accelerate, improve accuracy, and minimize the energy and
environmental impacts during the iterative discovery of a next-generation olefin
catalyst system. Successful testing of this hypothesis will address the
principal need to combine real-time, multiphase microfluidics tracking and
feedback algorithms with a non-invasive analytical method that can directly
measure a reaction parameter. The ability of a reactor system to decipher phase
behaviors, analyze the reaction progress, decide which catalyst is the most
active, and identify accurate kinetic expressions are tremendous challenges that
microAIRs can solve in order to more efficiently screen catalyst and discover
kinetics. Opportunities exist to i) improve the accuracy of process kinetics,
ii) establish input/output responses that fully fingerprint a catalyst in a
business portfolio, and iii) improve the presentation of real-time analytics and
accelerated decision making in catalyst discovery. Review of the state-of-the-
art reveals that current technical challenges for laboratory-scale, homogeneous
polyolefin catalytic systems include: 1) combinatorial challenge to fully
fingerprint catalyst performance, 2) evaluation of large commercial libraries of
catalyst systems, 3) engineering for control of chemical transport challenges in
flow, 4) sensing with adaptive response to catalyst activity, 5) on-chip
analytics coupled with unique reactor/mixer designs in flow, and 6) real-time
data analysis with adaptive experimental design and execution. The proposed
research, if successful, will broadly impact polymers manufacturing, and it will
also introduce novel laboratory techniques for the discovery of new science. The
project will also involve curriculum development activities and outreach to the
community through NYU's incubator program.