* 1701972
* Dissertation Research: Linking N cycling bacterial community composition and function along a mycorrhizal gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Adrien Finzi, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 18,827.00

Soil bacteria play a central role in the cycling of nitrogen (N) in all
ecosystems, where plant productivity is often limited by the availability of N.
Certain types of bacteria are able to capture N from the atmosphere and make it
available for plants through the process of N-fixation. Other bacterial groups
use their metabolism to return N to the atmosphere. Plant roots and fungi in
soil can influence bacteria, but the effect of these interactions on N cycling
is unclear. The aims of this project are to (1) characterize relationships
between N-cycle reactions and different groups of bacteria, and (2) to explore
how these relationships are influenced by plant roots and fungi. Understanding
how factors in soil control N-availability for plants is important for
agriculture and forestry. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant project
will enhance the graduate student's dissertation research, provide opportunities
for undergraduate students to develop field and laboratory techniques in
biogeochemistry, and will be integrated in outreach activities organized through
the Boston University Biogeoscience program. Plant roots and mycorrhizal fungi
can influence the form and availability of inorganic N in soil, potentially
impacting the composition and activity of N-cycling bacterial functional groups.
This research will test three hypotheses: (1) enhanced competition for N between
plants and soil microbes in forest stands dominated by ectomycorrhizal (ECM)
fungi relative to stands dominated by arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi will
select for N-fixers and select against nitrifiers and denitrifiers; (2) high
plant demand for inorganic N in rhizosphere soils relative to bulk soils will
select for diazotrophs and select against nitrifiers and denitrifiers; and (3)
the magnitude of the rhizosphere effect will increase as ECM abundance
increases. To test these hypotheses, the abundance of gene copies (DNA) and gene
transcripts (RNA) associated with N-fixers, nitrifiers, and denitrifiers will be
quantified in rhizosphere soil samples across a mycorrhizal gradient established
at the Harvard Forest LTER site in Petersham, MA. Stable isotope approaches will
be used to measure rates of N-fixation, nitrification and denitrification. These
paired analyses will elucidate relationships between microbial community
composition and function and identify how these relationships vary based on
biotic interactions between N-cycling bacteria, mycorrhizal fungi and plant
roots.