* 1701231
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating Physiology and Genomics to Test for Local Adaptation in a Montane Ectotherm
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Adam Leache, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,111.00

This project will investigate the processes determining color and size
differences between western fence lizards occurring at high versus low
elevations on mountains in California. High elevation lizards are darker and
larger than low elevation lizards. Such differences in traits within a species
are generally assumed to be genetically based and a result of adaptation to
local environments. However, phenotypic differences can also result from the
effects of different environmental conditions on development. The researchers
will use a combination of physiological experiments and genomic analyses to
identify whether color and size differences in western fence lizards are a
consequence of natural selection or phenotypic plasticity. Results will provide
critical insights into the role and evolutionary advantages of environmentally
dependent phenotypic differences in heterogeneous environments. In addition, the
project includes day-long educational workshops targeting young girls interested
in STEM fields and development of an interactive exhibit on lizards for a local
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on a phenotypic cline in the
western fence lizard (Sceloporus occidentalis) along an elevational gradient in
the Sierra Nevada Mountains of California. By combining techniques from
genomics, functional ecology, and transcriptomics, this research will develop a
comprehensive picture of the origin and function of high elevation phenotypes in
western fence lizards. The researchers plan to evaluate the influence of
temperature and day length on juvenile phenotypes, and to identify candidate
genomic regions implicated in phenotypic differentiation. Juvenile lizards will
be reared in a laboratory common garden experiment with treatments that mimic
conditions at high and low elevation. This experimental design will decouple the
genetic and environmental constituents of phenotype, and also shed light on the
functional implications of trait differences. By comparing gene expression
profiles of lizards reared in native and non-native conditions, fixed and
plastic responses to environmental conditions at both organismal and genomic
levels will be identified.