* 1701854
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Functional Tests of Hox Gene Evolution and the Pipefish Elongated Body Plan
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* William Cresko, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,093.00

This research will experimentally manipulate gene expression to understand how
elongate fishes, such as pipefish, get their shape. Fishes, like other
vertebrates, share a conserved set of genes that regulate development. Yet from
this conserved set, fishes come in an amazing diversity of shapes. Pipefish are
part of a group of nearly 300 species that also includes seahorses, pipehorses,
and seadragons, that have remarkably diverse traits such as long snouts, tube-
like bodies, and males that become pregnant. These fishes provide a unique
opportunity to study trait evolution because of the breadth of characters absent
in other fish lineages and the existence of powerful experimental tools based on
the pipefish genomic. This project will involve the research training of an
undergraduate from groups underrepresented in science. It will also contribute
to public outreach in collaboration with The Museum of Natural and Cultural
History at the University of Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
connect observed genetic and genomic changes with the morphological changes to
the body plan in the Gulf pipefish (Syngnathus scovelli). This research focuses
on a small subset of Hox transcription factors and their surrounding genomic
content that are important in early cranial and axial skeleton development.
Based on analysis of the Gulf pipefish genome, a few key Hox genes and nearby
regulatory elements have been lost through the course of evolution in the Gulf
pipefish lineage. Using advanced genomic and gene editing techniques, the
researchers will perform functional tests in related teleost fish, the
threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) and zebrafish (Danio rerio), to
examine the morphological impact of the loss of genes and genomic content on the
fish body plan. Possible effects of these losses on the evolution of the
syngnathid body plan will be determined by creating mutations in these
orthologous genes using the CRISPR technique in zebrafish and threespine
stickleback fish models. This work will advance our understanding of how novel
characters evolve in the context of the deeply conserved developmental toolkit.