* 1701120
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Biocompatibility and Biomechanical Validation of Cellulose-Based Hydrogels for Intervertebral Disc Repair
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Steven Nicoll, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
injectable biomaterial derived from the plant polysaccharide, cellulose, to
treat injuries or degeneration of the intervertebral disc (IVD).   These
materials are important because they address a clinical problem (IVD
degeneration) that is the most common diagnosis for lower back pain, a
debilitating condition that affects 15-30% of the United States population, with
associated annual costs of $100 billion. The project will result in valuable
proof-of-concept data demonstrating safety and efficacy of these cellulosic
biomaterials in a small animal in vivo model and a large animal explant model.
Successful completion will motivate further validation in a large animal
preclinical injury model prior to clinical studies. The cellulosic materials are
unique in that they are plant-derived, gel in situ via a dual coupling mechanism
and allow for the incorporation of cells and growth factors for combination
therapies.  These features provide the advantages of an extensive safety
profile, cost effectiveness, minimally invasive delivery, enhanced stability and
therapeutic versatility when compared to the leading competing materials under
development in this market space. 

This project addresses several technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application of a novel material for IVD repair.
Current surgical treatment options (i.e., discectomy) are inadequate for long-
term disease management, and existing commercial implants (i.e., total disc
replacement) do not sufficiently restore disc structure and function. Replacing
the gelatinous nucleus pulposus tissue of the IVD with an injectable material
may help restore IVD mechanical functionality. Several products are under
development for nucleus pulposus replacement, with none approved for use in the
United States. This project focuses on the use of injectable cellulose-based
hydrogels that form in situ in the intradiscal space to replace resected nucleus
pulposus tissue. The proposed validation experiments will characterize an
optimized cellulosic gel formulation previously shown to be stable and restore
disc properties under axial compression. The studies will determine the foreign
body reaction in a small animal model as well as the mechanical properties and
failure mechanisms under cyclic loading in bending using a large animal spine
motion segment injury model. Many of the competing products under development
have been found to have poor biocompatibility or exhibited migration and
reherniation. Also, few prior studies have been capable of evaluating candidate
materials under such "worst-case-scenario" bending conditions. As such, they
have met with limited success.

In addition, personnel involved in this project include undergraduate and
graduate students who will receive training in innovation and technology
commercialization through translational medicine courses, and via regular
interactions with potential strategic partners, participation in innovation and
commercialization conferences and symposia, and small business grant proposal
preparation.

The project engages experts in orthopaedic surgery from the Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai and an experienced biomedical device industry
professional to guide the biomechanical evaluation studies and commercialization
aspects, respectively, in this effort to translate the proposed technology from
research discovery toward commercial reality.