* 1701791
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of rapid adaptation in population establishment
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Jennifer Lau, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 20,135.00

Evolution was once assumed to only occur slowly over long time scales, but many
recent studies have found that rapid adaptation (adaptation that occurs over
timescales observable by humans) can occur across a wide range of species and in
many biological systems, and can affect ecological interactions and processes.
Theory predicts that rapid adaptation can also potentially affect the
establishment of species in new habitats, but there is little evidence from
natural systems to support this. This project will investigate rapid adaptation
in recently established plant populations, as well as how symbiotic microbes
might influence plant rapid adaptation. By conducting this work at an ecological
restoration site, this project will not only expand our understanding of basic
ecological processes, but results of the project can be applied to make
restorations more successful. This is important, as the restoration of degraded
landscapes can play a critical role in biodiversity conservation, yet species
sown into restorations often fail to establish. Additionally, this project
includes the mentoring of undergraduate students and development of online
educational materials for K-12 students.

By using field experiments, reciprocal transplants, and greenhouse studies, this
project aims to expand understanding of the role of rapid adaptation in
population establishment in several ways. First, although empirical evidence
suggests that evolution may occur rapidly enough to influence establishment, few
studies consider the demographic effects of adaptation. This study will examine
the demographic effects of adaptation in recently established plant populations.
Second, this work aims to identify the selective agents and traits responsible
for local adaptation, which few studies attempt to do. By combining selection
analyses with reciprocal transplant experiments, this study will both predict
evolutionary responses and test whether those predicted evolutionary shifts have
actually occurred. Finally, this work will investigate the role of microbial
mutualists in plant rapid adaptation by examining interactions between legumes
and nitrogen-fixing bacteria and how traits mediating interactions with rhizobia
have evolved in response to field environments that differ in soil nutrient
availability and rhizobium community properties. The results of this work will
elucidate the mechanisms underlying the relationship between rapid adaptation
and population establishment.