* 1701420
* Dissertation Research: Experimentally skewed ratio of males to females as a behavioral driver of genome evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Maria Modanu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2020
* USD 19,589.00

Why have males and females evolved to be so different? Over evolutionary time,
males and females can become very different from each other in behavior and
structure, but the process behind this divergence is poorly understood. This
research focuses on how social interactions shape the elaborate differences we
see in nature. An excess of males or females can have a strong effect on many
traits by changing how frequently an individual interacts with potential mates
or rivals, and therefore how likely that individual's traits are to persist in
later generations if they confer a mating or competitive advantage. Using the
short-lived roundworm, this project measures the genetic differences between
populations kept for 50 generations with mostly females, mostly males, or equal
numbers of males and females. Analyzing genetic changes in these populations
will reveal the processes by which evolution can alter traits in a population
entirely due to male-female interactions. Moreover, comparing the genomes of
multiple populations with an excess of males or females will address a core
question in evolutionary biology: how similar are evolutionary trajectories when
populations face identical conditions? This project will train undergraduate
students from backgrounds underrepresented in science using modern genomic
techniques, and produce online resources to educate high school students and the
public about genomic methods and evolution.

The goal of this proposal is to measure the genomic effect of selection on the
differences between males and females and to quantify genetic changes resulting
from the behavioral interactions that drive selection. Experimental evolution in
the nematode Caenorhabditis remanei has yielded evidence that populations faced
with a consistently male- or female-biased ratio of reproductively available
males to females show differences in morphology and behavior as a consequence of
selection. This proposal expands the question of behavioral interactions driving
evolutionary change by quantifying the degree of genomic divergence across
populations, and identifying signatures of selection at outlier loci across the
entire genome. The proposed study will be among the first to directly measure
evolution across the genome after a known selective regime of biased ratios of
males to females, and one of the few to do so using a behavioral regime. Because
experimental treatments were replicated across independent populations, the
project will also address the long-standing question of how repeatable evolution
is at the nucleotide level. Revealing the genomic consequences of selection
generated by behavior is essential to synthesizing proximate and ultimate
approaches to understanding dimorphism at the phenotypic and genomic level.