* 1701085
* PFI:AIR - TT: A Non-Aqueous Redox Flow Battery Prototype
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* James Landon, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on incorporating high
concentration organic electrolytes for redox flow batteries (RFBs) into
functional, high-voltage, stationary batteries. RFB have advantages for
electrical grid-scale energy storage options, including peak leveling and
frequency regulation, which would reduce overall energy consumption when linked
with an electrical grid. RFBs are inherently well-suited for large applications
such as these because they scale more cost effectively (power and energy
capacities are decoupled) than most battery technologies.

This project investigates non-aqueous RFBs containing organic electro-active
species. This proposed type of RFB has the following unique features relative to
other RFB designs: higher operating voltages, non-corrosive electrolytes,
smaller size, and use of scalable organic active materials (more environmentally
friendly and potentially lower cost). The potential customer benefit would stem
from more affordable options for stationary energy storage, enabling a greater
reliance on renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind power, and
improving energy efficiency of the electric grid, which together can reduce the
anthropogenic generation of carbon dioxide (CO2) from fossil fuel combustion.

Under this project, a prototype full-cell RFB with high concentrations of
promising organic electro-active materials will be built and tested. To date,
the lack of a demonstration of a high-concentration full cell has prevented an
analysis of the performance and identification of the potential advantages and
limitations of electro-active organic compounds. Moreover, performance-limiting
factors associated with cell design or component failure are difficult to
distinguish for active material decay. Full cell testing, at near practical
conditions, is required to complete a thorough performance assessment. This
project will address these knowledge gaps and complete the analytical suite
through the following tasks: effective synthesis of electro-active organic
materials will be performed at the requisite scale and purity for use in
electrochemical systems, membranes will be screened and selected, a prototype
will be fabricated, then high-concentration testing will be performed in a full
cell prototype.

In addition to the technical plans described, the postdoctoral researcher
supported by this program will receive innovation and entrepreneurship
experiences through accelerator programs at the University of Kentucky, such as
the Entrepreneurs Bootcamp. The postdoctoral researcher will also be guided in
customer interviews and continue work on defining key value propositions towards
the creation of a commercial product. In addition, the project partners with
MIT, and the MIT student on the project will work with the UK postdoctoral
researcher and both will spend time at Argonne National Laboratory and Oak Ridge
National Laboratory for further training in flow cell design and
characterization.

The project engages United Technologies Research Center to provide additional
testing assessments and to guide commercialization aspects in this technology
translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.