* 1701099
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Memory Processing Unit: A Low Power Processor for Analytics Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Martin Ganco, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating 3D chip-
stacking technology to develop a new microprocessor architecture called Memory
Processing Unit (MPU). The new architecture offers the promise of faster, more
energy efficient calculations than current solutions. This is important because
there is a large body of applications such as deep-learning, big-data analytics,
and data science that all require significant processing capability. While
capability requirements continue to increase to meet the needs of these new
applications, the rate of improvement of power efficiency of the microprocessors
is decreasing (in other words, the trends predicted by Moore's Law are beginning
to slow).

This project will result in a prototype chip-design of the MPU with complete
software API (Application Programming Interface) for end-to-end application
demonstrations based on real-time speech recognition and big-data analytics for
Internet search capabilities. The MPU includes the following unique features: an
energy-efficient simple core implementation (including exploration of mechanisms
for pipeline organization, virtual-memory, and coherence), an implementation
that connects 128 such cores together, cores connected through 3D links to
memory, and end-to-end software implementation. Compared to state-of-art server
chips in the market, the MPU architecture provides two-fold to 12-fold
calculation speedup while reducing energy consumption by 10-fold.

This project addresses the following two technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application: a) the difficulty of
developing end-to end software on this new highly concurrent architecture and
the determination of the mechanisms required, and b) Extensive exploration of
various application domains (initially demonstrating speech recognition and
internet search capabilities) to determine quantitatively the benefits of this
architecture over the state-of-the-art.

Personnel involved in this project, including graduate students and
undergraduates, will receive innovation and entrepreneurship experiences through
the technology commercialization activities, customer interviews, and business
development. In addition the team will work with entrepreneurship programs like
D2P at UW-Madison.