* 1701465
* Analytic Number Theory on Higher Rank Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Xiaoqing Li, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2021
* USD 134,997.00

This project concerns research in the theory of numbers, in particular questions
related to the distribution of prime numbers. One of the most fundamental open
questions in modern number theory is the Riemann hypothesis, which connects the
distribution of prime numbers with the distribution of complex zeros of the
generating zeta function, the Riemann zeta function. The Riemann hypothesis
asserts that the non-integer zeros lie on a line. The Riemann Zeta function is
an example of an L-function. This is a project to study zeroes of general
L-functions.

In more detail, a Siegel zero is a type of potential counterexample to the
(generalized) Riemann hypothesis on the zeros of Dirichlet L-functions connected
to the study of the distribution of primes in arithmetic progressions. In the
main part of this project, based on Sarnak's method, a novel technique will be
used to derive the standard zero-free regions for general L-functions. This new
technique combines the use of Maass-Selberg relations on higher rank groups
which is expected to remove the technical sieve arguments in Sarnak's work. The
new technique will also shed light on the classical Siegel zero problem as
mentioned above. Other projects include the study of equidistribution of Maass
forms on higher rank groups and spectral identities for L-functions. These will
provide new bridges between analytic number theory, representation theory and
ergodic theory.