* 1701745
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Evolution of Crocodylian Cranial Development
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Zachary Morris, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2020
* USD 21,970.00

Crocodylians (crocodiles and alligators), often labeled 'living fossils, are
commonly thought to have an ancient and conservative skeletal anatomy and
lifestyle. However, modern crocodylians are more diverse than often appreciated
and their skulls, in particular, can range from short and wide to incredibly
long and slender. Prior research has shown that crocodylian skull shape is
correlated with dietary and habitat specializations, but it remains unclear how
these shapes come to be. The formation of crocodylian skull diversity is tied to
development: the changes that occur in an individual as it grows from a
fertilized egg to an adult. The process of development is controlled by genes,
and changes to how genes are expressed can modify developmental pathways and
adult anatomy. By combining data from fossils, crocodylian embryos, and modern
developmental biology techniques, this project will reveal which changes in
developmental pathways were key to the evolution of the crocodylian skull, and
the evolutionary diversity of crocodylians. Insights from this research may also
inform general connections between genomic, developmental and organismal
complexity in vertebrates. To capitalize on the public interest in crocodiles
and their relatives (dinosaurs and birds), this project will develop K-12
activities for students and teachers in conjunction with the Harvard Museum of
Natural History (HMNH). These activities explore key concepts in paleontology
and developmental biology and will be tied to the Next Generation Science
Standards. The HMNH provides a unique venue to reach a diverse urban audience
from across the Boston Metropolitan area and visitors from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Unique morphological features distinguish major
groups of animals like crocodylians, mammals, and birds. These features are
important for the particular lifestyles and habits of these groups and have been
critical for their survival over millions of years. The formation of this
diversity is caused by the evolution of novel genes, novel functions for genes,
or modification to the developmental pattern of gene expression. Integrating
fossils, embryos, and developmental genetic techniques, this study will reveal
developmental mechanisms involved in the evolution of crocodylian cranial
diversity. This project will study the expression patterns of key genes involved
in the development of the skull in extant crocodylians using in situ
hybridization. Developmental stages from eight target species, which broadly
sample the phylogeny and diversity of snout shapes in modern crocodylians, will
be analyzed. The project aims to experimentally replicate ancestral and derived
gene expression patterns and to use geometric morphometrics to quantify the
relationship between expression patterns and skull shapes. These functional
studies in alligator embryos will test the likelihood that particular changes in
development were the cause of evolutionary changes in anatomy. This project
integrates paleontology, anatomy, and developmental biology to link changes in
anatomy to genetic inheritance through development. This integrative methodology
will lead to a greater understanding of critical mechanisms underlying the
evolution of anatomical diversity and novel features of organisms.