* 1701787
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms that maintain behavior in the face of environmental change
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Ryan Earley, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 19,370.00

Non-Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human activities are altering
environments at an alarming rate, and these changes can dramatically affect
animals and their behavior. An emerging area of concern is with endocrine
disrupting compounds (EDCs), which are synthetic or natural compounds that
infiltrate habitats in a variety of ways and wreak havoc on functions of the
body that aid in survival and reproduction. Oftentimes, behavior is the first
thing to change following EDC exposure, but what does it mean when behavior does
not change? Frequently this is interpreted as EDCs not having an impact on the
individual, but there are many alternative explanations that might provide a
greater understanding of how animals cope with environmental stressors. The goal
of this research is to determine if animals that are exposed to EDCs maintain
their behavior by altering patterns of hormone production, and whether the
measures that animals use to counteract the effects of EDCs might be beneficial
or harmful to the animal. This project will include an education program to
introduce high school students to the impacts of rapidly changing environments
on organisms. It will also include outreach to the community by partnering with
a local non-profit organization to create 'fish guides' to inform the public of
safe areas to catch fish for
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influx of endocrine disrupting compounds
(EDCs) into aquatic systems constitutes a major anthropogenic disturbance that
influences both physiology and behavior. Sometimes, however, behavior does not
change in response to EDC exposure. We do not currently understand the costs
associated with behavioral maintenance in the face of environmental change. This
project uses an emerging vertebrate model, mangrove rivulus fish (Kryptolebias
marmoratus), to explore how changes in endocrine function promote behavioral
maintenance in animals exposed to EDCs and alter the correlation structure among
behaviors. Behavioral correlation structures are important indicators of an
individual's flexibility and can be used to determine how well they can respond
to environmental perturbations, both in the short-term and evolutionarily. The
researchers measured behavior and collected hormone samples after exposing
individuals of different ages and sexes to a gradient of ecologically relevant
concentrations of two major EDCs, ethinyl estradiol and nonylphenol. Behavior
analysis indicated that there were no changes in average behaviors following
exposure, but the correlation structure among behaviors changed. By assaying
hormones, the researchers will determine the extent to which endocrine function
impacts singular behaviors and the structure of behavioral correlations
following EDC exposure. This approach forwards new perspectives on the
interpretation of null results, especially for studies seeking to understand the
fitness impacts on individuals persistently exposed to EDCs. It will also
provide insights into how physiological systems structure the behavioral
phenotype, and perhaps restructure it in response to EDCs in ways that impact
individual fitness and opportunities for selection to drive behavioral
evolution.