* 1701915
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of volatile organic compounds in antagonistic selection in the moss Ceratodon purpureus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Stuart McDaniel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2020
* USD 19,727.00

This project will investigate how differences in natural selection on males and
females effects the genetic basis of scent differences in the moss, Ceratodon
purpureus. In many plants and animals, males and females exhibit many
differences in form and physiology. These differences are thought to arise
because qualities that are beneficial in one sex may be deleterious in the
opposite sex. Although physical differences between males and females are very
conspicuous, we have a poor understanding of the genetic mechanisms that
generate these differences, and many of their benefits. In Ceratodon, female
mosses produce scents to attract small insects that carry sperm from male
plants, promoting reproduction, while male plants make few such scents. This
research will test the idea that the production of these scents is costly in
males, and that the genes for scent production are present but turned off in
males. In addition, the project will involve mentoring both undergraduate and
high school students, including individuals from groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences.

The project will use quantitative genetics and transcriptomic experiments to
understand the evolutionary forces shaping sexually dimorphic scent profiles.
Scents are comprised of a cocktail of volatile organic compunds (VOC). Measures
of VOC production in a pedigreed population is providing an estimate of the
additive genetic variance and covariance for VOC production in males and
females. Competitive mating trials will be used to evaluate the fitness
consequences of variation in VOC production in males and females, both in the
presence and absence of sperm-dispersing arthropods. RNAseq analyses in high and
low VOC producing males and females will be used in conjunction with existing
biochemical pathway databases to identify transcripts linked to VOC production.
The transcriptomic work will lay the foundation for studying the resolution of
genome-wide genetic conflict.