* 1701414
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Detecting adaptive evolution of gene duplication in olfactory receptors
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2019
* David Liberles, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 20,340.00

This project will develop novel methods to characterize how genes diversify and
will use these methods to detect adaptation in genetic diversification in bats.
How genes diversify and evolve new functions is a little understood but
important area in evolutionary biology. The sense of smell in mammals is the
result of extreme diversification of genes that code for proteins that detect
chemicals in the environment. Some mammals possess over 1,000 such proteins and
others only a few hundred. Quantifying the role of natural selection in this
diversification is difficult because current models fail to fully account for
the processes involved: gene duplication and loss, mutation, as well as the
number of gene copies present. This project will develop mathematical tools that
incorporate this complexity and test hypotheses about sensory evolution in bat
species with divergent specialized diets. The methods developed in the project
will be applicable to many types of genes, including those involved in immune
function and pathogen recognition. Through training from the Alan Alda Center
for Communicating Science, the research team will design a short video for the
public explaining the value understanding the evolution of smell. They will also
implement a summer program for underrepresented Long Island, NJ high school
students to learn about bat sensory systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous
research has identified several species of plant-visiting bats that have evolved
novel olfactory receptors via gene duplication. The match between dietary
specialization and olfactory receptors provides an ideal system to test whether
newly evolved receptors are related to a reliance on plant resources. A shift
from an insectivorous ancestral bat population to a population that exploits
fruit and pollen requires not only new morphological adaptations for consumption
of these foods, but also fine-tuning of chemosensory systems to find these plant
resources. The challenge of understanding the molecular evolution of the
mammalian olfactory gene family has prevented a quantitative investigation of
this pattern; this project will develop new methods to identify such adaptation.
The focal hypothesis is that increased gene copy retention and diversification
is connected to the rapid diversification of Neotropical plant-visiting bats. To
test this hypothesis, this research involves three major objectives: (1)
determine whether olfactory receptor retention rate is correlated with the
increased speciation rate observed in plant-visiting bats, (2) empirically test
whether olfactory gene duplicates are adaptive at the species level, and (3)
evaluate the functional similarity and novelty of the receptors that have
recently duplicated in plant-visiting bats. The project will make use of newly
developed gene-tree/species tree reconciliation and gene retention models
developed for recently diverged populations, as well as codon substitution
models and protein reconstructions to detect how selection may be affecting the
function of these hyperdiverse genes.