* 1701048
* GP-EXTRA: Authentic Research Experiences for Earth Science Education Majors
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Paul Bischoff, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2021
* USD 354,439.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;SUNY Oneonta?s GP-EXTRA: Authentic Research Experiences for
Earth Science Education Majors program strengthens the preparation of high
school geoscience teachers with the broader goals of generating greater student
enthusiasm for the geosciences, making students more likely to choose to major
in the geosciences, and addressing the national workforce deficit of
geoscientists. The project?s emphasis on model-based learning (MBL) provides
pre-service Earth Science Education (ESE) majors with authentic research
experiences designed to enrich content expertise and provide new avenues for
improving student learning in high school geoscience classrooms. The insights
gained through all aspects of the project will benefit geoscience educators
specifically and science education professionals more broadly. Presentations and
workshops at science teacher conferences will further broaden the project?s
impact by exposing a large group of K-12 teachers to the benefits of using
models of Earth processes created through the project. Pre-service participants
who conduct these presentations will experience greater self-efficacy and begin
to view themselves as both scientists and teachers of science. Publication of
results in geoscience education and science education journals will inform
science educators and teacher education programs about the benefits to student
learning that accrue from use of new models created by our pre-service
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;The project engages pre-
service ESE majors in authentic research experiences and immersion in MBL, a
pedagogy proven to enhance students? conceptual understanding. For each year of
the three-year project, a cohort of pre-service Earth Science teachers will
design and build new models of Earth processes and concepts. Models are
especially effective in Earth Science because so many geoscience processes and
concepts operate on spatial and temporal scales that are difficult for students
to grasp. Models developed by participants will be evaluated by New York State
Master STEM Teachers and pilot-tested in K-12 and introductory geoscience
college classes. Models will also be presented in ?Science Saturdays,? in
informal science education venues, and at science teacher conferences. Through
the design and construction of new models to help K-12 students conceptualize
various Earth concepts, ESE majors will gain valuable insights into the nature
of science and engineering design, which are important threads in the Next
Generation Science Standards. These experiences will enable participating ESE
majors to stimulate interest in the geosciences in K-12 students, with the
ultimate goals of inspiring students to choose geoscience majors in college, and
eventually reducing the deficit of geoscientists in the workforce.