* 1701591
* Dissertation Research: Evaluating the role of thyroid hormone in embryonic limb development in direct-developing frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Mara Laslo, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 21,870.00

This study will clarify the role of thyroid hormone in the development of
amphibian limbs. Hormones are substances produced in the body that influences
the way the body grows or develops. Thyroid hormone plays an important role in
the transition of tadpoles into frogs, especially in limb development. Nearly a
third of frog species bypass the tadpole stage and develop directly into frogs
and the role of thyroid hormone in the development of these species is not
known. This project will test two alternative hypotheses about the role of
thyroid hormone in this process. In association with the Harvard Museum of
Natural History, this project will also develop several educational activities
on amphibian biodiversity for K-12 students, teachers, and parents. Some of
these activities can be offered at little cost, which will allow many students
to experience wildlife and witness the dramatic transformation of metamorphosis
for themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparing how thyroid hormone regulates
gene activity during limb development between direct-developing and
metamorphosing frogs can tell us how fundamental endocrine networks evolve and
generate different life cycles. Biphasic frogs (which undergo metamorphosis)
require thyroid hormone (TH) for metamorphosis and limb development. This study
evaluates the role of TH in limb development in the direct-developing frog
Eleutherodactylus coqui for comparison to its role in three biphasic frog taxa
(Xenopus laevis, Bombina orientalis, and Dendrobates tinctorius). Next-
generation sequencing will be used to characterize and compare the TH-induced
molecular phenotype in the developing limb of all four species. This study will
provide a basis for further studies of amphibian life history evolution and
identify interspecific variation in an otherwise highly conserved molecular
mechanism of metamorphosis. Characterizing how one group achieves direct
development will provide a comparison for investigating the repeated origins of
this life history in other amphibians, and address questions at the intersection
of endocrinology, evolution, and development.