* 1701683
* Digitization PEN: Integrating the herbaria of peninsular Florida, a biodiversity hotspot of endemism, rarity, and richness
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alan Franck, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,086.00

This Partner to Existing Network (PEN) will join the South East Regional Network
of Expertise and Collections (SERNEC) Thematic Collection Network (TCN), a
collaboration that is digitizing and making data accessible for over 3 million
plant specimens. These specimens document over 8,000 species of native or
naturalized vascular plants in this region, a biodiversity hotspot. This project
will extend the collaboration to add a quarter million herbarium specimen data
records to SERNEC from the herbaria of Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden (FTG)
and the University of South Florida (USF), which together document over 4,000
plant species in the southeastern USA. As biodiversity is inextricably linked to
productivity, ecosystem services, and human health, the addition of these two
herbaria will fill a crucial gap in the knowledge base, maximizing the data
available to address environmental change and resource management among a
growing human population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important botanical
collections of the FTG and USF herbaria are the 125,000 specimens from central
and south Florida, more than found in any other herbarium. Unique features of
this region include the Lakes Wales Ridge, Everglades, Atlantic Coastal Ridge,
and Florida Keys, all of which have experienced significant habitat loss and
degradation. Among the 8,000 native or naturalized vascular plant species in the
southeastern USA, about 1,200 are known only from central and south Florida.
This number includes about 290 threatened or endangered, 130 endemic, 570 non-
native, and 90 invasive plant species. The plant diversity of this region is of
primary importance to the management of its resources, including air, water, and
soil quality, agriculture, mining, construction, land reclamation, recreation,
and biodiversity conservation. By engaging volunteers and high school and
undergraduate students, FTG and USF will increase access to their vast
collection of herbarium specimens, bolstering scientific and educational
knowledge of plants in the region. These data are shared as a public resource
through SERNEC and iDigBio (www.idigbio.org).