* 1701966
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of asymmetrical ecosystem responses to precipitation extremes in xeric vs. mesic grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Melinda Smith, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,316.00

Native grasslands once covering millions of acres across the US have been
reduced to a tiny fraction of their former distribution. These remaining
grasslands play important roles in the cycling of carbon and nutrients,
biodiversity, and as sources for restoration. The health and seasonal dynamics
of the remaining native grasslands in the central US are controlled by the
amount and timing of rainfall. Across the central US rainfall variability is
predicted to increase, with greater frequencies of extreme wet and dry years
expected. Grasslands are likely to be particularly sensitive to such changes,
with evidence that these systems may be more sensitive to wet versus dry years.
However, studies rarely include assessment of extreme years. This Doctoral
Dissertation Improvement Grant (DDIG) award, will experimentally assess the
sensitivity of the grassland composition, carbon cycle, and nutrient cycling to
rainfall extremes within an intact semi-arid grassland system. The research
results will be valuable to natural resource and land managers in managing or
restoring native grasslands. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
and participate in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
aims to advance a fundamental understanding of how ecosystems will respond to
predicted increases in environmental variability and extremity. The grassland
ecosystem's response to rainfall extremes is hypothesized to be non-linear and
bi-modal. A novel experimental treatment is proposed to expose semi-arid
grassland to a large gradient of growing season precipitation that will be able
to detect nonlinearities in response variables that are otherwise not detectable
in few-factor experimental design. The research will allow assessment of the
comparative sensitivities of key carbon cycle components to dry versus wet
years, and how this sensitivity may change when precipitation transitions from
moderate to extreme deviations from mean levels.