* 1701675
* Dissertation Research:  Shared pollinators affect flowering plant coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Monica Geber, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,994.00

Without pollinators like bees, bats and butterflies, most of the world's
flowering plants would disappear. Because of the importance of pollinators,
insuring their health is essential for preserving biodiversity and promoting
global agricultural security. As pollinators, some native bees can show strong
loyalty by limiting their visits to only flowers from a certain species, while
other bees may not be so loyal, visiting many different types of flowers. In
theory, plants with loyal pollinators should produce more fruit and seeds
because the pollinators provide only the appropriate pollen type when they
visit. The aim of this research is to understand the degree to which native bees
show loyalty to certain plants. This study also explores how the sharing of
pollinators between closely related plants might influence how many seeds those
plants produce. If some of the plants do worse than others when sharing
pollinators, differences in pollinator loyalty may influence how common or rare
those plants become. The results of this research are important for
understanding the role pollinators play in maintaining healthy and diverse
agricultural and natural plant communities. This research contributes to the
training of a graduate student, develops a lab and field program for a high
school biology class and provides opportunities to engage and encourage women
and under-represented students in STEM science.

Coexistence theory addresses how species richness is maintained in biological
communities by framing species interactions as a balance of competition within
versus between species. This study uses that theory to investigate whether
pollinator sharing affects coexistence dynamics in four co-occurring plants in
the genus Clarkia. Determining whether pollinator sharing is detrimental or
favorable for flowering plant coexistence hinges on understanding the flower
preference and constancy of native bees that specialize on flowers and the
quantity of pollen they provide. The diversity and quantity of pollen found on
Clarkia's pollinators will be measured with a genetic identification technique
(qPCR). These measurements will be used in conjunction with estimates of each
plant species' competitive ability to determine whether shared pollinators can
change plant fitness and whether the pattern shows a negative frequency
dependence. This study will shed light on the role that pollinator sharing can
play in promoting the coexistence of flowering plants.