* 1701087
* PFI:AIR - TT: Lateral Field Excited Acoustic Wave Sensor for Monitoring Thin Film Properties in Solid State Devices
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,12/31/2020
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2020
* USD 208,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology project focuses on translating research in lateral
field excited (LFE) acoustic wave devices to fill the continuing need for
improved methods of process monitoring and device metrology for manufacturing
processes involving thin-film deposition. A wide range of electronic, microwave,
and optical devices that use these thin films are commonplace in existing and
future computers, automobiles, mobile communication systems (cell phones), etc.
The capability of accurately monitoring thin film properties such as film
thickness, mass, viscosity, electrical conductivity and permittivity during film
deposition will improve the performance of consumer electronics that depend on
these devices. The features associated with the LFE monitor will provide higher
sensitivity when compared to the leading competing technology, the Quartz
Crystal Microbalance (QCM) in this market space, and allow electrical
conductivity and permittivity monitoring which are not possible with
QCM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lateral field excited acoustic wave sensor under
development is targeted for industrial factories and research laboratories which
fabricate solid state electronic, microwave and optical devices that employ thin
films critical to the device performance. In contrast to the commonly used QCM,
the LFE device will allow the accurate and sensitive in situ monitoring of both
mechanical (mass, film thicknesses and viscosity) and/or electrical
(conductivity and permittivity) film properties. However, before this technology
can be transitioned to a viable commercial product, two technology gaps have to
be filled. First, the LFE device admittance response needs to be improved.
Although the current LFE response is adequate for implementation in laboratory
instrumentation, a larger change in admittance magnitude and phase is needed to
realize a commercial sensor. The second gap involves the design and testing of
an oscillator circuit in which the LFE device is a feedback element. In this
configuration, the change in oscillator frequency becomes a direct measure of
the change in film mechanical and/or electrical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Maine (UM) faculty in Electrical Engineering
and Business Entrepreneurship and Fil-Tech engineers will advise undergraduates
and graduate MS and PhD students in acoustic wave technology and/or business
entrepreneurship necessary to realize a laboratory prototype that can be
transitioned into a commercial product. In order to prepare the LFE sensor for
technology transfer and commercialization, the UM Department of Industrial
Cooperation will work with Fil-Tech, Inc. to develop intellectual property
licensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Fil-Tech Inc. to provide
customized quartz samples and guidance critical in transitioning this technology
to a viable commercial product.