* 1701948
* Obtaining the PhD and the Road to STEM Careers
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The BD
project at the University of Florida (UF) for the 2017-2019 academic period will
support 12 doctoral students selected from students who participated in Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) undergraduate programs across
the nation. The UF Graduate School directs the project with support from four UF
colleges with STEM PhD programs. The UF has a long-standing commitment to
increasing diversity at all levels, with an emphasis on enhancing diversity in
PhD programs and expanding the PhD student population.

The BD program fosters an environment of collaboration and peer support among
students by encouraging BD scholars to engage with the various student-based
groups on campus. The impact of the program elements, including professional
development opportunities, formal coursework, workshops, seminars, and research
training, will prepare BD scholars for all aspects of research, teaching and
innovation in their professional careers. It is anticipated that many
participants will serve as role models and mentors for future cohorts of STEM
students and young STEM professionals. Programming will begin before the onset
of regular coursework through an innovative six-week summer orientation to
graduate school and the UF community. It is anticipated that many participants
will serve as role models and mentors for future cohorts of STEM students and
young STEM professionals.