* 1701023
* PFI:AIR-TT: LoCATER:Localization and Accountability Technology for Emergency Responders
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Taskin Padir, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research
discoveries on autonomous robot navigation to develop a localization and
personal accountability report check technology to fill the need for a
geolocation system with acceptable accuracy in GPS-denied environments. The
LocATER, a wearable localization and accountability report check technology, has
significant commercial, industrial, emergency response and military
applications. It will transform operations and efficiency of emergency response
teams by providing the incident commanders with a tool to make metric-based
response, rescue and recovery decisions. The LocATER can enhance the safety of
personnel working in environments where GPS and WiFi signals are not available.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a low-cost, integrated proof-
of-concept of the LocATER. The research team will develop the LocATER technology
with three unique features: (i) ability to accurately localize firefighters
inside a burning building to a quadrant and floor, (ii) functionality for
providing firefighters with a tool to quickly complete an accountability report
check, reducing radio traffic and overhead associated with them, and (iii) low-
cost, portable, and light-weight design that can operate without external
reference signals such as GPS, WiFi or other pre-deployed systems. These
features will make the LocATER technology more advantageous in terms of
usability, efficiency, efficacy and practical deployments when compared to the
leading competing localization technologies in this market space.
 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. A
2-dimensional simultaneous localization and mapping algorithm will be designed
and implemented on an embedded system by fusing the inertial and visual odometry
information. The position and velocity data from an inertial measurement unit
will be fused with barometric pressure data to determine the floor information.
A holistic model-based design approach will be adopted to develop and validate a
system that will meet size, weight and power requirements acceptable for
emergency responder operating conditions. In addition, personnel involved in
this project, undergraduate and graduate students as well as the postdoctoral
researchers will receive entrepreneurship and technology translation experiences
through participation in Northeastern's Entrepreneurship Bootcamp, an 8-week
program aimed at enhancing participating teams' understanding of technology
translation and commercialization. Furthermore, the project personnel will be
empowered to attend and participate in the rich lineup of events within the
Boston?s robotics and internet-of-things innovation
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages the Boston Fire
Department to seek critical feedback throughout the design process and access to
testing facilities, and a number of firefighting equipment manufacturers to
identify pathways for integration with existing products in this technology
translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.