* 1701041
* PFI:AIR-TT: DeepBeam: Wirelessly chargeable portable batteries through energy beamforming
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Kaushik Chowdhury, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a
distributed wireless radio-frequency (RF) charging concept to a network-assisted
battery replenishment system for small form-factor sensors and devices. This
will result in the ability to charge small devices, such as cell phones,
wirelessly, which will untether them from the constraints of cables and power
sockets. The project, called DeepBeam, will ensure such IOT devices operate
continuously, with minimum user involvement and battery-related maintenance
downtimes, and enable an energy management network for the tens of billions of
Internet of Things (IOT) devices that will be pervasively deployed over the next
decade. Many safety-critical sensing and monitoring tasks increasingly rely on
sensors in homes, industries and public areas, which make DeepBeam's innovation
in wireless energy delivery an important area of investment. The project will
result in a proof of concept network of multiple energy transmitters (ETs) and a
high-efficiency energy harvesting circuit.

DeepBeam will incorporate the following unique features: (i) a software
controller that optimally schedules wireless charging operations among the
energy transmitters, and (ii) a circuit that can harvest energy in both the
unlicensed and the cellular frequency bands. DeepBeam's design features provide
the following advantages: 40-45% energy harvesting efficiency, charging radius
of several tens of meters, and unconstrained charging in any spatial direction
when compared to the leading competing wireless charging solutions in this
market space. 

The project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application: (i) Designing a beamforming
algorithm based on channel estimation techniques to eliminate the need for
continuous feedback from that device, so that the energy beams from multiple
source points can be properly oriented with constructive energy interference at
the target, (ii) Developing and fabricating an energy harvesting circuit that
interfaces with off-the-shelf sensors and is also capable of aggregating the
received energy over multiple spectrum bands, (iii) Devising a scheduling
algorithm in the software controller that will decide the selection of the
target receivers and the active duration of the charging beams based on the
changing network needs. In addition, the personnel involved in this project, one
post doctoral researcher and one graduate student, will receive innovation and
technology translation experiences through jointly filed patents, writing
invention disclosure documents and participating in commercialization
activities.

The PFI team is strongly connected to the Northeastern Venture Mentoring Network
(VMN) and the university's Center for Entrepreneurship Education that contribute
mentoring support towards the technology translation goals of the project.