* 1701163
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Super-wicking Material for Efficient Evaporative Technology-based Air Conditioner (SWEET-AC)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Chunlei Guo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 198,376.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating previous NSF
discoveries of superwicking surfaces to the production of heat exchangers, the
most critical component in evaporative coolers, and subsequently creating Super-
Wicking Efficient Evaporative Technology based Air Conditioners (SWEET-ACs). The
SWEET-AC concept is important because it will deliver an energy efficient and
environmentally friendly cooling technology. Continuous increases in median
global temperatures, hikes in energy prices, widespread water shortages, and
climate change issues all will lead to a demand for higher energy efficiency
products. Compared to conventional vapor compressor-based air conditioners, the
SWEET-ACs will have an enhanced cooling efficiency while producing a minimal
carbon footprint in order to meet market demands and societal needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. Conventional
vapor compression air-conditioning systems consume a large amount of electrical
energy and have a detrimental impact on the environment. Direct and indirect
evaporative cooling technologies can significantly reduce energy consumption
compared to the conventional ACs. However, current evaporative coolers are far
from reaching their potential in energy efficiency and the hurdle is the lack of
optimized heat exchangers. This project will directly address this key issue by
developing a scalable and high performance heat exchanger material for
evaporative coolers. In contrast to conventional evaporation materials, the
proposed superwicking surfaces do not require water pump to constantly wet the
heat exchangers. They will have a water contact angle of &lt; 5 degrees, a
surface saturation of 90%, a minimum wicking speed of 1 cm/sec, and a minimum
unit area cooling power of 0.2 W/cm2 for an air velocity of 4 m/sec at 40 C. In
addition, this AIR: TT project will train graduate and undergraduate students,
and postdoctoral researchers with commercialization and entrepreneurship skills
in additional to their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage
air conditioner companies to guide the team in industrial requirements and
commercialization aspects in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.