* 1701241
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Improving Robustness of Nanoscale Threshold Logic based Digitial Circuits and the Performance of Design Algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Sarma Vrudhula, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a recent
innovation of designing digital circuits with threshold-logic circuits to
fill the need for achieving reductions in power consumption and size of digital
systems, at advanced technology nodes. The threshold-logic circuits and the
concomitant design methodology is important because, from a user's perspective,
it will enable mobile systems such as laptops and smartphones to operate much
longer between recharging of the batteries, and reduce their size and weight. It
can also lead to reducing the energy usage of bigger systems such as desktop
computers, and massive data centers. From a manufacturer's perspective, it can
result in cost savings, improved reliability and more competitive products. The
project will result in enhanced design tools, the design of threshold-logic
primitive cells, and the design of a prototype circuit at least one advanced
technology node to serve as a proof-of-concept of its robustness and scalability
at lower geometries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This threshold-logic based digital
design technology has the following unique features: (1) a new architecture and
method of operation of certain digital circuit primitives, and (2) a new way of
incorporating them automatically in larger circuits using existing design tools,
i.e., without disrupting the existing design methodologies, so that it can be
easily adopted by industry. These features provide the following advantages:
smaller circuits, lower dynamic power consumption, lower standby power
consumption, and lower variations in power, all without sacrificing speed, when
compared to the leading competing digital ASIC (application specific integrated
circuit) technology in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from research
discovery (successfully demonstrated at 65nm node) toward commercial
application: the scalability of the technology and design methodology to
advanced (smaller geometries- 40nm, 28nm) technology nodes, including overcoming
physical design challenges, maintaining robustness to increased process
variations, and scaling the accompanying software tools to industrial-scale
circuits. These challenges will be addressed by first developing the circuit
libraries in 40nm, which is still a key technology for many companies competing
in the $1T IoT (internet of things) market, and then advancing to 28nm in FD-
SOI. The performance and capability of the design software will be enhanced by
developing better interfaces to existing commercial design tools, and use of
faster software libraries and commercial software platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel involved in this project, Ph.D.
level graduate students, will continue to receive significant training that
requires developing a broad range of design and analytical skills, in multiple
technical areas, as well as learning how to meet exacting industrial design
standards. Other activities will include summer internships with companies that
have expressed interest in the threshold-logic technology, visiting companies
and presenting and marketing the research outcomes to industry.