* 1701004
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Patch for Repair of Cracked Metallic Structures
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Abdeldjelil Belarbi, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2020
* USD 239,998.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a newly
developed composite patching technology using shape memory alloys (SMA) and
fiber reinforced polymers (FRP). These materials will be used as part of easy-
to-install and effective techniques to repair cracks in steel structures,
specifically in transportation infrastructure.   The adoption of these SMA/FRP
patches is important because there are nearly 170,000 steel bridges in the
United States that may be susceptible to the formation of cracks under cyclic
loading conditions such as due to traffic.  These bridges were constructed prior
to the adoption of current fatigue design provisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will result in a proof-of-concept that the technology is effective for
repairing the most troublesome types of cracks that form in steel bridges and
will establish the most appropriate methods to prepare the surfaces of steel
structures to install these new patches. The SMA/FRP patches are lightweight and
can be easily installed without heavy equipment. They do not require welding,
drilling or other irreversible modification of the structure, and they can
potentially be designed to completely halt crack propagation.  These features
allow for rapid installation, and longer projected fatigue lives while
potentially eliminating the need to re-repair the same cracks. The need for
subsequent repairs has been cited as one of the primary concerns with the
currently most widely used techniques such as drilling crack-stop
holes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology
gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application:
(i) The current best practicing for installing composite patches is to grit-
blast the surface to remove contaminants. Older steel structures typically
contain lead paint and grit blasting poses an environmental risk that requires
expensive protective measures. In this project, surface preparation techniques
will be identified that do not present the same risks and the influence of
surface preparation on bond behavior will be quantified. (ii) Preliminary
testing has demonstrated that the SMA/FRP patches are effective at repairing one
class of cracks, namely stress-induced cracks. The effectiveness of these
patches to repair another class of cracks, namely distortion-induced cracks
(which propagate based on a different mechanism), will be evaluated. (iii) The
long-term durability of the patches under out-door environmental exposure
conditions will be quantified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel
involved in this project, post-doc, Ph.D. students, and undergraduate students,
will receive technology transfer experiences through joint activities between
engineering and business students who will, together, identify the market
potential and most suitable path to market for the technology.