* 1701071
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Consequences of adaptive behavioral plasticity for selection on an acoustic signal
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Marlene Zuk, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2020
* USD 17,222.00

A central problem in evolutionary biology is understanding how flexibility
(termed plasticity) in the expression of traits functions when populations are
under selection: does flexibility facilitate or hamper evolution? Flexibility
could facilitate evolution by creating new traits on which selection could act;
alternatively, flexibility could hamper evolution by protecting genes for
detrimental traits from being selected. Flexibility in mating behavior can be
especially important because it could allow the maintenance of small or isolated
populations, where available mates of preferred types are few, or play a role in
the divergence of populations, ultimately leading to divergence of one species
into two or more. This project addresses this fundamental question by examining
how flexibility in mate preference could affect the evolution of courtship.
During this project, a graduate student and an undergraduate participant will
gain comprehensive research experience in behavioral ecology and bioacoustics.
In addition, the researchers will engage in science education and outreach
activities aimed at elementary school children, adults in non-science careers,
and members of underrepresented groups in science via hands-on science
activities, public appearances, and writing for non-technical
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how the experience of male
song quality during development affects female mating behavior in the Pacific
field cricket. Male crickets produce song that females use to identify and
localize appropriate mates. Within Hawaii, the crickets experience a novel
selection pressure against singing preferred songs: an acoustically orienting
parasitoid fly that preferentially infests males with the same song
characteristics preferred by female crickets. Recently, a mutation arose that
makes male crickets obligately silent ('flatwing'). Female crickets strongly
prefer singing males, and also have directional preferences about temporal
properties of the song. Plasticity in expression of these preferences could
facilitate maintenance of this population when available males of preferred
phenotypes are few, but this plasticity could have consequences for the strength
of selection on sexual signals. Indeed, both males and females reared in
silence, mimicking an all-mutant environment, become more phonotactic,
suggesting that mating behavior is plastic and selection on signals in nature
may be relaxed. In this study, the researchers will rear crickets in acoustic
environments that vary by the value of a preferred trait and use phonotaxis
trials (females) and song recordings (males) to determine: 1) whether signal
production is plastic; 2) whether expression of female mating preferences is
plastic; 3) whether population differences in the extent of this plasticity
support the hypothesis that plasticity in mating behavior is an adaptive
response following the introduction of flatwing.