* 1701238
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Pulse Shaping for Increased Conversion Efficiency in Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography Sources for the Fabrication of Next Generation Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,889.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the concept
of laser pulse shaping into an increase in the efficiency with which laser-
created plasmas generate extreme ultraviolet light. The extreme ultraviolet
(EUV) light is necessary to print the next generations of integrated circuits.
The printing of the circuit pattern onto the wafer, known as lithography, is the
single most critical and capital intensive part in the manufacturing of advanced
integrated circuits. Advances in lithography have made possible the printing of
progressively smaller features that have enabled the revolution in the
information technology industry for the past 50 years. The printing of smaller
features has strongly depended on the use of progressively shorter wavelengths
of light. Extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography, a new projection lithography
technique that uses a wavelength dramatically shorter than that of visible
light, will make it possible to continue the progress in the fabrication of more
powerful integrated circuits, sustaining the semiconductor industry's underlying
business model, and the great societal impact that results from continued
advances in information technology. While the amount of average power generated
with the current technology of EUV light is sufficient to initiate the high
volume manufacturing of the next generation of integrated circuits,
significantly higher average powers are still required for high wafer throughput
and cost effective manufacturing. This project will result in the proof of
concept of a technological innovation, the application of a novel laser pulse
sequencer that makes it possible synthetize laser pulses of arbitrary temporal
shape to increase the efficiency of EUV light generation by plasmas. Such
increase in efficiency is of significant commercial value, because it decreases
the cost of ownership as it enables the use of proportionally smaller lasers
necessary in the production of integrated circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses the need for higher average power and higher efficiency in the
generation of EUV light for the printing of the next generations of integrated
circuits. A prototype of a pulse sequencer will be engineered and will be used
to optimize plasma conditions of electron temperature, density, plasma lifetime,
and opacity for increased EUV light generation. The additional degrees of
freedom in the plasma heating process is expected to lead to an increase in the
efficiency of EUV light generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
personnel involved in the project will include graduate and undergraduate
students who will be trained in innovation through immersion in the development
of novel technology and its translation to industry. The project will in this
way contribute to the training of a proficient workforce in EUV technology, an
area of high economic impact in which there is a high demand for engineers and
scientists. The project engages ASML/Cymer. This partnership between an
university and an industry leader enables this technology translation effort
from research discovery towards commercialization
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Industrial Innovation and Partnerships and the Division of Engineering
Education; reflecting the alignment of this project with the respective goals of
the two divisions and their programs.