* 1701727
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Urbanization and Avian Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Natalia Piland, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 16,023.00

Most humans now live in urban environments. Despite the trend towards
urbanization, little is known about the influence of urban environments on the
evolution and ecology of many animals. In Europe, a gene has been found to vary
between urban and rural birds. This gene encodes a protein that transports an
important hormone in and out of cells. This variation is thought to help birds
cope differently with stress in urban settings by influencing mood and behavior.
However, a major question remains, does this genetic variation consistently
correspond to urbanization across species and around the world? This research
will explore how this gene varies in different bird species inside and outside
cities in the Pacific coast of the US and western Amazon of Peru. Examining the
genetic differences in a diversity of birds in different locations will give us
general insight into how urbanization affects bird evolution. This urban focused
research will make biological science more relevant to human residents and will
inform the way cities grow by recognizing that we share these landscapes with
wildlife. In addition, this international research will promote scientific
exchange between Peru and the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus
on genetic markers associated with a serotonin transporter. To understand the
background genetic diversity in these markers, the researchers will first
characterize the variation at a biogeographic scale. They will do this by taking
tissue samples from natural history museum collections representing the full
range of six focal species and sequencing the DNA in the relevant marker
regions. Then, along with local scientists in Peru, the researchers will catch
birds of the same six species in two large cities, two small cities, and two
rural/natural areas. The same genetic markers will be sequenced and variation
between the study sites and the larger biogeographic patterns will be assessed.
Because a multi-species, multi-environment, comparative approach has not been
carried out before, any pattern in the results with inform our understanding of
genetic diversity in the tropics and its role in resilience against
urbanization. If the patterns at a fine spatial scale are consistent with those
at a large spatial scale, it will show that, unlike in Europe, urbanization has
not had an important effect on the distribution of alleles of this gene in these
species. If the serotonin transporter genetic diversity is different at a fine
spatial scale rather than a large spatial scale, while neutral genetic markers
show the same patterns of diversity at fine and large spatial scales, it will
indicate that this gene has perhaps been under selection associated with
urbanization. If all genetic markers show differences at fine spatial scales
from large spatial scales, further investigation will be needed to tease apart
the roles of ecology and species selection in urban areas, making this project a
valuable first foray into a case of rapid adaptive evolution in a novel
environment.&lt;br/&gt;