* 1701947
* Dissertation Research: Selection, niche breadth and plant mating system evolution: Are wider niche breadths of selfing species shaped by water limitation?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Susan Kalisz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 11/30/2018
* USD 19,630.00

This project will investigate whether the type of plant mating system
contributes to whether a plant can survive in stressful habitats. Plant mating
systems, which range from self-pollinating to outcross-pollinating, where pollen
has to be moved among different plants for fertilization to happen, can have
significant effects on where wild plant species live. Self-pollinating species
are expected to be better than outcrossing species at colonizing new areas
because they do not require the presence of either pollinators or mates. This
study will test the hypothesis that self-pollinating species also have
physiological advantages that allow them to outperform outcrossing species in
stressful, water-limited environments. The researchers will collect and analyze
a variety of physiological data, such as growth rate and relative fitness, from
multiple, closely-related pairs of selfing and outcrossing Collinsia plants.
Results of this work will reveal important factors influencing the evolution of
plant mating systems. In addition, the project will involve mentoring of
undergraduate students, including individuals from groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences. Planned outreach activities include the
development of educational activities for elementary school children.

Recent findings support theoretical models that suggest selfing may be a niche
diversifying trait because it allows colonization of new habitats lacking
pollinators or mates. The proposed research builds on previous results on mating
systems and niche breadth by testing whether the physiological performance of
selfing species relative to outcrossers contribute to the observed repeated
patterns of niche breadth differentiation between sister species pairs in the
genus Collinsia. To test the hypothesis that selfers are better adapted to
water-limited environments, the investigators will measure drought stress by
comparing the ratio of stable isotopes 13C:12C in herbarium leaf samples of
selfing/outcrossing sister species pairs relative to the 13C:12C in the
international standard. They will also grow three selfing/outcrossing sister
species pairs in the greenhouse in both high water and water-limited treatments
and measure physiological, growth, and reproductive trait responses. Results
will have important implications for our understanding of the evolution and
maintenance of niche breadth.