* 1701203
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Low-cost Graphene-based Gas Sensors for Hydrogen Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Deyang Qu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a sensing
platform, which is based on tin oxide nanocrystal-reduced graphene oxide (SnO2
NC-RGO) hybrid structures, to fill the need for a low-cost, fast, and ultra-
sensitive method for hydrogen (H2) detection. Sensing hydrogen is important
because it is very flammable if is mixed with ordinary air (due to the oxygen
content in the air). Thus, a sensor is needed in applications requiring or
containing hydrogen such as fuel cells, some batteries, hydrogen powered
vehicles, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a prototype
handheld device that combines the sensor chip with a digital meter for direct
readout of test results; the H2 sensor chip is also adaptable to batteries, fuel
cells, and existing air quality monitoring equipment for real-time H2 detection.
This NC-RGO sensor chip has the following unique features: rapid response for
real-time monitoring, micron-sized dimensions, high sensitivity, scalable
fabrication, and wireless communication compatibility. Compared to current
hydrogen sensors in the marketplace, these features provide fast response,
superior sensitivity/selectivity, portability, low-cost, and facile connection
with smart phones/devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. The NC-RGO sensing platform will be further improved in
order to realize the low-cost, reliable, ultrasensitive H2 detection for various
applications (e.g., H2 fuel cells, vehicles, lead-acid batteries, and air
quality monitoring for indoor spaces) associated with H2. Various sensor
characteristics will be investigated and validated, including sensor
sensitivity, selectivity, long-term stability, performance in different
operating conditions (e.g., various humidity values), and calibration methods.
Insights into the NC-RGO sensing platform will advance the understanding of the
interaction mechanism between gas molecules and low-dimensional materials in
hybrid structures. Such understanding can further contribute to the design of
nanomaterials with desirable properties to identify active sites and rates of
catalytic reactions on metal/metal oxide NCs and to provide guidelines for
performance enhancement through engineering properties of NCs. In addition,
personnel involved in this project, undergraduates (including underrepresented
students) and graduate students, will receive innovation and entrepreneurship
training experiences through interacting with industrial partners and additional
entrepreneurship training through I-Corps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
engages NanoAffix Science LLC., Johnson Controls, and A.O. Smith to augment the
project impact through accelerated commercialization of the resulting H2 sensing
technology.