* 1701484
* Infrared and Visible-Range Optical Observations of Lightning at LOG (Lightning Observatory at Gainesville) and Associated Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Vladimir Rakov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 827,861.00

Lightning is a transient, high-current electric discharge of typically tens of
kiloamperes in air with a flash rate in tens to a hundred per second. Lightning
channel is composed of ionized gas or plasma, whose peak temperature is
typically 30,000o K, about five times higher than the temperature of the surface
of the Sun. Each year, some 25 million cloud-to-ground lightning discharges
occur in the United States, and this number is expected to increase by about 50%
due to global warming over the 21st century. A lightning strike to an
unprotected object or system can be catastrophic. Lightning causes more
fatalities than any other thunderstorm-related hazard, such as tornadoes and
flooding. Lightning initiates many forest fires, and over 30% of all electric
power line failures are lightning related. In the funded research, a new high-
speed infrared (IR) framing camera will be employed for the first time at the
Lightning Observatory in Gainesville, Florida for lightning observations in
conjunction with the existing instrumentations, including the optical systems,
electric and magnetic field measuring systems operating in different frequency
ranges, and x-ray detector to obtain a view of lightning processes that has
never been possible before. The IR camera will allow the imaging of lightning
channels inside clouds that generally are not accessible to visible-range
cameras. The lightning channel cooling process and the thermal energy input to
different parts of the channel will be studied. The optical and corresponding
GPS time-stamped electromagnetic field data will be used to develop, for the
first time, a non-linear and non-uniform distributed-circuit model, which will
allow the investigation of a variety of lightning processes, including the
final-jump phase of lightning attachment to ground or grounded object, which has
not been documented for natural lightning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funded
research will further advance our understanding of the physics of lightning and
its effects with important implications for environmental and climate change
research and for mitigation of lightning hazards to people, structures, and
systems. An improved knowledge of lightning attachment process is needed for
designing adequate protection against lightning and for developing lightning
testing standards. This project will involve postdocs and Ph.D. graduate
students, as well as international collaborations, including two visiting
scholars supported by their home Universities and a Fulbright Scholar. The
research findings will be incorporated in the popular University of Florida
senior undergraduate/graduate course "Lightning." The PI will continue to engage
with high-school science education and public awareness of lightning hazards.
Besides the Physical and Dynamical Meteorology area, the results of the project
will be useful in other disciplines, including high-energy atmospheric physics,
plasma physics, lightning protection and testing, and lightning safety.