* 1701748
* Dissertation Research:   Assessing the vulnerability of salt marsh carbon storage to nutrient enrichment using an integrated meta-omics framework
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Ashley Bulseco, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,878.00

As human populations increase, so will the demand for food. Nitrogen fertilizer
production helps meet this need. However, adding excess nitrogen drastically
alters natural habitats such as salt marshes and others that receive water as
runoff from land. Coastal wetlands provide several ecosystem services, including
nursery habitat for fish and birds, storm surge protection, and nutrient
filtration. Prior studies suggest that excess nitrogen may increase
decomposition in these sediments, resulting in faster degradation of complex
organic matter to carbon dioxide. What controls these processes, and the micro-
organisms responsible for them is not well understood. This doctoral
dissertation improvement project will use controlled laboratory experiments to
investigate the mechanisms behind the effect of added nitrogen on organic matter
decomposition. This research will provide an in-depth analysis of the members of
the salt marsh microbiome and their activities in marsh sediments. Data will
provide insight into how salt marshes are responding to nitrogen fertilizer
runoff, information that is essential for the adaptive management of coastal
wetland systems and their response to environmental change.

This doctoral dissertation improvement project will use controlled flow through
reactor systems to investigate the mechanistic effect of nitrate on microbial
decomposition of salt marsh sediment organic matter. We hypothesize that,
because nitrate is a favorable electron acceptor in heterotrophic, microbial
respiration, it can promote oxidation of organic matter that would otherwise
remain unprocessed. Current biogeochemical data indicate a significant increase
in microbial respiration, particularly denitrification, in response to nitrate
addition, with the most pronounced effect in deep sediments ranging from 150 to
200 years old. This is significant, because organic matter at this depth is
typically thought to be more resistant to microbial degradation, which means
that the capacity of salt marshes to store carbon may lessen with
eutrophication. To further assess these results, we need to gain a better
understanding of the microbial consortia responsible for organic matter
decomposition. Microbial activity plays a critical role in controlling how much
carbon is decomposed; though we know little about salt marsh sediment microbiome
structure and function, and how it may change in response to nitrate addition.
Accordingly, this dissertation improvement grant will contribute to existing
data by taking an integrated 'meta-omics' approach. To complement flow through
reactor experiments, the microbial genetic underpinnings of organic matter
decomposition under conditions of nutrient enrichment will be investigated using
metagenomics, and the metabolic activity of these microbial players will be
assessed by measuring the expression of the microbial metatranscriptome. These
data have the potential to reveal novel microbial lineages from deep salt marsh
sediment, and draw unique linkages between microbial gene expression patterns
and changes in organic carbon quality. Successful integration of these meta-
omics approaches with existing geochemical rate measurements will vastly improve
our understanding of the role of microbes in organic matter decomposition, and
potentially allow for a better predictive understanding for how carbon storage
capacity in salt marshes will respond to future nitrogen loading.