* 1701396
* Axion Dark Matter Experiment at High Frequency (ADMX-HF)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Steven Lamoreaux, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2021
* USD 648,906.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known elementary particles. Deciphering the
nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology,
astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. One of the most exciting quests
is the search for new particles beyond the Standard Model of Particle Physics,
which describes all the known elementary particles and the interactions between
them. Extensions of the model predict not only new particles with large masses
but also some with very small masses. Such a candidate for the latter is the
axion, which has been introduced to explain the smallness of the violation of
the Charge-Parity (CP) symmetry in Quantum Chromodynamics, the theory describing
the action of the strong force, for example the interactions between protons and
neutrons that make up atomic nuclei. The axion turns out to also be a prime
candidate for a constituent of the dark matter in the universe. Axions
constituting the dark matter of our Milky Way halo may be detected through their
conversion into a narrow Radio-Frequency signal in a microwave cavity permeated
by a magnetic field. Searching for this signal is the goal of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R&amp;D on superconducting thin-films together
with squeezed-state and single-photon detection in quantum electronics will
certainly produce unanticipated spin-offs. ADMX-HF at Yale, has already proven
to be a great attractor for young talent, with roughly half being women. The
experiment provides a focal point for the PI's outreach activities with high
school teachers in the greater New Haven area. It is planned to establish a
permanent exhibit on dark-sector science at the Yale Peabody Museum, one of the
foremost natural history museums in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
experiment represents the inaugural use of both Josephson Parametric Amplifiers
(JPAs) in the microwave cavity search, and operation with a dilution
refrigerator. The ADMX-HF PIs have laid out a future strategy for improving
sensitivity, showing that, for above 10 GHz, an optimized search will require
transitioning from linear amplifiers to photon detection schemes that can evade
the Standard Quantum Limit (SQL) noise. The experiment's plans include: a)
reducing the system noise below the SQL, initially by incorporating a JPA-based
squeezed-vacuum state receiver; eventually, photon detector systems based on
superconducting qubits will be developed and deployed; b) implementing a
Photonic Band Gap (PBG) structure as an alternative to a traditional microwave
cavity; if successful it will completely eliminate the forest of TE modes
interfering with the TM mode of interest, which have been a bane to fast and
efficient mass coverage; and c) boosting the cavity Q by one of two avenues:
Incorporating multilayer structures of thin-film Type-II superconductors into
the cavity design, or the use of Distributed Bragg Reflector cavities based on
nested dielectric cylinders. R&amp;D on the fabrication and characterization of
planar thin-films of NbTiN, a Type-II superconductor is showing great promise.
Technical deliverables expected are to (a) extend the mass range of the search
to 12 GHz (50 micro eV), and (b) deliver an improvement in power sensitivity by
a factor of five, and thus approach sensitivity to DFSZ axions. This will
dramatically improve our discovery potential in the most promising mass region.