* 1701049
* PFI:AIR-TT: From Lab to Market - Transcranial Focal Electrical Stimulation (TFS) for Epilepsy
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Walter Besio, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2021
* USD 235,953.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating non-invasive
transcranial focal electrical stimulation (TFS) to fill the need for the
treatment of refractory epilepsy.   The TFS technology is important because it
will provide a powerful tool that is accessible to the research and medical
community for understanding and modulating brain activities and has extensive
applicability in the broad space of technologies to aid persons with epilepsy
and other neurological and psychiatric disorders in general.  The project will
result in a robust and easy-to-use clinical TFS prototype. TFS has the following
unique features: it is non-invasive, focal, and allows recording and stimulation
from the same electrodes. These features will help simplify and advance the
therapeutic modality for epilepsy and avoid the risks involved with implantable
stimulators or the side effects of antiepileptic drugs.
 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application.  First, the
design of the TFS prototype will be improved to meet the safety and operational
requirements of the clinical environment.  Second, the safety and tolerability
of TFS will be established through first-in-human testing.  This innovative
clinical TFS prototype will be fully programmable with current intensity (0 to
100 mA) in increments of 2 mA, pulse width (50 to 500 micro-sec) in increments
of 10 micro-sec, frequency (0 to 500 Hz) in increments of 5 Hz, and duration of
pulses (30 seconds to 30 minutes) in increments of 30 seconds.  The controller
will assure the stimulation parameters selected are below the energy density
factor, 0.92 A2/cm4-sec-1, which was found to be safe with electrical-thermal
coupled field analysis and preliminary animal experiments. In addition, the
graduate student directly involved in this project will receive innovation and
technology translation experiences through the design and testing of the TFS
prototype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages business development and
intellectual property professionals to help achieve the commercialization goal
in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.