* 1701850
* Dissertation Research:   Behavioral Responses to Floral Signals of Nectar Quality Affect Hawkmoth Fitness
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Geoffrey Broadhead, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 18,350.00

A preference for amino acid-rich floral nectar is ubiquitous among adult moths
and butterflies that pollinate flowering plants. Moths pollinating yellow
evening primrose (Oenothera flava) flowers can use the intensity of its scent to
directly assess the nectar amino acid content. Amino acids improve the
reproductive potential of these pollinators and nectar is their only dietary
source of amino acids. Despite the demonstrated importance of amino acids to
reproduction, it remains unknown how this preference translates into increased
fecundity; amino acids consumed by the adult are not directly used to produce
additional offspring. This project will combine behavioral theory and physiology
to assess how floral preference translates into increased reproduction for both
sexes of pollinating moth and to investigate potential underlying physiological
mechanisms. The researchers will investigate effects of nectar amino acids on
male and female moth reproduction, flight muscle maintenance and function, and
trade-offs between immune function and reproduction. This project also provides
opportunities for research involvement by undergraduates and exchange students
with broader nutritional interests. Furthermore, the investigators will continue
activities designed to foster scientific interests in underrepresented groups
and share their work with local NY communities.

The fitness benefits of amino acid preferences have been demonstrated in female
Lepidoptera, however the mechanisms behind this preference remain unknown and
the impact on male fitness has never been assessed. Once completed, this project
will provide a systematic assessment of the contributions of nectar amino acids
to mating success and reproduction in both sexes of moth and test two
physiological theories involving nutritionally mediated reproductive tradeoffs
with somatic maintenance and immune response. Using the white-lined sphinx moth
(Hyles lineata), the most abundant pollinator of the evening primrose O. flava,
this project will experimentally manipulate the nutritional status of adult
moths and conduct mating trials to determine how nutritional status affects
mate-choice and overall reproductive output in both sexes of moth. To determine
if amino acids improve flight ability, which is important for nectar foraging
and reproduction, the researchers will also test moth flight ability and muscle
strength in combination with histological assessments of overall muscle cell
senescence. Finally, to assess the role of amino acids for nutritionally
mediated tradeoffs between reproduction and immune function, standard tests of
immune function will be used to investigate how nutritional status influences a
moth?s ability to resist pathogens while maintaining reproductive output.
Undergraduates from the Cornell Biology Scholars program will participate in the
research and be mentored by the researchers. The researchers will disseminate
their work through scientific presentations and publications, outreach through
Expanding Your Horizons, Insectapalooza and Cornell?s teaching outreach program
GRASSHOPR.