* 1701827
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Testing the role of red carotenoid coloration in copepod mate choice
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2020
* USD 18,948.00

Red colors are among the most widespread forms of animal signals. On one hand,
the red coloration may be assessed by potential partners during mate-choice,
where individuals with the brightest red color are more likely to be chosen as a
mate. Evidence supports this idea in animals such as birds and fish. On the
other hand, some research has found that red color may have a physiological
function, for example, acting as a sunscreen that offers protection from
potentially damaging solar radiation. This project uses copepods, tiny shrimp-
like animals with bright red colors, to test whether to examine if red copepod
color is (1) a signal of mate quality, (2) a sunscreen, or (3) both a signal of
quality and a sunscreen. The results of this research will advance the basic
understanding of animal coloration in group of animals that has not been well
studied. In addition, the researchers will use this study system to bring
science training to Alabama children in fourth through sixth grade. Working
through a well-structured program--Getting Under The Surface (GUTS)--teams of
parents and children from some of the most science-deficient school systems in
the U.S. will be invited to half-day programs run by faculty. Two programs will
be run involving the same student/parent teams. The bright red copepod system is
ideal for capturing the attention of younger students while offering
opportunities for training with microscopes and basic experimental design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red carotenoid coloration is a widespread form of
ornamentation in animals and extensive empirical data show that red coloration
is an honest signal of individual quality and performance. However, the most
popular vertebrate systems that clearly demonstrate selection for red carotenoid
coloration via mate choice are not suitable for the physiological experiments
needed to advance the field. The project focuses on physiological constraints on
the production of red carotenoids in animals, using Tigriopus copepods as a
model. The researchers use diet manipulations to vary carotenoid coloration and
to test whether red colors in copepods are used as a visual signal in male and
female mate choice, or whether red coloration acts as a protectant against UV
radiation. This behavioral research will create a critical context for
interpreting physiological research on carotenoid color production and enable
better of understanding red coloration in copepods in particular and animals in
general.