* 1701214
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Dibble: A Cost-Effective Tool for Broadening Participation in STEM Thinking
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Karen Jeffrey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/29/2020
* USD 197,461.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating knowledge
about science learning and innovative technologies into a tool for supporting
scientific literacy growth in youth. The project will create "Dibble," an
innovative learning platform and mobile app that engages learners in the
processes of scientific investigation (e.g., posing questions, exploring
resources, collecting evidence to address questions, and making conclusions
based on evidence). Dibble is grounded in the philosophy that scientific
thinking, problem solving, and use of evidence are critical for our country's
economic success and for our citizens to live healthy, participatory, and
successful lives. Dibble will engage users in the scientific process at multiple
entry points, allowing participation through asking questions, collecting data,
visualizing data, interpreting data, and soliciting ideas and feedback from
peers, educators, and content experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
take on key challenges related to sustaining user engagement; effectively
supporting learners' creation and interpretation of shared data products; and
identifying and creating intuitive and usable design features in learning
environments. Dibble will seek the right balance between user-directed
navigation- to ensure users are motivated and confident in their activity- and
built-in features to guide and support engagement to support Dibble's underlying
purpose of participation in scientific practices. As part of this development
process, graduate students who are participating in the myCHOICE program at the
University of Chicago will have opportunities to learn about and gain experience
in the science education activities of this project, in order to learn about
education as an alternative career to academic research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical partner for this project is ForAll
Systems, a Chicago-based educational software development company. The primary
educational partner is the Peggy Notebaert Nature Museum that hosts the
educational programs for teens where Dibble will first be tested.