* 1701816
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of phyllosphere microbiomes in plant species coexistence and plant-pathogen interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Briana Whitaker, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,143.00

Microorganisms are species that are so small that you cannot see them with the
naked eye. Microorganisms live all over the surfaces and inside of every type of
larger organism on the planet, forming what is known as the "microbiome" of the
larger hosts. This research will focus on the microbiomes of plants, which have
profound impacts on plant health and performance. This research will focus on
how microbiomes affect resistance of a host to another microorganism: a disease-
causing fungus. By experimentally manipulating combinations of microbiomes, host
species, and whether or not the disease-causing fungus is present, the
researchers will be able to find out how microbiomes affect the ability of
different plant species to compete with one another and to resist disease. By
growing microbes found in natural microbiomes and by using state-of-the-art DNA
sequencing approaches, they will begin to identify how important microbial
players affect plant health. This project will involve the training of a
graduate student in cutting-edge bioinformatics techniques. Because one outcome
of this work will be to identify how and whether inoculating plants with the
right microbiome protects against disease, the results from this work will also
contribute to the development of new approaches to fighting costly pathogens in
crops, and to helping land managers promote biodiversity in natural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past three decades, the plant-soil
feedback framework has been used to achieve theoretical and empirical
breakthroughs. Phyllosphere microbial communities, which reside in or on
aboveground plant tissues, are similarly diverse, but current research suffers
from an inability to connect presence and identity of phyllosphere microbes to
larger ecological questions. In this project, researchers will test how pathogen
infection alters the fitness and growth outcomes of con- vs. heterospecific
phyllosphere microbial communities, with a focus on the fungal constituents of
these microbiomes. Next-generation sequencing technologies will be combined with
culture-dependent approaches to study the mechanisms of fungal community
assembly in the phyllosphere. Functional trait data will be collected on select
fungal cultures as metrics of plant-fungal and pathogen-fungal interactions.
This trait-based approach will then be used to determine whether specific traits
of the fungi measured in the lab can be used to understand their abundance and
role on plants. This body of work has the potential to expand the scientific
community's understanding of phyllosphere community assembly, and the mechanisms
by which different phyllosphere communities inhibit or facilitate plant-species
coexistence on their own or in conjunction with pathogens.