* 1701788
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Isolating a Mechanism for Microbial-Host Local Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Tony Wilson, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 20,294.00

This project investigates how the external environment shapes the immune system.
Seahorses provide an ideal model for studying host-microbe interactions for
three reasons. The genetic structure of their immune system is simple. Also,
their dispersal capability is limited, and their geographic distribution is
broad. Previous research on the pot-bellied seahorse across its range in New
Zealand and southeastern Australia found striking differences between the
pattern of genetic diversity in those parts of the genome related to immune
response versus those parts of the genome that are not under selection. This
proposal aims to experimentally test field observations of host-microbe
associations. It will address a key question in host-microbial co-evolutionary
theory: Are host-microbe associations in natural populations a type of local
adaptation for immunity? Marine environments provide an essential economic
engine for food, transportation, commerce and recreation, but we still have a
poor understanding of how human activities impact resident organisms and
influence ecosystem health. The results of this research will be incorporated
into the NSF-funded Authentic Research Experience in Microbiology program
serving students at ten City University of New York campuses, and will inform
marine conservation planning and management through the Ministry of Primary
Industries, FishServe Commercial Fisheries Services, and the National Institute
of Water and Atmospheric Research.

Host-microbe interactions are an underappreciated driver of adaptation. This
project will evaluate a potential mechanism of local adaptation at the major
histocompatibility class II locus (MHII) by testing the fitness consequences of
host-microbe associations in the marine species Hippocampus abdominalis (the
pot-bellied seahorse). Previous research on wild H. abdominalis across its
geographic range detected enhanced levels of MHII variability at the population
level relative to neutral loci. Sequencing of the host gut microbiome indicates
that the local environment (urban, agricultural, or pristine) has a significant
effect on the microbial composition of hosts collected from these sites.
Experimental populations of H. abdominalis will be exposed to microbes showing
positive, negative, or neutral associations with hosts in natural populations,
and effects of MHII genotype on growth, condition, immune response and survival
will be measured. The research proposed here represents an exciting opportunity
to explicitly test field observations of host-microbe associations and targets a
key evolutionary concept, microbe-mediated local adaptation, using an
experimental protocol reflecting natural pathways of microbial exposure