* 1701192
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Portable Neutron Detector Implementing PIN detectors and Application Specific Circuitry (ASIC)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2018
* MANUEL QUEVEDO, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 199,261.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating research on
solid state neutron detectors based on silicon p-i-n diodes coupled with a 10B
neutron conversion layer. Low cost, high performance portable neutron detectors
will have applications ranging from homeland security to medical treatment.
First responders will be able to continuously monitor for the presence of
special nuclear materials, providing a distributed, networked array of detectors
covering the entire country, making it nearly impossible to move special nuclear
materials without being detected. Medical physicists will be able to monitor the
production of neutrons during heavy ion cancer treatment to collect data on the
long term impact of secondary neutrons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology is
based on research that resulted in detectors that have shown &gt;13% intrinsic
thermal neutron detection efficiency. Currently, most portable neutron detectors
are based on 3He-filled tubes. While these detectors have been the workhorse of
the nuclear industry for many years, they require high voltage and they are
fragile, bulky, and too expensive to be widely distributed. There is a need for
high efficiency neutron detectors that are rugged, low cost, low power and that
can be networked together. This PFI program involves the University of Texas at
Dallas working closely with Texas Instruments to develop the electronics to tile
many small solid state neutron detectors together into an array that will
provide performance similar to commercially available 3He detectors at a greatly
reduced cost.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses several technology
gap(s) as it translates from research discoveryÂ toward commercial application.
For example, this program will couple highly efficient neutron detector elements
with high performance signal processing electronics made from state-of-the-art
silicon CMOS, based on an ASIC (application specific integrated circuit) that
has at least 25 channels of pre-amplification and pulse shaping circuitry, with
one channel coupled to each 1 cm2 detector element. This will allow the
demonstration of a 25 cm2 solid state neutron detector array with performance
equivalent to a conventional 3He detector. Simulations show that the high
performance, low noise electronics should enable 20% intrinsic thermal neutron
detection efficiency. Because all of the electronics are combined in one ASIC,
the cost of the electronics can be reduced from approximately $1200 using
discreet components for each channel, to &lt;$10 for the entire array. Because
of the greatly reduced cost, portable neutron detectors would be available for
applications never before possible. This project will support two graduate
students who will be trained in the area of radiation detectors and nuclear
electronics. This is quickly becoming a lost skill set and there is a need for
the next generation of engineers and scientists that understand radiation
detectors and the associated electronics. The students will also have the
opportunity to work with engineers and scientists at Texas Instruments, the
leader in the field of analog and mixed signal electronics. This is an
opportunity to which few students have access.