* 1701680
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Landscape genetics and connectivity in a polymorphic salamander, Plethodon cinereus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Shawn Kuchta, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,632.00

This project will investigate the ecological and evolutionary factors that
maintain color polymorphism in different populations of the Eastern Red-backed
Salamander, a species that has a 'striped' red and black morph and an
'unstriped' solid black morph. Many species in nature have multiple color morphs
that occur together within a single population. However, the frequencies at
which particular morphs occur can vary widely among different populations. A
fundamental unanswered question in evolutionary ecology is whether natural
selection or dispersal is primarily driving these differences. This study will
collect and analyze genomic data from 32 Eastern Red-backed Salamander
populations that range from having only a single color morph present to having
both morphs present at various frequencies. Different morphs of this species
also differ in other aspects of their biology, such as physiology and
aggression, and a major goal is to assess the relative importance of local
adaptation versus dispersal among populations in maintaining morph frequencies.
Results will further our basic understanding of the relationship between color
variation and the evolution of diversity. In addition, the project will provide
research opportunities for undergraduate students, who will be trained in
cutting-edge genetic techniques. Outreach includes public seminars at two local
nature preserves and educational displays at the local library for school
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use genomic data to determine
whether geographic distance, environmental variables, morph frequency, or a
combination of these factors best explain patterns of genetic variation in the
Eastern Red-backed Salamander, Plethodon cinereus. Genetic data will be
collected using double digest restriction associated DNA (ddRAD). These data
will be used to quantify levels of gene flow in P. cinereus from 480 individuals
from 32 populations across northern Ohio that vary in morph frequency, from
monomorphic to various degrees of polymorphic. A variety of statistical
analyses, such as STRUCTURE, BAYESCAN, and redundancy analysis, will be used to
determine if genetic variation in P. cinereus is more closely linked with
phenotype frequency or geographic distance. Overall, this study will provide
critical information on the relative contributions of morph frequency and
geographic distance for explaining patterns of genetic variation in P. cinereus,
and will improve our understanding of the factors involved in the evolution and
maintenance of color polymorphisms.