* 1701658
* SusChEM: Beyond Thermal Separations: Development of Ultra High Pressure Reverse Osmosis Membranes for Energy Efficient Desalination of Hypersaline Brines
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 340,000.00

PI Name: Menachem Elimelech&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET
1701658&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The treatment of high-salinity industrial
wastewaters, such as those from the oil and gas industry, coal-fired power
plants, and inland desalination facilities, is a major challenge. Rising costs
and environmental concerns associated with the disposal of industrial
wastewaters necessitate the development of low-cost, energy-efficient treatment
technologies that can allow for water reuse while minimizing the volume of
wastewater requiring disposal. Current thermal desalination technologies are
relatively inefficient and expensive compared with membrane-based reverse
osmosis (RO) processes, which have dramatically lowered the energy consumption
and cost of seawater desalination; however, conventional RO can only treat or
concentrate feedwaters up to approximately twice the salinity of seawater
because of the limited maximum hydraulic pressure that current RO membrane
systems can tolerate (typically about 75 bar). Therefore, conventional RO cannot
be used to treat industrial wastewaters, which are typically several times more
saline than seawater. The PIs seek to develop and characterize new RO membranes
that can operate at very high pressures of up to 400 bar. These membranes will
facilitate the development of high-pressure RO (HPRO) or ultra-high pressure RO
(UHPRO) systems that are capable of treating high-salinity industrial
wastewaters in an energy efficient and cost effective manner. To promote
diversity and to enhance the involvement of under-represented groups in science
and engineering, the PI will be engaged in Yale's K-12 outreach activities and
in the training of undergraduate students through research and senior-level
projects, and graduate student training for research and academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of the project include: (i)
providing fundamental understanding of membrane compaction and the ideal support
layer properties for highly pressure-tolerant TFC RO membranes, (ii) developing
a polyamide selective layer using sacrificial nanostrand layers on polymeric and
metallic supports tailored for HPRO and UHPRO operation, and (iii) analyzing
water and salt transport behavior through RO membranes at ultra-high pressures
and salinities. The PIs will develop new fabrication techniques for HPRO and
UHPRO membranes and investigate fundamental membrane properties and mass
transport behavior at ultra-high pressures and salinities. Such breakthrough
membranes would enable the expanded application of RO to
desalination/concentration of large volumes of highly saline brines, which would
in turn result in significant energy and cost savings.