* 1701007
* GP-EXTRA: Fostering Interest in Earth Science Teaching Through the Reflective Practice of Science
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Steven Bertman, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2022
* USD 420,770.00

PART 1&lt;br/&gt;Earth Science plays a key role in the nation?s security and
welfare. Finding energy and mineral resources, protecting water quality,
preparing for the impacts of a changing climate, and keeping citizens safe from
hazards such as floods and earthquakes are essential to the nation?s quality of
life. In order for young people to choose career paths in Earth Science, they
need well-prepared teachers who reflect the ethnic, racial, and gender diversity
of our nation. These teachers should be able to effectively convey both the
important concepts in Earth Science, and how Earth scientists gather and
interpret information. Our project tests the idea that the best way to engage
children in the knowledge and practices of geoscientists is for their teachers
to have direct experience with scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
create a 10-week summer program in which 8 undergraduate students per year gain
direct experience in conducting scientific research and in translating this
research experience into classroom lessons. Students majoring in science or in
K-12 education from Western Michigan University, Lake Michigan College, and
Kalamazoo Valley Community College will gain experience in four interwoven
components: (1) Learn Science ? a two-week introduction to surface water quality
and lake systems, (2) Practice Science ? a six-week water quality investigation
in a local urban lake, (3) Teach Science ? two weeks of teaching preparation and
practice with master teachers, followed by two weeks of supervised teaching in a
middle school summer camp, and (4) Think Science ? ten weeks concurrent with
other program components in which students learn about how Earth Science is
practiced by scientists and how they might best teach these practices to
children.&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this project is to better prepare a
diverse future Earth Science workforce. We expect that participating
undergraduates will go on to impact thousands of K-12 students during their
teaching careers, contributing to the nation?s scientific literacy and inspiring
some of these children to become Earth scientists. Additionally, this project
explicitly recruits students of color and women from all participating
institutions as a means for increasing the diversity of the Earth Science
education workforce. Finally, if this project is highly effective in preparing
future teachers, we intend to advocate for this model to be adopted across our
university and across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2&lt;br/&gt;As
states in the U.S. adopt the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), or adopt
NGSS-inspired state standards, Earth Science takes a more prominent role across
K-12 grades. Diverse and well-prepared teachers become ever more critical to
expanding participation in the geoscience workforce. The best way to engage
children in the knowledge and practices of geoscientists is for teachers to
self-identify as geoscientists, which can be achieved through authentic
experiences with scientific practices such as asking questions, gathering and
analyzing data, and justifying claims with evidence. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will create a 10-week summer program in which elementary and secondary science
education undergraduates from Western Michigan University and two regional
community colleges gain direct experience in conducting scientific research and
in translating this research into classroom lessons while being guided through
reflection of the work. Cohorts of 8 students per year will gain experience in
four interwoven components: (1) Learn Science ? a two-week introduction to
surface water hydrogeology and lake systems, (2) Practice Science ? a six-week
water quality investigation in a local urban lake, (3) Teach Science ? two weeks
of mentored teaching preparation and practice followed by a two-week mentored
teaching experience as summer camp instructors, and (4) Think Science ? ten
weeks concurrent with other program components in which students learn about the
nature of science and scientific inquiry, reflect on their research experiences,
design lessons to be taught at the summer camp, and reflect on their teaching
experience. &lt;br/&gt;Because authentic research, teaching, and reflection on
Earth Science research and education will be coupled, the outcome of this
program will be that elementary and secondary science teachers will self-
identify as geoscientists just as strongly as they do as teachers. Through this
integrated approach, we will improve future teachers? knowledge of content,
skills, and scientific practices in surface water hydrogeology and geochemistry,
improve their ability to design and carry out a field- and laboratory-based
investigation, increase their understanding of the context of the scientific
method, improve their skill in designing and teaching lessons to middle school
students, and improve their knowledge of classroom practices of science and how
to use these to inspire more young people into careers in earth and
environmental science. Ongoing external evaluation will provide data informing
the project team as to whether we are meeting program goals, and where the
program may be improved. &lt;br/&gt;As they go on to a career in teaching K-12
science, each of the 24 undergraduate students expected to participate in this
program will collectively impact thousands of children. By self-identifying as a
scientist and displaying comfort with scientific thinking and experimentation,
they will be able to make their own students more comfortable with science and
hence increase the chances that they will consider scientific career paths thus
enabling our program graduates to inspire future geoscientists. Discussion of
careers in the geosciences and related fields will be an explicit part of this
program. Additionally, this project explicitly recruits students of color and
women from all participating institutions as a means for increasing the
diversity of the Earth Science education workforce. We anticipate that this
program will also impact other pre-service teachers through interactions with
peers. Finally, we will disseminate our program model and best practices as
identified through evaluation so that key aspects can be adopted at other
teacher preparation institutions.