* 1701876
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Energetic mechanisms underlying fitness consequences of immune responses
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Kristi Montooth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,949.00

This research tests the hypothesis that individuals with inefficient energy
metabolism will have a decreased ability to fight infection, which in turn will
decrease their future reproductive ability. Fighting infection requires
individuals to invest energy in immune responses. These responses can deplete
energy supplies that would otherwise be used for growth, maintenance, and
reproduction, particularly when energy is limited. Individual organisms may be
energy limited when nutrients are not available or when their genes do not allow
efficient processing of nutrients into energy supplies. The research will also
address questions about how fighting infection changes metabolic rate. By using
the model genetic organism, Drosophila melanogaster, which has natural immune
responses that are similar to humans, this project will generate critical
information on how genetic variation in energy metabolism affects the ability of
human cells to fight infection. This research will also be used to design new
exercises for introductory biology laboratories that will help students
synthesize information across diverse topics covered in introductory biology
courses, from evolution to immunity and physiology.

This project tests the prediction that the energy required to activate the
immune system during development decreases the ability of individuals with
inefficient energy metabolism to fight infection, and creating a resulting
decrease in future adult reproduction. The project connects the effects of
interactions between innate immunity and energy metabolism pathways at the
organismal, molecular, and physiological levels in a well-studied genetic
system. The experiments take advantage of a well-characterized set of genotypes,
one of which has a disrupted mitochondrial-nuclear interaction that results in
inefficient energy metabolism. Objective 1 will quantify whether flies with
inefficient energy metabolism have lower infection survival and greater
deleterious consequences for reproductive fitness after infection by a natural
pathogen, Providencia rettgeri. Experiments will also modify the nutrient diet
to further decrease the energy available for immune responses in all genotypes.
Objective 2 will measure the activation of underlying molecular pathways and
aspects of cellular energy metabolism to explain effects on tradeoffs between
immunity and reproduction. Experiments include quantifying levels of
antimicrobial peptide induction, measuring the amounts of key proteins in
energy-sensing pathways, assessing the bacterial load during infection, and
monitoring indicators of the cellular energetic state and organismal metabolic
rate during infection.