* 1701585
* Workshop on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Olav Richter, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2017
* USD 20,988.00

The 31st Annual Workshop on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics (AFW) will take
place March 6-9, 2017 at East Tennessee State University in Johnson City,
Tennessee. The AFW is an internationally recognized, well-respected conference
on topics related to automorphic forms, which have played a key role in many
recent breakthroughs in mathematics. Continuing a three-decade long tradition,
the AFW will bring together a geographically diverse group of participants at a
wide range of career stages, from graduate students to senior professors.
Typically, about half of the attendees at the AFW are at early stages of their
careers, and about one quarter to one third of participants are women. The AFW
will continue to provide a supportive and encouraging environment for giving
talks, exchanging ideas, and beginning new collaborations. In addition to the
research talks, the AFW will - like in past years - have two professional
development panels on topics such as good mathematical writing, early career
development, and transitioning from one career stage to the next. Furthermore,
for the first time at AFW, there will be a "speed" session in which participants
(primarily junior mathematicians) present short talks about current research
projects which may still be in preliminary stages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automorphic forms constitute a major area of study in
number theory and related areas. One of the goals of the AFW is to promote new
interactions and collaborations between researchers working in different areas
concerning automorphic forms. Thus, the workshop will highlight a wide range of
developments in areas including the analytic, algebraic, combinatorial, and
p-adic theory of automorphic forms and related topics such as L-functions.
Automorphic forms have played a key role in many breakthroughs in mathematics,
including the proofs of Fermat's Last Theorem (by Andrew Wiles), Serre's
Conjecture (by Chandrashekhar Khare, Mark Kisin, and Jean-Pierre Wintenberger),
the Sato-Tate Conjecture (by Thomas Barnet-Lamb, David Geraghty, Michael Harris,
and Richard Taylor), Serre's Uniformity Conjecture (by Yuri Bilu and Pierre
Parent),the Monstrous Moonshine Conjecture (for which Borcherds was awarded the
Fields Medal), and the Fundamental Lemma (for which Ngo Bau Chau was awarded the
Fields Medal). The topics covered in this year's workshop are likely to include
Bianchi, elliptic, Jacobi, Hilbert, and Siegel modular forms, elliptic curves
and abelian varieties, special values of L-functions, p-adic aspects of
L-functions and automorphic forms, connections with representation theory, mock
modular forms, quadratic forms, and additional related areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Website:http://automorphicformsworkshop.org/