* 1701069
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Using dynamic network models to reveal how heterogeneity in behavioral and immune competence impact disease dynamics in an emerging wildlife disease
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Meggan Craft, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,620.00

Emerging infectious diseases are diseases that appear in new hosts or in a new
place. They can result when new strains of a pathogen arise, or from a pathogen
being introduced into a new area, and can threaten wildlife, livestock, and
humans through illness and death. Because most emerging infectious diseases that
shift to humans come from wildlife it is important to understand wildlife
diseases. Often, scientists use mathematical models of disease as tools to
understand existing patterns of how a disease spreads or to help predict future
trends. This research focuses on understanding differences among hosts in how
they behave, or how their bodies respond to infection affect the next step in a
disease epidemic: when the pathogen spreads among hosts. This research will help
scientists better understand how individual differences in what happens after
infection should be incorporated into disease models. With this information,
scientists and managers will be able to better design data collection and
disease models for the targeted control of emerging infectious diseases. The
project will also train a graduate student and result in the development of new
teaching tools for grade school and undergraduate students, including a website
that could be used at many other colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the potential for severe
consequences of emerging infections diseases with wildlife sources and the time
and resource-intensive nature of gathering pathogen data in wildlife
populations, improved disease models are necessary tools for providing insight
into the research effort necessary to capture the transmission process. The
objective of this research is to link empirical and modeling approaches to
better understand how among-host variation in traits affects pathogen
transmission in a wildlife system. It will integrate a theoretical model with
empirical data from the host-pathogen system of house finches and their
bacterial pathogen, Mycoplasma gallisepticum. This work will address how the
behavioral and physiological phenotypes affect disease dynamics and will also
explore the effects of infection-induced behavioral changes. Experimental M.
gallisepticum infection data combined with empirical contact network data will
be used to parameterize a dynamic network disease model. This research will
provide novel insights into the potential role of covariation between behavioral
and immune competence in epidemic dynamics, and will serve as one of the first
models to apply dynamic networks to an emerging infectious disease system in
wildlife.