* 1701913
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Morphological consequences of trophic evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Brian O'Meara, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 19,630.00

A unifying characteristic of all life forms is the need to acquire resources.
Resources relating to food and feeding, also known as trophic resources, have
been a leading factor in driving the diversity of life on this planet. One of
every three living vertebrate species is an acanthomorph fish, a group of spiny-
ray finned fishes that includes cichlids and many reef fishes. Members of this
group consume a wide variety of resources, ranging from scraping scales off
other fish, filtering plankton from the water, biting off chunks of coral, or
actively hunting other vertebrates. How effectively the fish feed on these
resources is intimately connected to their physical anatomy, especially how well
the fish can maneuver and capture prey. Some anatomical traits are thought to
lead to increased speciation or decreased extinction rates (these are known as
key innovations) but may limit possible flexibility in diet evolution. This is
the key question addressed by this research. In addition, this research compares
how communities of different ages are shaped by their trophic ecologies.
Acanthomorphs are also common aquarium fish, providing a great opportunity to
educate the public about form and function in biology, which this research will
do by producing interactive software.

Understanding the ecological factors that generate and maintain diversity is a
major goal in biological research. Trophic ecology is one such factor and is a
major driver of evolution. Acanthomorph fishes provide the perfect system to
study trophic evolution as they are extremely speciose and diverse in their
trophic ecology and morphology. Specifically, this research investigates how
trophic ecology may promote or constrain rates of morphological evolution, how
morphological key innovations may constrain or promote rates of diet evolution,
and how communities of different ages may have different patterns of trophic
evolution that have shaped the respective fish fauna. This research will use
comparative phylogenetic methods and, for young radiations, phylogenomics, to
elucidate relationships of species and test these hypotheses in a comparative
evolutionary framework. This research will provide insight into how diet evolves
and the macroevolutionary consequences that trophic ecology has on morphology.