* 1701657
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Negotiations Over Offspring Care: A Test of Alternative Hypotheses Using the Clown Anemonefish
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Tina Barbasch, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2019
* USD 16,374.00

Conflict is a pervasive feature of animal societies. Conflicts arise whenever
the interests of interacting individuals are not wholly aligned, yet many social
interactions require individuals to reach some compromise. Parental care is an
interaction that is rife with conflict, because both parents benefit from
shifting the burden of care to the other, yet requires cooperation, because both
parents benefit from the total amount of care. The outcome of conflict between
parents has been modeled using economic game theory models, which assume that
individuals act in their best interest but that their optimal behavior depends
on how others behave. This project will build on existing empirical and
theoretical work to test alternative hypotheses for how parents negotiate care
utilizing a tractable study system: the clown anemonefish a.k.a. Nemo. Studying
how conflict among caring parents is resolved is critical to understanding why
animals, including humans, form such alliances. Undergraduates involved in the
project will receive training in aquarium maintenance, assist in ongoing
research, and complete independent research projects. This project will also
encourage participation of underrepresented groups in science through the
researchers' participation in Science Club for Girls and through work with local
school groups at the Mahonia Na Dari field station. The results will be broadly
disseminated through presentations at international scientific meetings and
development of "data nuggets" (http://datanuggets.org/) to ensure that results
are available in a format that will enhance public understanding.

The existence of biparental care poses a perplexing evolutionary question
because parents must coordinate their behavior to raise offspring when there are
costs to providing care and inherent conflicts of interest among parents. The
objective of this project is to test plausible alternative hypotheses for the
factors that govern how parents negotiate the amount of care to provide to their
offspring, and create a more general framework for understanding conflict
resolution. The researchers will test four alternative hypotheses for how
parents negotiate the amount of care to provide to their offspring: H0) Parental
effort is fixed; H1) Parental effort is negotiated based on partner effort
alone; H2) Parental effort is negotiated with an information asymmetry; H3)
Parental effort is negotiated with a power asymmetry; H4) Parental effort is
negotiated with a simple form of reciprocity. Experiments will be conducted in a
natural population of clown anemonefish (Amphiprion percula) in Papua New
Guinea. By supplementing food resources, effort by each parent will be
manipulated in a non-invasive and ecologically relevant manner. The anemonefish
system allows tests of alternative hypotheses simultaneously, where previous
studies have only tested them in isolation. Furthermore, the majority of
negotiation studies have been conducted in birds, so utilizing A. percula will
test the generality of theoretical predictions. In sum, the proposed research
will use a tractable study species together with a rigorous alternative
hypothesis testing approach to determine the factors that influence the outcome
of negotiations. While incorporating teaching, training and learning, this
research will create a more general framework for studying conflict resolution
and revise our understanding of negotiations over offspring care.