* 1701855
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Costs and Benefits of Shelter-Building by Lepidopteran Caterpillars in a Tropical Dry Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Robert Marquis, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,307.00

Tens of thousands of caterpillar species build shelters out of silk and leaves.
Many are sufficiently abundant that they are important forest pests. However,
little is known about how shelters affect the survival of the caterpillars and
ultimately their egg production as adults. This project will provide information
on the impact that shelters have on caterpillar survival and adult success.
First, the project tests how much protection shelters provide from high
temperatures and low humidity. This information will help determine how
sensitive the caterpillars are to their environment, clarifying how changes in
local and global climate might influence the success of shelter-building
species. Second, the project will test the protective effects of shelters
against predatory insects and spiders, and against parasitic wasps and flies.
Specifically, the experiments will determine whether caterpillars whose shelters
provide better protection against predators are more vulnerable to parasitic
insects. Both predators and parasitic insects are used to control pest insects,
so testing this hypothesis could be applied to pest management. Because the
research site is in Costa Rica, the researchers will also increase awareness of
an under-studied tropical habitat (tropical dry forests) and foster
international connections and training.

The researchers will perform two sets of experiments using caterpillar species
that cooperatively build group shelters, in which two to ten caterpillars can be
found living together. Both sets of experiments will be conducted in the natural
forest habitat of the caterpillars. The first experiment will measure the
effects of shelters and the environment on caterpillar survival for four
species. Caterpillars, along with temperature and humidity sensors, will be
placed both inside and outside caterpillar shelters. Caterpillar survival will
be monitored to determine whether the caterpillars are protected from the
outside environment by their shelters. The second experiment will measure the
costs and benefits of building and sharing group shelters for two caterpillar
species. Caterpillars will be allowed to build shelters either alone or in
groups, and the mortality caused by predators and parasitic insects will be
measured. If some treatments are less likely to be killed by predators, the
researchers will test whether the caterpillars are also more likely to be
attacked by parasitic insects. The positive and negative effects of sharing a
shelter with other caterpillars will also be measured by weighing the pupae of
surviving caterpillars. Heavier pupae become adults who generally produce more
offspring, so this measure will allow the researchers to determine whether
sharing a shelter has a negative effect (due to competition with other
caterpillars) or a positive one (due to sharing the costs of building and
maintaining the shelter).