* 1701836
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing the Importance of Trophic Lability for Fungal Endophytism Using the Moss Dicranum scoparium and its Associated Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Ko-Hsuan Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 11/30/2018
* USD 19,517.00

Plants are essential because they are the main source of carbon for terrestrial
ecosystems. Similar to humans, and animals in general, plants harbor diverse
microbial communities, including fungi. Mosses are a major component of boreal,
arctic and alpine vegetation, which are most drastically impacted by
environmental variation. They are known to host diverse fungal communities,
living inside plant tissues (endophytic), such as leaves, without causing any
visible symptoms. Endophytic fungi can actually help living plants in various
ways, including the improvement of nutrient uptake and protection from
pathogens. However, fungi are also known to be proficient decomposers of dead
plant material. Switches between these functional states by fungi might be
dynamic and potentially regulated by abiotic and biotic factors. Understanding
the circumstances and mechanisms by which these functional transitions occur
will greatly improve knowledge of plant-fungus interactions and their roles as
symbiotic entities to maintain nutrient cycling and ecosystem functions. The
researchers will participate in various outreach activities, including the
annual Darwin Day exhibition event at the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences. This grant will greatly improve the co-PI's Ph.D. dissertation, and
contribute to the development of an independent research program for a
successful academic career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previously, the researchers
have examined endophytic fungal species and their function across a senescence
gradient within moss plants using an innovative metatranscriptomic approach.
Although active fungal species were found to be structured according to the
senescence gradient of the moss, several fungi inhabit both the living (top) and
decomposing (bottom) portions of the plant, providing multiple candidate fungal
species to study trophic transitions between symbiotrophism and saprotrophism.
The researchers will isolate some of these fungi in pure cultures and use them
in an experiment designed to quantify the effects of focal fungal strains on
living and dead moss tissues. Using co-culture experiments of these fungi with
moss plants, this project will characterize the phenotypic, and transcriptomic,
responses of mosses to their associated fungi. This research will use also the
same moss-fungus system to monitor differential gene expression associated with
a switch between symbiotrophism and saprotrophism by three very different fungal
species.