* 1701897
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the resiliency of the savanna-forest biome to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Jason McLachlan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,085.00

Today, closed forests dominate the non-agricultural land in the North American
Midwest, but data from before European settlement, less than 200 years ago,
indicate that both open savanna and closed forests co-existed in the region.
Such changes in forests are often attributed to changes in fire occurrence and
frequency, but analyses of tree rings suggest other environmental changes such
as rising CO2 and changes in weather patterns that may have contributed to
shifts in forests and savannas. In this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant
(DDIG) award funds will be used to measure tree ring carbon stable isotopes to
estimate annual trends in water use efficiency across a network of savanna and
forest sites to determine the mechanism for changes in tree growth and the
trends observed in historical survey and ring-width data. A better understanding
of the many factors responsible for changing forest cover in the past will help
in understanding how anticipated future environmental changes might affect
Midwestern forests: Hotter temperatures and drought stress could drive tree
decline, pushing today's forests towards the savanna state. Alternatively,
increases in CO2 may confer drought resilience by enhancing tree growth, and
favoring forest expansion. These alternative trajectories for the Midwest create
uncertainty in predicting future vegetation distribution and make it difficult
for local land and forest managers to develop effective resource management
plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award funds will be used to test the hypothesis
that increased atmospheric CO2 has driven past changes in tree growth and
altered forest resilience to future changes. This research advances scientific
understanding of how environmental changes affect Midwestern forest resilience
and growth, and more broadly identifies the conditions where tree growth is
resilient to environmental changes. This award builds on a network of sites
where the researchers have developed annual tree ring growth records from
1850-2015 for oak trees in both closed forest and open savannas. From the annual
trends in tree ring growth across these sites, the researchers have identified
places where tree growth has increased since 1950 and where the growth-climate
relationships change over time. Such shifts are consistent with CO2 driven
enhancement of tree water use efficiency (carbon uptake by the tree per unit of
water needed), which can theoretically drive increases in tree growth and
improve drought tolerance in trees. However, growth data alone cannot determine
if CO2 fertilization is the mechanism for these changes. Thus, researchers will
use stable carbon isotopes in tree rings, which are related to water use
efficiency, to determine the extent to which rising CO2 can explain changes in
tree growth. Overall, this project will test whether CO2 enhancement played a
role in stabilizing trends in Midwest forest cover, and will provide scientific
insight into the conditions necessary for CO2 enhancement of tree growth.