* 1701304
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Cultural Meaning of Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Zhiwen Zhao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 12,000.00

The Cultural Meaning of Entrepreneurship&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will adopt a comparative lens to uncover and
contrast what it means to be an entrepreneur in China and the U.S., the two
largest economies in the world at different economic development stages with
drastically different cultural orientations to entrepreneurship, and to
investigate how this meaning has evolved over time. Situated in economic
sociology and cultural sociology, this dissertation will contribute to the
literature of entrepreneurship by directing attention to the under-studied role
that culture plays. It will also enhance understanding of the contemporary
meaning of work as well as the globalization of capitalism. There are few issues
that are more crucial than understanding the meaning of work, given that we
spend most of our awake time pursuing one type of work or another. Understanding
the fundamental question of what work means to people will inform public
discourses on job motivation, satisfaction, and work-life balance. Furthermore,
this study will have practical implications for public policies aiming to
encourage innovation and economic development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by the
enormous success of Silicon Valley, entrepreneurial fervor in the 1980's has
spread across countries and cultures. Chief among them is the recent phenomenal
rise of entrepreneurship in China. In 2015 alone, venture capitalists poured a
record $37 billion into Chinese startups, making China second in the global
league (Ernst and Young 2016). Such rapidity of the rise of entrepreneurship is
puzzling. Unlike Protestant ethics, for more than a millennium, the Chinese
traditional culture valued intellectual pursuits rather than market
opportunistic behaviors. Business people were perceived as low status, and
capitalists were even punished under Mao. It was only after Deng's open and
reform policy in the late 70's that China gradually relaxed its constraint on
private businesses, and it was not until 2000 that China emerged as a global
hotbed for entrepreneurship. Given this traditionally unfavorable if not
outright hostile environment, how did entrepreneurship grow to today's vibrancy?
Particularly, how did the cultural environment change, and how do entrepreneurs
in China make sense of their identity and their role in the society? How are
these understandings different from or similar to those in the U.S.? Using
interviews and participant observations, this project seeks to uncover the
current cultural meaning of entrepreneurship. This dissertation will also take
advantage of cutting-edge machine learning techniques and topic modeling to
analyze large media text corpora in order to examine how the meaning of
entrepreneurship has evolved over time.