* 1701983
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Multi-scale and in-situ sensing technology for structural integrity
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Axel Schulzgen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 09/30/2021
* USD 277,766.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
multi-scale sensing technology to fill the technology void in high-spatial
resolution, non-invasive and non-contact measurement of material stresses and
damage.  The system is important because it provides structural integrity
assessments in critical components for applications ranging from aerospace
structures including metallics and composites to civil structures such as steel
gussets in bridges and buildings to enhance safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will result in the development and scale-up of multi-scale, in-situ
piezospectroscopic technology. This uses a stress sensitive photo-luminescent
material that can be embedded in coatings on various structures. The stress
distribution is monitored based on optics technology which measure shifts in the
emission spectrum that are related to stress. This has the following unique
features: capability to provide intrinsic measurements of material stress;
multi-scale spatial resolution; in-situ measurements under various loading
conditions. These features provide the following advantages: quantitative stress
determination for a variety of structural substrates of metallic and composite
origin under various load environments, as well as demonstrated early damage
detection when compared to the leading competing non-invasive techniques such as
Digital image correlation in this market space.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application; i) materials technology - the
deployment of sensing material needs to be optimized to define a process
configuration that ensures excellent bonding and uniform dispersion of particles
for effective and reliable sensing performance ii) optics technology - the
measurement of photo-luminescence emission from the particles must be improved
from point detection to area detection methods while ensuring current spatial
and stress resolution capabilities are maintained for efficient inspection
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel involved in this
project, including a graduate and undergraduate student, will receive technology
translation experiences through industry collaboration and UCF's resources for
entrepreneurship, which facilitates opportunities such as the use of Maker
Spaces and access to participation in the NSF ICorps program at UCF's I-Corps
Site. The project engages Lumium, an optical measurements company, and Imperial
College in London to overcome challenges in area scanning and effective
dispersion in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality.