* 1701416
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolution of complexity: tests of the ecological drivers of eye size evolution in Trinidadian killifish (Rivulus hartii)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Matthew Walsh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,604.00

Understanding the evolution of complex organs, such as the eye, is a long-
standing goal in evolutionary biology. The intricate structure of the eye is
frequently presented as an example that challenges our understanding of
evolution by natural selection. Eye size and structure vary tremendously across
species and it has been hypothesized that this variation is the result of
contrasting ecological pressures, such as differing light levels in different
environments. This project's researchers recently showed that predation is
associated with evolutionary changes in in the eye size of a killifish on the
island of Trinidad. This proposal will build upon this previous research to
understand how and why predators select for shifts in eye size. Such work will
enhance comprehension of the conditions that favor the evolution of complex
traits such as the vertebrate eye. This research will be incorporated into
educational modules that will be presented at outreach events to further enhance
the public's understanding of evolution by natural
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eye size is positively correlated with the
visual capacity of an organism. In turn, vision is closely linked to behaviors
that directly and indirectly influence fitness. This connection between
variation in eye size and visual aptitude, behavior, and fitness provides the
raw materials for divergent ecological conditions to drive evolutionary shifts
in eye size. Trinidadian killifish (Rivulus hartii) are found in fish
communities on the island of Trinidad that vary in predation intensity.
Increased predation is associated with genetically based declines in eye size.
This work established a clear link between an ecological selective force and
evolutionary shifts in eye size, but it does not establish causation, nor does
it explain why predators select for a smaller eye size. This project will
leverage a multifaceted approach that includes comparative mark recapture
experiments and perturbation experiments in the lab and nature to: (1) quantify
how selection operates on eye size in nature, and (2) experimentally test the
influence of predators on eye size evolution.