* 1701763
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How do saltwater intrusion and drought interact to change the soil carbon balance of a brackish water coastal marsh?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Jennifer Richards, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,045.00

Coastal wetlands play an important role in the global carbon cycle and store
large amounts of carbon in vegetation and sediments. Saltwater intrusion and
drought represent serious threats to the stability of coastal wetlands, and may
therefore cause substantial changes in their ability to store carbon. Coastal
wetlands, including the Florida Everglades, persist under relatively low rates
of sea level rise by accumulating soil carbon fast enough for wetland elevation
to keep pace. In the Florida coastal Everglades, faster sea level rise, combined
with increases in drought and freshwater diversion, have resulted in saltwater
moving into coastal freshwater wetlands, changing processes that affect the
rates of carbon storage, potentially altering the pace of wetland elevation
increases. This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant will provide funds to
experimentally simulate saltwater intrusion and drought in a brackish Everglades
marsh to determine how changes in productivity, soil carbon pools, and water
chemistry affect losses in soil elevation and nutrient export to estuaries.
Results from this research will provide information for conservation and
restoration efforts not only in the Everglades but also for coastal wetlands
globally. The project will also give research and lab experience to
undergraduates at a major Hispanic-serving institution. Researchers will use
this project to inform and engage the public on coastal environmental issues
through a variety of outreach activities.

In coastal wetlands, the rates of primary production often exceed decomposition,
and can result in significant storage of soil carbon. Preliminary results have
suggested a strong interaction between saltwater intrusion and drought on the
rates of soil carbon storage in coastal wetlands, but questions remain about the
magnitude and mechanisms behind these responses. This research uses a controlled
experimental manipulation in which coastal wetland mesocosms are subjected to
elevated salinity and simulated drought to disentangle the interactive effects
of these two drivers. Changes in carbon storage will be measured through carbon
dioxide gas exchange and organic carbon stocks (above and below ground), inputs
(root productivity, sediment surface accretion), and outputs (organic carbon
decomposition). This research will: (1) Identify changes in carbon and
biogeochemical cycling in brackish water coastal peat marshes experiencing
elevated salinity and prolonged drought; (2) Test the resilience of coastal
marshes to drought through evaluation of a post-drought recovery phase; and (3)
Assess the potential for elevated salinity and drought to cause the loss of peat
elevation and conversion to open water wetlands.