* 1701922
* Free resolutions and computations, Berkeley 2017
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Amelia Taylor, Adelphi University
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 04/30/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports participation in the conference and software development
workshop entitled "Stillman's Conjecture and other Progress on Free Resolution"
to be held on July 17-21, 2017, at the University of California, Berkeley. A
core focus for this meeting is two important and timely areas of research. The
conference will bring together leading experts with young researchers at a time
of exciting developments and new breakthroughs. Many of these recent
developments were inspired by computer experiments, which are becoming more
common within the fields of algebraic geometry and commutative algebra. The
workshop will focus on developing Macaulay2, a leading computer algebra system
within these fields. By helping researchers develop their own packages, there
will be immediate research impact as they and others compute new examples which
push the mathematical frontier. Such examples can answer old questions and
inspire new ideas, just like those that are to be presented at the scientific
conference. Further information is available at the conference website:
https://macaulay2.github.io/Workshop-2017-Berkeley/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first two days of the meeting will be a conference on free resolutions and
commutative algebra. The time is ripe for such a conference; in Summer 2016
Irena Peeva and Jason McCullough (both of whom will speak at the meeting)
resolved a famous 38-year-old conjecture on free resolutions due to Eisenbud-
Goto. There has also been recent progress on Stillman's question, which asks for
a bound on projective dimension of an ideal, based solely on the number of
generators and degrees (Mel Hochster and Craig Huneke will give talks on their
work). The meeting will then switch gears, to a software development workshop
for Macaulay2, one of the world's leading software systems for supporting
research in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. Macaulay2 is open
source, and one of the key ways in which it extends its functionality is through
packages, which allow researchers to write functions that utilize Macaulay2's
core functions. The workshop will enhance research infrastructure by
constructing packages which will be subsequently integrated into Macaulay2. It
will also serve as a training ground for algebraists to use and write for
Macaulay2. The workshop will build bridges and foster connections between
workers on the theoretical and computational aspects of free resolutions.
Macaulay2 workshops have a history of being inclusive both in terms of including
underrepresented groups and for including participants from a wide variety of
positions. The organizers are committed to continuing this tradition.