* 1701887
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does resource limitation promote cooperation? Nutrition restriction and social cohesion in insect societies
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Amy Toth, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,446.00

Why cooperation evolves and how it persists in groups of organisms is a question
that biologists are still working to answer. This research will investigate if
limited nutrition has led to and continues to promote increased cooperation in
one of nature's greatest cooperators: the social insects. The project will
integrate behavioral, genetic, and physiological research to investigate how
nutrition limitation affects cooperation in two species - one with simple
societies (paper wasps) and one with complex societies (honey bees). In
experimental colonies of both these organisms, the diets of developing workers
will be altered such that some individuals will experience nutritional stress
and others will receive normal healthy diets. When these workers reach
adulthood, the researchers will examine how cooperatively they behave (more or
less aggression toward other workers, tending the queen, raising their sisters),
testing the hypothesis that decreased nutritional resources promote increased
cooperation. By comparing simple and complex social insect societies, this
research will examine whether resource limitation could be a general theme in
the evolution of cooperation. By analyzing ovary size, fattiness, and the
activity of reproduction and nutrition related genes in starved and un-starved
individuals, this research will also examine how nutrition can influence
differences in behavior through physiology and gene expression. Research will be
paired with insect and evolution education outreach via public talks and freely
available and entertaining internet content, as well as direct participation in
research activities by undergraduates and research assistants of diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential form of cooperation in a social
insect colony is between the queen (the sole reproductive in the colony) and her
workers (the queen's daughters). Worker honey bees vary in their responsiveness
to the queen a behavior that is essential to colony social cohesion.
Nutritionally stressed workers exhibit a high sensitivity to the queen, and
workers with high nutrition diets exhibit a low sensitivity. The researchers
will investigate if mechanisms underlying the link between nutrition and
cooperation are evolutionarily conserved by studying elements of nutritional and
reproductive physiology and associated molecular pathways in two eusocial
insects, honey bees and paper wasps. They will expand this prior work on honey
bees to address whether nutritional stress-induced increases in queen
responsiveness are underlain by changes in the regulation of conserved genes
related to reproduction and nutrient signaling. Second, the researchers will
utilize the primitively social paper wasp Polistes metricus to begin to address
the generality and evolutionary conservation of this pattern. Polistes workers
will be nutritionally restricted and behavioral observations will be recorded to
test whether this leads to higher social cohesion of workers on the nest. The
researchers will also measure how these changes affect ovary development and
changes in the expression of genes associated with reproduction and nutrient
signaling. If nutritionally restricted Polistes workers exhibit higher
cooperative behavior, then the connection between nutritional stress and
cooperation may represent a conserved mechanism regulating social cohesion in
insect societies. Cooperation may be strategic when nutrition is scarce, and the
link between nutritional stress and cooperation may be a common theme in social
evolution.