* 1701013
* GP-EXTRA: A geoscience pathway field experience in near-surface geophysics to promote recruitment and retention of transitional students in quantitative geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Susan Brantley, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 380,755.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;Geoscience fields have the worst record of any STEM field in
terms of diversity and generating interest among under-represented minority
(URM) students. Statistically, geoscience fields are the least ethnically
diverse of all the sciences with only about 9% of BS/BA and 2% of PhD?s going to
URM candidates nationally. The number of students receiving geoscience degrees
will not meet future workforce demands and URM students represent an untapped
resource to fill this demand. Increasing the retention of students and
increasing the number of URM students enrolling in the geosciences can address
these problems. The goal of this GP-EXTRA project is to recruit and retain
students in the geosciences through a multi-institutional near-surface (NS)
geophysics applied field experience. &lt;br/&gt;The field experience will focus
on addressing ongoing scientific questions in critical zone science. It will
expose students to state-of-the-art geophysical equipment, an active field
research laboratory, and experts in near-surface geophysics and critical zone
science, and potential geoscience career paths. This positive field experience
and post-activity mentoring will provide GEOPATH students with a sense of
community within the geosciences and increase the likelihood that they will
continue to pursue careers in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
II&lt;br/&gt;As outlined in the GP-EXTRA program solicitation, the number of
students receiving geoscience degrees will not meet the future workforce demand.
This problem can be addressed by both increasing the retention of students and
increasing the number of students enrolling in the geosciences. In particular,
minority students are severely underrepresented in the geoscience fields and
represent an untapped resource to fill this demand. To address this problem, we
propose to implement a multi-institutional near-surface (NS) geophysics applied
field experience, focused on addressing ongoing scientific questions in critical
zone science. The experience will expose students to state-of-the-art
geophysical equipment, an active field research laboratory, experts in near-
surface geophysics and critical zone science, and potential geoscience career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;The GEOPATH (GP) students in the NS geophysics field experience
will be drawn from the two primary institutions involved in this project:
Rutgers University, Newark (RN), a Hispanic- Serving Institution, and Temple
University (TU). These institutions are connected to 2- and 4-year colleges via
the Garden State-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (GS-LSAMP; PI
Gates), the Northern New Jersey Bridge to the Baccalaureate (NNJB2B) program,
and Temple Alliance for Minority Participation (AMP). GP students will also be
drawn from secondary participating 4-year institutions in the northeast (Penn
State University, Dickinson College, Kutztown University, Indiana University of
Pennsylvania, and Bucknell University).&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment of GP students
from these institutions will focus on underrepresented minorities (URMs) and
students from 2-year institutions. The participants will be lower-level
undergraduate students (freshman/sophomores) who will have a unique opportunity
to participate in a NS geophysics field experience, usually only taught to
upper-level undergraduate students. These students are at a critical juncture in
their academic career when exposure to opportunities and career options can have
an impact on decisions about which major to choose. Focusing our recruitment on
first and second year students will also ensure students enter the field
experience with an equivalent exposure to the subject matter regardless of
academic background.&lt;br/&gt;The field experience will be held at the Shale
Hills Critical Zone Observatory (SH-CZO). This field site is ideal as it will
expose students to ongoing research in critical zone science. The syllabus and
NS geophysics problem sets for the field experience will be developed to address
pressing research questions at the SH-CZO. At field stations, GP students will
work alongside a graduate student mentor in smaller cohorts (6 students); larger
group workshops and presentations are integrated in the schedule to give
students the resources to work effectively within a group, learn how to design a
research experiment, and analyze datasets. The 2-week field experience will
conclude with smaller cohort presentations and a workshop on careers available
within the geosciences. Students will enter the field experience as individual
students and leave as a team of geoscience students with the skills, knowledge,
and confidence to make a more informed decision about their future goals and
interests. &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to retain most of these students in the
geosciences through a positive field experience and post-activity mentoring.
GEOPATH (GP) students will be linked with volunteers from within the RN and TU
Society of Exploration Geophysicists (SEG) student chapters, providing the GP
students with a sense of community within the geosciences and increase the
likelihood that this cohort will continue to pursue careers in the geosciences.