* 1701157
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Smart Helmet Impact Sensing System
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Massood Atashbar, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 271,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the research
discovery of a printed and flexible pressure sensor into a smart helmet impact
sensing system to fill the need for monitoring sports related traumatic brain
injuries. The smart helmet impact sensing system is important because it will
provide information needed to reliably detect head trauma and data for improved
performance and training measures which can reduce head, spinal and neck trauma.
The project will result in the development of a fully functional prototype of
the smart helmet impact sensing system which will be able to monitor the
intensity and location of head impacts sustained by athletes in the field. This
smart helmet impact sensing system has unique features of being physically
flexible, light weight and conformable. These features provide the advantage of
being able to seamlessly integrate the system into existing helmets covering the
entire helmet interior, thus enabling "point-of-impact mapping" of head trauma
around the skull that no other system in the market provides. These features
differentiate the impact sensing technology when compared to its competitors in
this market space, who typically use traditional silicon based manufacturing
processes that result in systems that are not flexible, non-conformal, bulky and
relatively expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gap(s) as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: (a) developing an in-helmet sensor array for the characterization
of impact forces as well as an integrated and miniaturized electronic readout
circuit to enable it to fit within a helmet; (b) developing a communication
system that can wirelessly send and store impact data; (c) confirming by field
testing that the system is mechanically and operationally robust; (d)
demonstrating that the system conforms to the Virginia Tech STAR Ratings
standards; and (e) understanding the combined effects of the current
accelerometer approach to that of impact alone as well as impact-accelerometer
combinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel involved in this
project, a post-doctoral fellow and a graduate student, will receive technology
and entrepreneurship translation experiences through: (a) participation in the
system development project activities, (b) interactions with the Office of the
Vice President of Research (OVPR) office at Western Michigan University for
disclosures and patents, (c) developing pitch decks for participating in
business pitch competitions, (d) developing a business plan for the
commercialization of the smart helmet impact sensing system, (e) participation
in developing follow-up grant proposals, and (f) further interactions with
research scholars, business professionals, customers and entrepreneurs for
licensing, technology transfer and commercialization activities.