* 1701501
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Linking mechanism to pattern in community assembly: ant-mediated seed dispersal in tropical pioneer trees
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Andrew Suarez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 15,389.00

A central goal of ecology is to understand why species live where they do. We
already know that different species have different requirements to survive,
grow, and reproduce. For example, some trees can thrive in the shade whereas
others need lots of sunlight. These light-loving trees are called "pioneer"
species because they are usually the first to colonize open areas after a
disturbance topples large trees that once grew there. How do their seeds get
there? Either they are dispersed after an area becomes sunny or they are
dispersed much earlier, become buried in the soil, and "wait" for trees above
them to die. In both cases, plants often rely on animals to move their seeds.
Ants are one of the most important seed dispersers because they both move seeds
and "plant" them in the soil. Most of what scientists know about seed dispersal
by ants comes from studies investigating seeds that provide a food reward for
the ants. However, most plant seeds, including those of most commercially
important crops, do not provide a food reward for ants. The scientists doing
this study have discovered that ants may move these types of seeds, despite the
lack of a reward. They think that ants are chemically "tricked" to carry seeds
that smell good but can't be eaten. The goal of this project is to test this
idea and figure out what the good-smelling chemicals may be. Results will help
land managers understand how plants move into new places, which is an important
process in forest restoration. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will use a
tropical tree species and a common, ground-dwelling ant to determine possible
chemical cues that promote seed dispersal. The approach includes fractioning,
identifying, synthesizing, and field-testing seed extracts to identify which
chemicals attract ants. Seed extracts will be tested both in tropical and
temperate environments to help determine which species engage in ant-mediated
seed dispersal. The results will help guide strategies for plant conservation,
restoration, and invasive species management. In addition, a graduate student
will be mentored in laboratory techniques and field research.