* 1701654
* Quantum Groups, Special Functions, and Integrable Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Yi Sun, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 141,999.00

Representation theory originated as the mathematical study of algebraic objects
that arise from the study of of physical and probabilistic systems. Quantum
groups are a large class of such objects that encapsulate the structure of
certain highly symmetric models in statistical mechanics. Though the origins of
quantum groups are in statistical physics, their underlying structures appear
also in probability theory, string theory, and combinatorics. This project will
apply the theory of quantum groups to study solutions of differential equations
that appear in certain physical models known as quantum integrable systems and
probabilistic models of random matrices.

In more detail, the project focuses on quantum affine algebras and q-KZB
systems, Macdonald theory and its affine generalizations, and integrable random
matrix models. In previous work, the investigator related traces of intertwiners
of quantum affine algebras to certain theta hypergeometric integrals and
proposed so-called affine Macdonald conjectures. The first part of the project
will use a representation-theoretic approach to prove these and related
conjectures. The second part of the project studies Whittaker and Macdonald-
Koornwinder functions from the perspective of finite-type quantum groups. The
third part of the project applies methods motivated by quantum integrable
systems to the asymptotic study of eigenvalues of certain sample covariance
matrices arising in statistics.