* 1701081
* PFI:AIR - TT: m Health technology for detection of pregnancy complications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Anna Pyayt, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 196,732.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on an innovative mHealth
(mobile Health) system for early diagnosis of hypertensive complications of
pregnancy. Hypertension during pregnancy can result in high maternal and infant
morbidity and mortality. This mobile-phone based system is important because if
hypertension is detected early, mothers and babies have a greatly increased
survival rate compared to what happens if this condition is detected at a later
stage. The project is expected to result in a prototype of a low cost mHealth
technology that can be used at point-of-care or at home. In the future, mHealth
will transform the way diseases are diagnosed and treated, drive the healthcare
revolution, and have the potential to significantly extend life expectancy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, there are several fundamental challenges facing
mHealth systems that need to be addressed in this project through innovative
scientific contributions. The proposed technology is expected to transform
mobile healthcare through creation of mobile-platform independent, intelligent
mobile sensing systems. A traditional approach requires efforts of several
trained professionals to perform, process, and analyze the medical tests, and a
qualified doctor to make the diagnosis and treatment decisions. The common basis
for this decision-making process is the professional experience of a
single/several doctor(s). Because of recent advancements in mHealth technologies
and Big Data management, it is now possible to access large-scale biomedical
data about thousands of different patients and doctors efficiently. This can be
used to create an mHealth mobile-phone application to support and enhance the
clinical decision making process. This approach can revolutionize patient
diagnostics and treatment, decrease human error, and enable a variety of new
biomedical instruments. However, it requires creation of a cross platform system
compatible with different mobile hardware and software platforms. This work will
address this challenge on multiple levels (ranging from hardware performance
fluctuations within the same mobile device and platform, to cross-platform
compatibility - e.g. Android and Apple iOS mobile operating systems). The
project is expected to close important knowledge gaps about future mHealth
systems and develop a fully functional prototype, compatible with different
mobile hardware systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, participating
students will gain important technology and business experience, which will
positively influence their education and prospective job opportunities. The
business mentoring aspects will be covered by Dr. Michael Fountain, the founding
director of the University of South Florida's Center for Entrepreneurship. Dr.
Fountain is a pioneer in the development and adoption of life sciences
entrepreneurship as a sub-interdisciplinary specialty in entrepreneurship
education.