* 1701676
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Examining the role of reinforcement in driving genomic divergence between and within species in darters
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Rebecca Fuller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Karen Mabry
* 04/30/2019
* USD 20,618.00

The study of how species arise has been revolutionized by new technologies that
allow researchers to get large amounts of genomic information from different
species quickly. This technology has been used to identify areas of the genome
that differ between populations occurring in different environments, and which
may be important in preventing closely-related species from forming hybrids.
This project uses similar methods to compare populations that differ in whether
they co-exist with a close relative with which they can hybridize. The project
focuses on orangethroat darter fish. The project will identify genome areas
associated with a preference to mate with one's own species, and test whether
the same genetic changes happen in all closely-related species that coexist, or
whether unique genetic changes occur each time. Data obtained from this study
will provide critical insight into how differences in biological communities can
drive species diversity. This project will provide valuable research
opportunities and teaching materials for undergraduate students. Furthermore,
the results of this research will be used to educate community members about the
biology of local native fish species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reinforcement plays
a critical role in finalizing the process of speciation after secondary contact
by increasing prezygotic isolation between taxa that produce unfit hybrids. As
reinforcement directly selects for divergence in mating traits in sympatric
populations, it can also incidentally lead to behavioral isolation among
populations within species (i.e., cascade reinforcement). The objective of this
project is to develop genomic tools to examine how reinforcement affects genome-
wide divergence between and within species in two groups of darters (the
orangethroat darter clade Ceasia and the rainbow darter Etheostoma caeruleum).
Previous studies have provided strong behavioral evidence that reinforcement is
driving behavioral isolation between sympatric Ceasia and E. caeruleum, and
subsequently causing cascade reinforcement and behavioral isolation between
species within Ceasia. This research will examine genomic divergence between
species experiencing reinforcement, and investigate whether this divergence
between species may incidentally be causing genomic divergence among populations
within species (or among recently diverged species). Specifically, Next-
Generation Sequencing will be utilized to (1) identify any differences in
chromosomal structure between Ceasia and E. caeruleum that may be contributing
to postzygotic isolation and facilitating reinforcement, (2) identify loci
responsible for postzygotic isolation between Ceasia and E. caeruleum by
genotyping hybrid and backcross individuals, and (3) conduct genome scans that
compare genetic differentiation between multiple populations of Ceasia that are
sympatric and allopatric with respect to E. caeruleum, in order to identify
highly differentiated outlier loci between sympatric and allopatric populations
that are likely associated with prezygotic isolation.