* 1701383
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Mammalian Dentition: Insights from fossil synapsid histology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Christian Sidor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2020
* USD 20,043.00

The origin of mammals has long been of interest to scientists because mammals
are one of the most diverse groups of animals on the planet. This research
investigates how certain complex dental characteristics evolved in the ancestors
of modern mammals (therapsids), and thus informs our understanding of the
selective forces driving mammalian evolution from their "reptile-like"
ancestors. Mammal teeth are considered more complex and specialized than
reptiles; however, these assumptions have not fully considered extinct species.
As such, the evolution of complex dental traits is not entirely understood,
which leaves our understanding of the ecology and evolution of ancient mammals
incomplete. Histological data and analyses from this work will be made available
to the scientific community, and the data will be useful for systematists
interested in the evolution of vertebrates. Public outreach through displays and
programs at natural history museums will also occur. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dentition of mammals is unique among living vertebrates, and therapsid fossils
have shed light on the evolution of mammalian innovations like a regionalized
dentition (heterodonty), multiple tooth roots, and tooth-to-tooth occlusion.
While it is relatively straightforward to assess these characters using gross
morphology, the evolution of other significant features can only be examined
through histological thin sections, and thus remain unknown for many fossil
taxa. This research fills this void by using paleohistology and micro-computed
tomorgraphy data to determine character states for important dental traits in
therapsids. Preliminary data suggest that dental traits once thought exclusive
to mammals evolved multiple times in their therapsid forebears. This project
also tests for correlative evolution between dental and life history traits
along the mammal line as well as in reptilian taxa that have independently
evolved these complex traits. The work will provide insight into the selective
pressures on the acquisition of mammal innovations.