* 1701595
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration, Social Mobility, and Self-Employment
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Joshua Wassink, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 11,996.00

This research directly informs policies to reduce income disparities. More than
80% of the world's population live in low- to middle-income countries. These
regions are characterized by a high degree of socioeconomic stratification and
low levels of intra- and intergenerational mobility. Although extensive research
documents patterns of stratification, few studies consider particular mobility
pathways available to different classes of workers. As the noted economist, Gary
Fields (2013), observed in his recent report to the United Nations, a critical
aim of post-2015 development policies should be identifying "interventions to
promote the graduation of the self-employed from one segment to another, higher-
earning form of employment." This dissertation responds to that call by
identifying factors associated with both upward and downward economic mobility
among the self-employed. Of the major strategies used to address income
disparities, educational reform is an important one, but, initial results
suggest that policies that provide business capital and access to credit to
self-employed workers with little schooling may have the greatest short-term
potential to promote mobility. This research also contributes to contemporary
debates about immigrant incorporation in the United States. By documenting
economic mobility pathways available to Mexican immigrants in their origin
communities, this study will contextualize the process of economic incorporation
within broader patterns of economic inequality in sending countries. It is
impossible to truly understand and incorporate new arrivals without first
understanding their origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates two
mobility pathways--self-employment and international migration--commonly used by
workers of varying social classes in Mexico, a highly unequal country. To do so,
the Co-PI will 1) assemble a nationally representative panel dataset of self-
employed Mexican workers in 2008-2012; 2) analyze 52 in-depth interviews that
were conducted with self-employed return migrants in an urban and industrial
community, and 30 interviews that were conducted with self-employed return
migrants in a rural and agrarian community; 3) develop a typology of self-
employment that identifies marginal, temporary, and successful businesses; and
4) use quantitative methods to analyze how social class and market sector
affects the risk of business failure among all self-employed workers. The
proposed research will address two related research questions: First, is self-
employment a mobility pathway in highly stratified labor markets? Second, how
does migration experience in the United States shape self-employment
trajectories among returning labor migrants in urban and rural sending
communities?