* 1701430
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Competition and cooperation in the honey bee gut microbiota
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Margaret Steele, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,134.00

Pollinator health is important for both agricultural and natural ecosystems, and
one of the most important pollinators, especially in agriculture, is the honey
bee. In this project, researchers will focus on bacteria in honey bee guts,
because gut bacteria affect animals' health. They will study how these bacteria
interact with one another, because this is important for how stable helpful gut
bacterial communities are, and how they interact with the host animal. The
researchers will continue working with two critical bacteria in the bee gut.
They have already shown how these bacteria have toxins with which they can
attack one another. However, it is likely that these bacteria also help one
another in some situations. The researchers will use recently developed methods
to look at whether and how these bacteria pass nutrients to one another and to
the host bee. This will contribute to understanding how bee-gut bacterial
communities stay stable through time. It will help to develop new routes to
improving bee health. In addition, during the project graduate and undergraduate
researchers will be trained in state-of-the-art methods in
microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As insects can take up and utilize byproducts
of carbohydrate fermentation, honeybees may benefit from the metabolic
activities of members of their gut microbial communities through both the
degradation of toxic sugars and the production of useful byproducts. To better
understand the role of cooperative metabolic interactions in gut communities,
this project will trace nutrient exchange in the honeybee gut. Genomic evidence
suggests that the bee gut microbes Snodgrassella alvi and Gilliamella apicola
depend upon one another for production of nutrients. G. apicola metabolizes
carbohydrates that S. alvi cannot, and metabolizes sugars found in nectar that
are toxic to honey bees. This project will use isotopically-labeled
monosaccharides that can be utilized by G. apicola, but not by S. alvi or the
host, to trace metabolic interactions in the bee gut. DNA-stable isotope probing
(DNA-SIP) will be used to track incorporation of labeled carbon atoms into
bacterial DNA, while incorporation of these atoms into host tissues will be
measured through elemental analysis and isotope ratio mass spectrometry. This
research will contribute to a greater fundamental understanding of the processes
that govern cooperative metabolic interactions among members of the gut
microbiota and between the microbiota and the host, and will demonstrate the
important potential role of SIP methods in hypothesis testing in microbial
community ecology, a framework in which it is uncommonly used.