* 1701736
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Tracking trends in the lichen symbiosis: do species interactions drive the latitudinal diversity gradient?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Klara Scharnagl, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,151.00

The latitudinal diversity gradient is the pattern in which many species are
found in the tropics, near the equator, and fewer species are found outside of
the tropics, towards the North and South poles. This pattern is often explained
in terms of temperature, climate, or geological conditions. Less frequently, the
latitudinal gradient is described in terms of biotic interactions; interactions
between different organisms. This research investigates a particular biotic
interaction, the lichen symbiosis, along a large environmental gradient from
North to South America. Lichens are symbioses (mutually beneficial, long-term,
close physical associations) between fungi and algae/cyanobacteria. Though small
and often overlooked, lichens can be found in almost every terrestrial
environment, making them ideal for investigating biotic interactions across
large environmental gradients. This research will focus on the role of symbiosis
in driving patterns of diversity, and may improve predictions of how patterns of
diversity change in the face of ongoing changes in climate. This research
uniquely addresses both partners in the symbiosis, and will increase our
knowledge of global biodiversity through the discovery and description of new
species and traits. This project will extend the research and training of a
doctoral student by supporting research that moves from descriptive pattern to
mechanistic process. A workshop on symbioses will be made available to
undergraduate students in Michigan, and educational materials for high school
classrooms will be offered via the Data Nugget program, promoting the scientific
process and potentially recruiting more students to science and technology at
the college level.

The biotic interactions hypothesis proposes that in extra-tropical regions,
abiotic selective pressures exert a stronger force, whereas in tropical regions,
biotic selective pressures exert a stronger force. Furthermore, these biotic
interactions lead to moving peaks of adaptation, and coevolutionary races, which
further contributes to diversification in the tropics. This research
investigates the dynamics of the lichen symbiosis along a latitudinal gradient
by sequencing both the fungal and algal partners within five lichen-forming
families of fungi found along the latitudinal gradient in order to map patterns
of specificity among partners, and to test whether partner switches have
resulted in diversification events or range shifts in the lichen symbiosis.