* 1701160
* Digitization PEN: Expanding and enhancing a TCN digitizing fossils to reconstruct evolving ecosystems the Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stephen Westrop, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 102,369.00

The Sam Noble Museum (SNM) of the University of Oklahoma will join a Thematic
Collections Network (TCN) of ten other institutions with extensive holdings of
fossils from rocks that formed in a shallow sea, termed the Western Interior
Seaway, which bisected North America during the late Cretaceous Period (65-100
million years ago). The late Cretaceous was a time of warmer, "greenhouse"
climates and higher sea levels than those of today, and environments may have
been similar to those predicted for the middle of the next century under some
scenarios of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. The data made available
through this TCN offer an opportunity to answer a variety of questions dealing
with the impact of climatic and sea level change on marine communities, and may
provide critical information for predicting future outcomes for modern marine
biodiversity. This project will digitize collection data from the SNM and make
them accessible to the scientific community, industry, K-16 educators and
students, and the public via a variety of web portals. Additional societal
impacts of the project are made through a collaboration with the Education
Department at the SNM, which will develop a field- and lab-based teacher
workshop and web resources, and produce curricula that focus on biotic and
environmental change over time, including sea level change, continental drift
and other geological phenomena. The project also contributes to training of
university students in modern digitization techniques and the generation of
biodiversity data from museum collections, with up to five students
participating annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Invertebrate Paleontology
Collection at the SNM will digitize data for about 13,000 specimens from 450
localities at the northern and southern ends of the seaway, and thereby expand
both the paleogeographic and paleoenvironmental reach of the project. Of
particular importance are localities from the far northern margin of the seaway
in Alaska and northwestern Canada that extend geographic coverage of the project
by at least 4,000 km. They will allow the geographic ranges of species to be
assessed fully, and will also provide insight into latitudinal variability in
paleocommunity composition. The SNM?s holdings also include about 7,500
specimens from 240 localities in southern Oklahoma. They record paleocommunities
in coastal regions of the seaway that lie shoreward of localities in Texas that
will be contributed by other partners in the project. These data "fill in" the
more proximal end of a shallow marine environmental gradient near the southern
margin of the seaway, thereby expanding the scope of the project into onshore
environments. Data will be aggregated by the TCN and shared with iDigBio
(www.idigbio.org).