* 1701311
* Dissertation Research: Geographic variation in Dmrt1 in the North American green frog
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* David Skelly, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 21,763.00

This proposal investigates the processes that determine if an embryo becomes a
male or female. These processes can differ widely among species, but other
features are more conserved between species. Previous work by the researchers
showed that the North American green frog and humans share portions of the
genome that are important for determining whether an embryo becomes a male or
female. Importantly, the researchers discovered that the gene DMRT1, which is
critical for human male gonads to develop as normal testes, is also important in
green frog development. The researchers also noted widespread abnormalities in
green frog development in suburban neighborhoods. This might indicate that
human-derived contaminants interfere with how frogs develop. That work was
conducted on green frogs in Connecticut. However, green frogs range across half
of the United States and parts of Canada, and variation occurs across that
range. In addition, work in one European and one Japanese frog species shows
variation among populations across the species' range. This project will study
the genomic variation in the gene DMRT1 and other genomics regions linked to
development in green frogs across the United States. This project will
substantially advance our understanding of how variable the genetic basis of
development is across a large geographic area. It will also begin to show the
extent to which environmental conditions across the country impact frog
development. The work will be distributed to the public in a variety of ways
including online blogs and guest lectures for K-12 teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using tissue samples collected from male and female green
frogs from representative regions across the species' range, the researchers
will test for geographic variation in allele frequencies and linkage for DMRT1.
Additionally, the researchers will test whether a set of genetic markers shown
to be linked with particular chromosomes specific to males and females are
similarly linked across the species range. Geographic areas with varying degrees
of this linkage, either for DMRT1 or the other markers, will indicate regions of
the species' range where environmental conditions are more likely to influence
the processes driving whether an embryo becomes male or female.