* 1701365
* California LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Howard Gillman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;There remains a growing demand in the United
States for a highly trained and diverse science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) workforce to maintain US intellectual and economic
competitiveness in the global market. However, while the US moves toward
minority-majority status, that demographic change is not reflected in the number
of graduate degrees being awarded to underrepresented minorities (URMs) in
science and engineering. This underrepresentation of such a large portion of the
US population in STEM graduate programs must be addressed, and supporting URM
students in their pursuit of advanced degrees is a critical piece. Working in
pursuit of this critical piece, the University of California Santa Barbara
(UCSB), a part of the University of California Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program, will offer
12 incoming LSAMP PhD students substantial fellowships and degree completion
support. LSAMP assists universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM
workforce through the development of highly competitive students from groups
historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska
Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP BD Activity is to increase the quantity
and quality of STEM graduate students from underrepresented populations, with
emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and completion. BD programs implemented in the
nation's institutions of higher education contribute to addressing one of the
objectives in NSF's 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and
research to support development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge
capabilities." For the U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide
exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-
based economy. UCSB is uniquely positioned in this alliance as it has also
recently become a Hispanic-serving institution (HSI), and as such is the first
in the Association of American Universities (AAU) to reach HSI status, putting
UCSB on a short list of prominent research-intensive institutions serving a
large number of Hispanic students. The BD project at UCSB seeks to seed a shift
in the institutional culture by introducing holistic selection criteria and
faculty mentoring resources, and raising the visibility of motivated and
talented URM STEM PhD trainees and alumni thereby encouraging future generations
of underrepresented students. Similarly, the proposed UCSB-BD program intends to
increase the number of URM students in STEM who successfully complete a doctoral
program at UCSB and successfully transition into the STEM workforce with the
highest level of academic achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;There remains a growing demand in the United States for a
highly trained and diverse STEM workforce to maintain US intellectual and
economic competitiveness in the global market. However, while the US moves
toward minority-majority status, that demographic change is not reflected in the
number of graduate degrees being awarded to underrepresented minorities in
science and engineering. In fact, in 2014, URMs represented only 13% of the
earned doctorates in science and engineering. Having a diverse set of problem-
solvers becomes paramount to sustaining the nation's scientific excellence and
solving important societal needs. The current underrepresentation of such a
large portion of the US population in STEM graduate programs must be addressed.
Supporting URM students in their pursuit of advanced degrees is crucial. UCSB
will support 12 PhD students through the BD program within the University of
California LSAMP. The UCSB-BD program seeks to increase the diversity and
inclusion of our STEM workforce through a concerted campus-wide effort and an
evidence-based program designed to identify and foster the development of a
cohort of alumni as PhD-trained science and engineering leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UCSB-BD program will build on existing infrastructure,
develop new strategies and leverage networks, campus, state, and nation-wide, to
expand the body of knowledge around recruiting, training and retaining a diverse
population of PhD-trained scientists and engineers. The BD program at UCSB will
do this by providing a strong community of mentors and an extensive academic and
professional preparation program that offers BD Fellows access to the tools and
community interaction that will foster success in their graduate programs and
beyond. With a focus on affirming values, nurturing a sense of belonging, and
mentoring through key transition points, the UCSB-BD program will ensure a
timely completion of the PhD and a confident transition into STEM careers in
academia, government and industry. As UCSB strives to promote a nurturing
environment for our STEM PhD trainees, hosting a BD program is an important step
toward building more robust and inclusive recruitment and retention strategies
for broadening participation. Additionally, in order to better understand the
important factors in the trajectory of success for those underrepresented in
science and engineering seeking and progressing though advanced degrees, a
rigorous evaluation plan and tracking strategy will be employed and results
shared across the California LSAMP alliance and national networks.