* 1701154
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Novel Platform for Optimizing Fire Suppression System Performance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* James Milke, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2020
* USD 199,954.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translatingÂ recent
discoveries in spray measurement and analysis to improve fire suppression system
designs and enhance public safety. Fire suppression knowledge gaps can result in
design conservatism that not only limits fire suppression system performance but
also limits the overall building performance in form, function, and cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed platform provides an unprecedented capability
to evaluate sprinkler performance by integrating recent discoveries in spray
measurements and analysis with the increasingly popular Building Information
Modeling (BIM) environment used by architects and engineers to coordinate a wide
variety of design, engineering, construction, and even inspection activities.
Building Information Modeling is already used to communicate fire protection
installation details and to evaluate hydraulic calculations ensuring water is
delivered at sufficient pressure to the sprinkler head in the event of a fire.
However, these models fall short of functional performance predictions of the
actual spray dispersion and associated interactions with the built environment.
The proposed BIM plugin would possess sufficient fidelity for performance-based
design of sprinkler systems by providing the tools needed for rigorous analysis
and system optimization. Distinct from the available computational fluid
dynamics framework, integrating this spray analysis capability within the BIM
framework opens a new world of dynamic functional analysis that is uniquely
convenient, fast, and precise. Further, implementation of this spray analysis
capability on a popular, usable, convenient engineering platform such as BIM is
expected to facilitate widespread stakeholder adoption, establishment of market
viability, and exploration of the full spectrum of use cases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It should be noted that basic engineering questions
regarding fire sprinkler systems remain unanswered even after 100 years of use.
While new designs are routinely conceived, no predictive capability is available
to answer essential questions of spray composition (i.e. what is the spray?) and
dispersion (i.e. where does it go?), which impedes innovation. While the
sprinkler spray pattern details (e.g. spatio-stochastic distributions of
momentum, volume flux, and drop size) are known to govern fire suppression
performance, the fidelity of the spray descriptions in the design process do not
reach beyond global coverage area specifications for a given sprinkler type. In
contrast, this proposed technology seeks to capture all of the spray details to
completely describe its composition. Specifically, the proposed technology
provides a complex spatio-stochastic initial spray representation, generated
uniquely by each sprinkler model, captured by laser diagnostics, characterized
in terms of a probabilistic analytical framework, and recorded into a sprinkler
database. This virtual spray representation is used to inform a novel
computational efficient trajectory analysis integrated into the BIM framework to
provide high fidelity super-real time predictions of spray patterns on building
surfaces. These spray patterns provide useful information for sprinkler system
designers to determine installation details for the suppression system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to these technical advancements expected from
this project, undergraduate and graduate students will receive valuable
entrepreneurship and technology development experience working on a team
consisting of engineers, computer scientists, university students, and faculty.
The team of industrial and university collaborators will work with recently
patented technology developed at the university while reaching out to potential
customers including building designers, engineers, and architects to promote
adoption of the new fire suppression design technology.