* 1701672
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Survival and performance costs of phenotypic responses to predation risk
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Thomas Martin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 03/31/2018
* USD 18,705.00

This study investigates whether young songbirds that grow faster and leave the
nest earlier because of a higher risk of nest predation have lower survival
rates after leaving the nest. Predation can be a major source of mortality in
wild animal populations. When the risk of predation is variable, prey species
are expected to show flexible developmental responses that reduce their risk of
being killed by predators. For example, young birds may grow faster and leave
the nest earlier when nest predation risk is high. However, flexible
developmental responses at early life stages may be physiologically costly and
increase mortality at later life stages. By simulating increased predation, the
researchers will experimentally determine the effects of variable nest predation
on nestling growth rate and timing of fledging for Dark-eyed Juncos. Each bird
will be tagged with a radio transmitter to determine their fates after leaving
the nest. The study will also address whether activity levels and behaviors of
fledglings reduce mortality risks and compensate for physiological costs.
Results will provide critical insights on the key factors that control the
growth and decline of wild animal populations, and lead to more effective
management of these populations. In addition, the project will involve mentoring
of both undergraduate and graduate students, and will develop educational
materials for high school students. Educational videos for school age children
will also be created for a local science education
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that faster
growth of Dark-eyed Juncos in response to nest predation risk compromises
mobility and causes increased mortality risk at older life history stages.
Researchers will use speakers to broadcast sounds of typical nest predators to
increase the perception of nest predation risk by parents and offspring to
examine its consequences for mortality after fledging. Preliminary data show
that young nestlings in 'high risk' nests leave the nest with shorter wings and
are less adept at flying, but it is unclear if these same individuals are
predated more often after leaving. Just before the nestlings leave the nest the
researchers will attach radio transmitters to aid in tracking. Data will be
collected on how often and how far the young birds move around each day after
they leave the nest; whether they hide more often in denser vegetation where
predators, like hawks, have greater difficulty getting to them; and whether they
actually are more likely to die. Results will advance our understanding of
carryover effects from growth plasticity on offspring mortality during later
life stages.