* 1701272
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Life at the ocean surface: evolution and morphology of the Portuguese man of war
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Casey Dunn, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2018
* USD 21,028.00

The Portuguese man-of-war, Physalia physalis, drifts at the ocean surface. It is
highly specialized for this environment using a gas-filled float as a sail to
catch the wind and long tentacles as fishing line to capture small fishes and
crustaceans. Physalia physalis is known to many beach goers for its painful
sting, but despite being familiar and abundant, little is known about most basic
features of this species. In this project, researchers will use new microscopy
techniques to answer old questions about the anatomy, development, and
evolutionary origins of this unique species. The products of this study will be
made freely accessible to the public and other scientists via open access
publishing. The award will also support lessons in a local elementary school on
topics related to this project, including lessons on ocean zones, plankton,
pleuston, and marine invertebrate body plans.

Physalia physalis is the only siphonophore (Cnidaria: Hydrozoa) that is
pleustonic (living at the interface between water and air). Siphonophores are
colonial animals that are composed of zooids (bodies) that are each homologous
to solitary animals. This project will describe fundamental features of P.
physalis morphology and use phylogenetic comparative methods to reconstruct the
evolutionary changes associated with a transition from a planktonic to
pleustonic lifestyle. The primary product of this work will be a re-description
of P. physalis, which also aims to address some of the following questions: how
are zooids organized in P. physalis? How does P. physalis zooid morphology and
colony organization differ from other siphonophore species, and what does this
suggest about their evolution? Physalia physalis colonies have highly
3-dimensional branching structures. Optical Projection Tomography, as well as
other immuno-fluorescent imaging methods, will be used to 3D-image fixed P.
physalis tissue. These morphological descriptions will be compared with
morphological descriptions available for planktonic siphonophores in order to
investigate general patterns of character evolution within the siphonophore
phylogeny.