* 1701082
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary and functional diversification of an ancient biopolymer in cnidarians.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Chris Amemiya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 16,343.00

Chitin has recently has been discovered in a diverse range of animals and may
serve as yet unknown functions. The hard shells of insects, shrimp and their
relatives are made from chitin. But chitin is a natural polymer made by
connecting a series of sugar-like molecules that now appears to be produced by
many soft bodied animals. The proposed research examines the biology of chitin
in the group containing corals, sea anemones, and jellyfish. Like other species
in this group the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis, lacks any hard body parts
that would be obviously made of chitin. However, the genomes of these anemones
have three genes that code for a chitin-producing enzyme. This research will
investigate the distribution of chitin in these soft-bodied animals. The
research will determine if chitin has an integral and unexpected role in the
development of these organisms. Ultimately, this research will advance our
understanding of how animals evolve novel structures using glycopolymers. This
research will also provide training for a graduate student and foster outreach
efforts for Girls in Science programs and mentorship of undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chitin's role in animal development and
regeneration has not been widely explored, though prior work suggests that
glycopolymers may have a widespread role in cell behavior and migration.
Preliminary data show that chitin is present in cnidarian stinging cells
(cnidae), as well as soft tissues. This study will survey the diversity of
chitin synthase (CHS) genes across the cnidarians. The goal is to determine
shared and lineage-specific changes to CHS genes that may correlate to diverse
roles of chitin. Dozens of species of cnidarians from five cnidarian classes
will be surveyed. Animals will be identified to species level and tissue
collected from different tissue types. RNA will be Isolated and used to provide
tissue specific profiles of which CHS genes are expressed in which tissues.
Variation in the pattern of gene expression across species and tissues will
allow inference of the evolutionary diversification of chitin as structural or
nonstructural compound.