* 1701399
* RUI:  Collaborative Research: Microbicidal Carbon Dots for Combating Anti-Biotic Resistance and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Liju Yang, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Since the 1990s, infectious diseases caused
by antibiotic-resistant bacteria have been increasing globally and becoming a
serious threat from these diseases. Antibiotic resistance is mostly a
consequence of bacterial response to excessive uses of antibiotics in humans or
agriculture and the widespread usage of disinfectants in a variety of other
settings. Noticeably, new resistance mechanisms emerge and spread globally as
fast as new drugs being developed, which has posted serious challenges to the
realm of traditional antibiotics/antimicrobial agents, but has also motivated a
global search for alternative antimicrobial strategies. Among the many
strategies that have been pursued in combating the resistance, the development
of antibacterial agents that are mechanistically different from traditional
antibiotics is a more effective option. Specifically, on the technology explored
in this project, carbon dots are developed as a new class of antimicrobial
agents which kill bacterial cells through reactive species generated under
visible/natural light. This project, funded by the Biomaterials Program within
the National Science Foundation's Division of Materials Research, focuses on the
evaluation and validation of the potential of carbon dots for killing drug-
resistant bacteria and developing an understanding of related working
mechanisms, with the goal of establishing an effective alternative antimicrobial
technology for combating drug-resistant bacteria. This project will also have
significant broader impacts in stimulating the development and transfer of new
technologies for the knowledge-driven economy, and other areas such as
applications in food, water safety and national defense, education and human
resource development. With more than 85% of the student population from
underrepresented minority groups, the proposed multidisciplinary research is
expected in providing a great research training environment for these
undergraduate students in a variety of ways, including direct participation in
research, student exchange programs (between the collaborators' labs), and
summer workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This
Collaborative Research project is to explore the light-activated microbicidal
functions of newly developed carbon dots (CDots) against drug-resistant
bacterial pathogens. CDots may be considered as a special kind of "core-shell"
nanostructures, each with a small carbon nanoparticle core and a thin shell of
soft materials. They are strongly absorptive over the entire visible spectrum,
and their photoexcited state properties and redox processes resemble those
typically found in semiconductor quantum dots, but with unique advantages. The
interdisciplinary project team will develop and validate CDots as a new class of
visible/natural light-activated microbicidal agents against multi-drug resistant
bacteria, with the selected species for testing including Salmonella enterica,
Listeria monocytogenes, and Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli isolated
from farm animals. The scientific objectives of the project are: (1) systematic
evaluation of CDots' antibacterial function to the drug-resistant bacteria in
relation to several major factors including Cdot surface charge, size, and
synthesis approach; (2) mechanistic elucidation and understanding of CDots'
antimicrobial function, focusing on correlations of the structural and
photochemical parameters of CDots with the observed bacteria-killing
performances; and (3) exploration of Carbon/TiO2 hybrid dots of different
configurations for enhanced antimicrobial performance against drug-resistant
microbes and viruses. The intellectual merits of the project include the
advancement of the biomaterial field for antimicrobial applications and the
establishment of the photo-activated antimicrobial functions of CDots for
combating the increasing threat of antibiotic resistance. In addition to
addressing the critical issues in national healthcare, these materials could
find applications in food, water safety and national defense. The broad impacts
of the project include providing excellent research-for-training opportunities
for participating students in the interdisciplinary field at the interface of
material science and biological applications at the two collaborating
institutions, especially for undergraduate and K-12 students from
underrepresented groups.