* 1701512
* EAGER: GOALI: Crown Ether-enhanced Electrodialysis for Selective Removal of Problematic Ions in Feed Water and Waste Fluid of Unconventional Energy Production
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Michael Findlater, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2018
* USD 95,846.00

1701512&lt;br/&gt;Yan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop an
innovative selective desalination technology using membranes specifically
designed for the treatment of feed water and wastewater of unconventional oil
and gas production. Sustainable development of unconventional oil and gas
production relies on efficient use of water resources and safe disposal of
effluent from hydraulic fracturing processes. A key to attaining these goals
lies in the effective removal of a subset of contaminants amid high levels of
background electrolytes in alternative (brackish) water sources and in the waste
water produced during unconventional oil and gas production
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species of key interest in this project include
barium (II) and strontium (II), which give rise to scaling problems and
interfere with the proper function of gelling agents. The project will involve
close collaboration among two university PIs from Chemistry and Environmental
Engineering at Texas Tech and an industrial co-PI with extensive experience in
water management for a major oil and gas production company, this proposal will
explore conjugating commercial electrodialysis membranes with optimized
supported crown ether moieties to enable selective binding and transport of
target contaminants in electrodialysis processes. The objective of this project
is to develop a class of electrodialysis membranes with novel ion-gating
functionality for selective removal of problematic ions in alternative brackish
water sources for energy production uses. The central hypothesis of this
research is that intrinsic ion selectivity of electrodialysis processes can be
significantly improved by incorporating a thin layer of ion sequestrants of
suitable structure and density at the surface of electrodialysis membranes,
creating localized concentration gradients driving highly selective transport of
the target ions. The PIs ability to prepare crown ethers of diverse
conformations and to adapt their molecular structure for optimal metal binding
specificity renders the proposed technology a versatile method for selective ion
separation. One attractive application is to enable the use of alternative water
sources for hydraulic fracturing operations. In this one-year project, the
project will focus on the removal of two ions of primary concerns to
unconventional oil and gas production, namely, Ba2+ and Sr2+, although the
concept can in principle be extended to other problematic ions, such as Ra2+,
which is the major source of radio-activity in naturally occurring radioactive
material and its disposal is subject to stringent regulatory control. The
research being addressed in the project will potentially reduce the
environmental impacts of unconventional oil and gas production and enhance water
sustainability at the energy-water nexus, particularly in regions where the
fast-growing practice of hydraulic fracturing has imposed a considerable stress
on the local fresh water resources. This project will provide excellent academic
training and industry exposure opportunity for undergraduate students and two
graduate students from Environmental Engineering and Chemistry through
participation in a multidisciplinary team involving strong industry-university
collaboration. The industrial partner will advise the research team on practical
constraints and potential complications associated with alternative water
treatment technologies, so that the PIs will formulate research strategies to
address the unique water treatment needs of the energy industry, which are
substantially different from water treatment for domestic use. The PIs will
expand their current outreach programs to engage K-12 and community college
students from under-represented groups in STEM curricula and research. Research
data will be reported in public domain including conferences, industrial
seminars, and peer-reviewed journals.