* 1701995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paying for College and Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Jane Zavisca, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 10/31/2018
* USD 11,973.00

Title: Paying for College and Uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the complex relationship between student loan debt, college
access, and the American Dream. At over $1.3 trillion, rising total US student
loan debt has sparked public concern, yet the experience of student borrowers is
poorly understood. Research has shown that debt-based financial aid affects
college access and college completion, but few studies have examined how college
students understand their loan use in relation to the college experience,
aspirational goals, and their plans for the future. The project will expand
knowledge about how students make decisions as they navigate financial markets
and financial risk in order to meet their social mobility and/or lifestyle
goals. Knowledge generated by this project will be of value to US policymakers,
stakeholders, and members of the public who seek, or support, efficient and fair
means of providing access to higher education. &lt;br/&gt; To achieve its
research objectives, the project employs a mixed-method longitudinal design.
Phase 1 surveys registered seniors (N=975) at a public flagship university and
collects in-depth interviews with a strategic subsample of survey participants
(N=111). The main objective of this phase is to assess: 1) student perceptions
of the risk and social legitimacy of borrowing to pay for a college degree; 2)
how pathways taken through college?including choice of major, lifestyle and
consumption habits?are framed in relation to means of paying for it; and 3) the
role a debt-financed college degree plays in how students imagine their futures
unfolding. Phase 2 of the project will revisit the original interviewees for a
second interview approximately 15-18 months after the students have graduated.
The objective of Phase 2 is to address how orientations to debt affect life
strategies after graduation, such as where to live, what jobs to take, and how
to manage future financial risk. Phase 2 will also be used to compare how
student views of their futures change after graduation. Combined, the two phases
of research will contribute to public and scholarly debate about the ethics and
implications of financing higher education with student loans.