* 1701123
* GP-IMPACT: Expanding Geology Discovery Opportunities Beyond the Classroom
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* David McConnell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 296,338.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of GP-Impact: Expanding Geology Discovery
Opportunities Beyond the Classroom is to increase the number of students
pursuing undergraduate degrees in the geosciences. The geosciences represent a
key STEM discipline that will contribute to solutions of several grand
challenges facing Earth and its inhabitants. This project seeks to diversify and
expand the number of students majoring in geosciences through the design and
testing of new approaches for engaging high school students in authentic,
career-relevant experiences. Fields such as geology or marine science are often
discovery majors that students select only after enrolling in an elective
college course. We propose to provide multiple opportunities for discover the
geosciences to high school students so that they have a clear vision of what a
geoscientist does and how this work can impact our local community, the nation,
and the world. &lt;br/&gt;We propose three programs to expose more students to
the geosciences including: i) Creating an engaging summer program for early high
school students to focus on the role of geoscience in society; ii) Working with
high-school science teachers in nearby school districts to invite students to
participate in an open house visitation program where they can interact with
geoscientists in research labs on campus; and, iii) Establishing a collaboration
with NCSU programs working with high performing and/or uncommitted incoming
students to develop and promote a Geo-Journey summer bridge course to be offered
prior to first-year students arriving on campus. During all components of the
project we will collect survey data that allows us to measure student interest
regarding the geosciences and its potential as a career option. This data will
allow us to interpret the relative effectiveness of these three strategies in
increasing the number and diversity of students entering geoscience degree
programs in North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to provide a
mechanism for reaching a cohort of students who are currently unengaged with the
geosciences in high school and do not consider the geosciences to represent a
realistic career path. A second outcome of the project will be the production of
a series of lessons that North Carolina high school teachers can use to
customize instruction of essential geoscience concepts in earth and
environmental science classes. Further, this project provides opportunities for
geoscience faculty at NCSU to build robust partnerships with colleagues within
university programs serving incoming students and with science teachers in the
Wake County Public School System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of GP-Impact: Expanding Geology Discovery Opportunities Beyond the
Classroom is to increase the number of students interested in pursuing
undergraduate degrees in geoscience through the design and testing of new
approaches for engaging high school students in authentic, career-relevant
experiences in geoscience. We propose a multi-dimensional plan for reaching out
to new populations of students beginning soon after they enter high school and
ending a few weeks before they take their first course on campus at North
Carolina State University. We break this down to specific objectives associated
with the three elements of the proposal. &lt;br/&gt;?? Objective 1 - Attract
freshmen/sophomore high school students to a summer camp program focused on the
idea that the geosciences represent an interesting and realistic career path.
Summer camp programs geared toward high school students can involve students in
some basic research during which they learn about the geosciences, work with
geoscientists, and hear from working geoscientists about the nature of their
jobs. Participation in these programs can develop an initial interest in the
geosciences among high school students who may not have taken a related
class.&lt;br/&gt;?? Objective 2 - Present junior/senior high school students
with the variety of types of research that represent the geosciences and
demonstrate to them how relevant the geosciences are for the future of Earth at
a variety of scales. Most high school students have little conception of what a
geoscientist does and few have ever met a geoscientist. Students will
participate in lab visits with research faculty in geology, marine science, and
meteorology so that they can realize the significant role that the geosciences
play in identifying and mitigating the grand challenges that society will face
during their lifetimes. These visits will build interest among the participating
high school students that will result in increased applications to MEAS
programs. &lt;br/&gt;?? Objective 3- Attract STEM-friendly students into the
Geosciences through our new Colorado River GeoJourney course. We will teach a
new hands-on geoscience summer bridge field course for matriculating first-year
university students. This 3-credit course will focus on interactions between
geoscience and society along one of the continent?fs most iconic rivers.
Students will be recruited from university programs containing students with a
STEM focus, but who may be unaware of the merits and opportunities of a career
in the geosciences. A field course that is taught in a region of spectacular
geology, and has an intentional focus on how geoscience is related to society,
has the potential to convince some of the participating students that they
should consider majoring in a geoscience program. We hypothesize that
matriculating first-year college students who participate in the NCSU Colorado
River GeoJourney are more likely to: 1) enroll in additional geoscience courses;
and, 2) choose to major in the geosciences when compared against both their
peer-population as well as in comparison to similar demographic cohorts prior to
the implementation of the Colorado River GeoJourney.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project seeks to both increase the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in the geosciences. During all components of the project we will seek
to collect data that allows us to measure student/teacher interest and attitudes
about geoscience and its potential as a career option. This will be in the form
of pre/post surveys and/or performance measures. This data will allow us to
interpret the relative effectiveness of these three strategies in increasing the
number and diversity of students entering geoscience degree programs in North
Carolina. These programs can have an additive effect. We anticipate that
students who participate in multiple elements of the project will be more
significantly impacted than students who complete just one element.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One outcome of the project is to provide a mechanism for
reaching a cohort of students who are currently unengaged with the geosciences
in high school and do not consider the geosciences to represent a realistic
career path. Further, this project provides opportunities for geoscience faculty
at NCSU to build robust partnerships with colleagues within university programs
serving incoming students and with science teachers in the Wake County Public
School System.