* 1701265
* Simulations of Magnetic Field Generation in Low-Mass Stars Across the Tachocline Divide
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Maria Weber, Weber                   Maria          A
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2020
* USD 190,911.00

Maria Weber is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to conduct a
program of research and education at the University of Chicago and at the Adler
Planetarium. Stars like the Sun have a boundary region deep inside called the
tachocline, which is thought to be necessary to generate a magnetic field. The
smallest stars lack this boundary, but they can still have strong magnetic
fields. Weber will develop computer models of magnetic activity in M dwarf
stars, the smallest, most common stars in our galaxy. Results from her work will
allow astronomers to understand how magnetism emerges in M dwarfs. Because many
M dwarfs host planets, this work might also allow a better understanding of how
stellar magnetic activity affects the conditions for life on such planets.
Alongside this research, Weber will present colorful visualizations of her
computer models, showing Adler Planetarium visitors how heat and magnetism are
created inside a star and how they reach the stellar surface and beyond. Weber
will also develop a science communication program for University of Chicago
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Weber will study the generation and emergence of
magnetism in fully convective M dwarfs and in those with an imposed tachocline.
She will produce the first set of simulations that address dynamo action and the
rotation-activity correlation for M dwarfs across the partially-to-fully
convective transition. The nature of the magnetism generated will inform
separate simulations of flux emergence and allow astronomers to interpret
observations of M dwarf magnetic activity. Her work will assess whether buoyant
magnetic structures emerge self-consistently in these stars, as they are in
rapidly rotating Sun-like stars. Comparing such structures with those studied
through traditional flux emergence models will allow a better understanding of
the flux pattern expected at the stellar surface. Weber will also seek to
increase public science literacy by inspiring science communication through
three-dimensional visualizations and by training students in the skills
necessary to deliver impactful public presentations.