* 1701597
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Investigating patterns and processes of evolution, ecology, and diversification in carangiform fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Thomas Near, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 21,776.00

This project examines genetic diversity in two species of iconic marine fishes,
the Giant Trevally and the Bluefin Trevally. Both species are top predators on
coral and rocky reefs throughout the Indian and Pacific Oceans and are highly
valued for artisanal, commercial, and sport fisheries. The research will
investigate the correlation between genetic diversity and environmental
variables (e.g., ocean temperature and currents) in the Indo-Pacific to identify
physical barriers that might lead to observed differences in the genomes of
these fishes in different geographic locations. The project focuses on the
western Indian Ocean, a region lacking sufficient marine conservation measures
in large part due to a scarcity of data necessary to inform governments making
management decisions. Given the lack of data on these two species of Trevally,
coupled with their economic importance, this project has direct societal
implications. The researchers will share data with governmental and non-profit
collaborators and incorporate strong scientific training components for graduate
students, as well as engagement with members of the public in the USA, South
Africa, and Seychelles. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the project
objectives, the researchers will first conduct seascape genetic analyses using
next generation sequencing techniques, specifically double digest restriction
site associated DNA sequencing (RADseq) targeting single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) to examine fine-scale genetic structure within and among C.
ignobilis and C. melampygus individuals across their range. Seascape properties
will be analyzed using coupled biological-physical models that integrate
oceanographic data with biological attributes of these species. Models will be
generated that maximize the availability of oceanographic information at a
spatial scale complementary to the genetic data. The second component includes a
phylogeographic analysis focused on characterizing patterns of historic gene
flow by using paleoclimatic data to characterize physical and biological forces
that may have driven evolution and influenced historical and present data
distributions of the two species. This methodology uses high-resolution
paleoceanographic models coupled with contemporary GIS-based species
distribution modeling algorithms to generate paleodistribution suitability
values for each species. These paleodistributions serve as alternate hypotheses
to test against the SNP dataset. In combination, these analyses will provide
insight on contemporary and historical processes shaping the diversification and
connectivity of these two important fishery species.