* 1701690
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of adaptation to saltwater by an amphibian
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Michael McCoy, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,175.00

This project will investigate the genetic and cellular processes that allow some
populations of the American green tree frog (Hyla cinerea) to tolerate high salt
concentrations, and how saltwater affects the natural history of amphibians. The
ongoing decline of habitat quality and quantity has increased the urgency to
understand how organisms adapt to new or changing environments. Evolution might
occur rapidly and quickly enough to rescue populations and protect species from
being lost in the face of a changing environment, including by the increasing
salinization of freshwater wetlands around the world. As wetlands grow saltier,
many freshwater wetland organisms such as fish, turtles, and frogs may become
locally extinct. However, populations of the American green tree frog have been
discovered in brackish wetlands. This project will compare frogs from coastal
and inland populations for differences in gene expression, egg hatching, and
larval development, among other traits. The results will lead to a much better
understanding of the process of adaptation to saline environments. In addition,
the project will engage with K-12 students, especially those from groups that
are underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine whether
putatively salt-tolerant frog populations are adaptively diverging from
freshwater populations in response to salt exposure, this study uses a common
garden, factorial design to investigate endpoints across multiple levels of
biological organization across three stages of anuran amphibian development
(egg, larval, and post metamorphosis). The study will characterize
transcriptomic responses following saltwater exposure and relate these patterns
to subsequent protein expression and fitness correlates (e.g., developmental
rates, survival). In doing so, the project links selective pressures occurring
at the level of the whole organism to the molecular processes that underlie
adaptation. The project will identify the mechanisms that underlie salt
tolerance and differentiate between competing hypotheses about the role of
genetic variation and plasticity in the evolution of adaptive change.