* 1701104
* PFI:AIR - TT: Multifunctional Underwater Sealants with Long-Term Sustained Release Functionality
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Youngwoo Seo, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2021
* USD 253,630.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a new
multifunctional moldable and adhesive material with small molecule controlled-
release properties. Two potential applications have been identified: one as an
underwater sealant, good for emergency water leak repair, and one as a
controlled-release device, capable of multiple-month release of active small
molecules for disinfectants, herbicides, fragrances, pheromones or drugs. When
used as an underwater sealant, the new material has the unique features of
immediately sticking when pressed to a wet surface (rather than requiring a dry
surface or a significant setting time), and could stop leaks faster than
competing products. When used for long-term sustained release, the material
also: (1) adheres to diverse surface types; (2) can be molded to fit most
shapes; and (3) requires no organic solvents or high temperatures during
production (which reduces toxicity and prevents payload degradation). This
unique combination of properties could make this sustained release material
safer and more versatile than the leading competing products. This project will
result in prototypes that demonstrate how the new material can be used for both
applications, and in a comprehensive set of guidelines for appropriately
tailoring the material's adhesion, stability and long-term release properties. 

This project will address several knowledge and technology gaps as it translates
the new multifunctional material toward commercialization. To enable its
successful use as an underwater sealant, the researchers will investigate: (1)
how different modes of stress affect adhesive failure at various ionic strength,
pH and temperature levels; (2) how rheological and adhesion properties evolve
upon aging (and how these changes correlate to the structural rearrangements
within the material); (3) how adhesion properties depend upon application
method; and (4) how adhesion and rheological properties change upon drying.
These analyses will both elucidate how and where the proposed material may be
used as a sealant, and advance fundamental understanding of ionically
crosslinked polyelectrolytes (from which the new material is formed). Further,
to enable its commercial use as a long-term sustained release vehicle, this
project will establish methods for optimizing this material to efficiently
encapsulate small molecules (regardless of their affinity for the encapsulating
polymer or their solubility), and will generate approaches for tuning their
sustained release. By demonstrating how this ionic network can be tailored to
deliver antimicrobial agents, herbicides and other actives over multiple months,
this project will provide essential guidelines for the use of this material in
commercial sustained-release applications. 

In addition, project personnel, including graduate and undergraduate students,
will receive innovation and technology translation experiences through: (1)
research and development; (2) completing a four-week (mini I-Corps type) course
on customer discovery and product-market fit offered through UT's
entrepreneurship/business incubator program; and (3) participating in meetings
with potential industry partners, which will be conducted in partnership with
UT's Technology Transfer Office.