* 1701468
* How Binary Companion Stars Impact Stellar Rotational Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Stephanie Douglas, Douglas                 Stephanie      T
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2020
* USD 285,810.00

Stephanie Douglas is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to
conduct a program of research and education at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center
for Astrophysics. Douglas will observe hundreds of binary stars (stars that
orbit each other) to measure their physical properties. This will allow a better
understanding of how stars---and their effects on planets---change with time.
Alongside this research, Douglas will provide astronomy research experiences to
middle school students from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds and to
undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Douglas will study the relationship between a star's
rotation period and the proximity of a companion. Observations of open clusters
show that among stars of a given age, the rapid rotators tend to be binaries.
This could be because of tidal effects acting over 0.01 - 10 billion years or
interactions between the binary companion and the protoplanetary disk during the
first 10 million years. Both effects would cause binary stars to rotate faster
than single stars, thus affecting angular momentum evolution in the binary
systems. Douglas will combine rotation periods and binary orbital parameters to
explain why rapidly rotating stars tend to be binaries. Douglas will use
photometry, spectroscopy, and light curves to identify candidate binaries as
well as new radial velocity observations to measure orbits. These data will
allow her to test how binary companions affect stellar rotation over time. For
the educational component of her work, Douglas will develop inquiry-based
activities to introduce middle school students to binary and exoplanet research.
She will also advise undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds on
projects related to binary and exoplanet research.