* 1701062
* GP:IMPACT:  Interactive Simulations and Systems Thinking to Broaden Pathways into the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Juliette Rooney-Varga, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 407,602.00

Part 1. &lt;br/&gt;Our project seeks to promote the progress of science and
advance the national prosperity by broadening the pipeline of students
interested in the sciences. We will develop and leverage immersive learning
tools that bring state-of-the-art sustainability science directly to &gt;3,000
students, with the potential to scale to reach hundreds of thousands of
students. Our educational approach combines interactive computer models with
engaging role-play simulations, in which students learn for themselves by making
decisions, and then finding out, through the computer models, how the Earth and
energy systems are expected to respond to those decisions. In short, rather than
being lectured to, students learn for themselves through a process that mimics
scientific discovery. Further, our learning tools will take students ?under the
hood,? to understand important Earth system processes and to gain a deeper
understanding of the modeling process. Our project focuses on a student target
audience that is currently under-represented in STEM: economically
disadvantaged, first-generation-in-college students in federally funded TRIO
Student Support Services programs. This focus will benefit the project by (1)
leveraging and improving existing programs and networks for dissemination; (2)
enhancing participation in the scientific enterprise by college students; and
(3) enhancing the prospects of economically disadvantaged
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Overview:&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this proposal is to broaden the pathway of low-income,
first-generation-in-college students to the geosciences through development,
implementation, and evaluation of scalable simulation-based climate and
sustainability science educational tools. Our project team brings together
expertise in climate and sustainability education (UMass Lowell Climate Change
Initiative, or CCI, and Dr. McNeal), educational evaluation and research
(SageFox Consulting Group and Dr. Newton), and leaders in advancing college
access and success opportunities for low-income, first-generation-in-college
students through federally funded TRIO Student Support Services (SSS) programs
around the Nation (the Council for Opportunity in Education, or COE). Our goal
is to significantly increase geoscience knowledge, interest, and motivation
among early, low-income, first-generation undergraduate students. The three key
project components include: (1) Develop and test a new ?Geo-Interactive?
curriculum that is centered on engaging simulation-based learning tools, uses an
active learning approach to introduce climate and Earth system feedback
processes, and makes direct connections to academic career opportunities; (2)
Leverage the extensive nationwide network of 1,080 TRIO SSS programs that
together reach &gt;205,000 students to implement, propagate, and disseminate the
Geo-Interactive curriculum to those currently underrepresented in STEM
professions, careers or education pathways; and (3) Determine the impact of the
Geo-Interactive curriculum on geoscience-related motivation, learning, and
career interest.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The simulation-based
curriculum we are proposing takes an approach that is supported by educational
research: it is student-centered, experiential, and addresses a highly relevant,
real-world problem. The proposed curriculum will include the World Climate
simulation, which was co-developed by the PI and our project partners at Climate
Interactive. Initial results have shown that World Climate delivers significant
gains in climate literacy, systems thinking skills, and, importantly student
motivation to learn and do more about climate and sustainability. By combining
World Climate with new modules that explore geoscience concepts and academic and
career opportunities, potential paths into geoscience will be opened for
students whose engagement and motivation has been stimulated. Importantly, our
target population are early undergraduates in SSS programs, a demographic that
is under-represented in the geosciences and STEM more generally, and that has
strong potential to broaden and diversify the Nation?s geoscience
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is designed
to benefit to society by: (1) contributing to the evidence base for effective
educational approaches that reach all students, with a focus on students who
have been underserved and underrepresented in the geoscience and STEM pipelines;
(2) playing a role in closing the projected shortfall in geoscience
professionals by broadening geoscience participation among more than 3,000 low-
income, first-generation undergraduate students; (3) building a citizenry and
workforce that is informed about and enable to make effective decisions in the
context of global environmental change.