* 1701805
* Dissertation Research: The genetic and neurobiological basis of nesting behavior in two species of Peromyscus
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Caitlin Lewarch, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2019
* USD 21,929.00

A central challenge in the study of behavior is to understand the mechanisms by
which genetic changes can cause behaviors to vary. Though nesting is a
heritable, tractable behavior with profound consequences for survival and
reproduction in rodents, the genes that influence this trait and the precise
neural circuitry governing this behavior are unknown. This research project will
complement an ongoing genetic study and bridge the gap between our understanding
of genetic, neurobiological and behavioral variation by identifying the neurons
that are active during nesting and characterizing gene expression patterns in
these cells. These are crucial steps in understanding how genetic changes can
alter the structure and function of a mammalian nervous system, an area of
inquiry with implications beyond nesting behavior. Moreover, this is a unique
opportunity to identify a genetic change that contributes to a behavioral
difference in naturally evolving populations, examples of which are very rare,
especially in mammals. As this genetic variant is segregating in wild rodent
populations, the results of these experiments will provide insights into the
evolution of mammalian behavior that may be broadly applicable to other species,
including humans. Finally, of the researchers will create videos and educational
materials including activities, problems sets, and exam questions to complement
the videos that will be made freely available to educators and the public
through the Hoekstra Laboratory website, the Harvard Museum of Comparative
Zoology Teacher Resource Page, and the National Association for Biology
Teachers.

This project focuses on two sister species Peromyscus polionotus (the oldfield
mouse) and P. maniculatus (the deer mouse) that differ in their latency to build
nests of thermoregulatory value to further understand how genetic changes can
alter the structure and function of a mammalian nervous system and, ultimately,
behaviors important for fitness. Cross-fostering experiments between the two
species demonstrated that this difference is heritable, and a Quantitative Trait
Locus (QTL) mapping experiment identified 3 genomic regions that contribute to
interspecific variation, including one locus containing only 62 candidate genes.
This research will significantly extend and improve upon this existing body of
work. First, the researchers will use Immediate-Early Gene (IEG) expression
patterns to identify the cell populations in the brain active during nesting,
which will itself be a novel finding and will additionally allow subsequent
experiments to focus on the brain regions and cells most relevant for the
behavioral difference. Following this the researchers will characterize the
transcriptomes of those neurons specifically active during nesting using a
cutting-edge phosphorylated ribosome profiling technique. Together, these aims
will both narrow the list of candidate genes generated by the genetic mapping
approach and provide insights into how those genetic changes modify neural
circuits to produce behavioral differences. The researchers will also make short
educational videos tailored to a high school/undergraduate audience using
VideoScribe (http://www.videoscribe.co/) to explain basic concepts in genetics
and neuroscience and their application to the study of behavioral evolution.