* 1702232
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Uprisings and Political Outcomes in the MENA Region
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Tyson Patros, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 11,801.00

Title: Uprisings and Political Outcomes in the MENA
Region&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to explain
the emergence and outcomes of contemporary regional revolutionary waves. Recent
Middle East-North African history provides exceptional cases to test and enrich
related theories. Beginning late 2010, the Arab Spring concatenation of mass
movements challenged regimes? right to rule, police states, and economic-
development orientations. By early 2011, many saw these uprisings as initiating
democracy and social justice across MENA. Yet, uprisings emerged in only six
MENA countries; others had reformist or few protests; and later outcomes
contradicted demands. Consider the political despair, the imprisoned or dead,
the masses made refugees, compared to popular calls for socioeconomic wellbeing
or democratic empowerment. Of the six uprisings, four ousted long-standing
rulers (Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen, Libya) and two were deflected (Bahrain, Syria).
Tunisia alone would then transition to political democracy; Egypt's military and
Bahrain's monarchy institutionalized autocratic counterrevolutions; and Yemen,
Libya, and Syria descended into internationalized civil wars. This project seeks
to explain these three interrelated outcomes: namely, why uprisings emerged in
some regional countries and not others (revolution emergence); why some
uprisings ousted rulers and others did not (initial political outcomes); and
lastly, why cases produced political democracy, counterrevolution, or civil war
(major political outcomes). This project addresses theoretical debates on the
oppositional movements, political and economic regimes, and global relations
impacting revolutions. The project analyzes the contingent dynamics of social,
state, and global actors contending to transform or retain autocracy and
neoliberalism, and the institutional-structural terrains conditioning these
struggles and outcomes. By splitting cases into multiple episodes and outcomes,
not single isolated-linear processes, this project enhances knowledge of
successful/positive, failed/negative, and reversed cases amid revolutionary
waves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses comparative historical-
sociological methods for in-depth case studies and comparisons, and multi-level,
combinatorial, and interactive causal analysis. First, the project uses fuzzy-
set/Qualitative Comparative Analysis of 21 MENA countries to locate causal
combinations for revolution emergence, no emergence, and reformist protest.
Fuzzy sets allow fine gradations in degrees of set membership in potential
causal factors, rather than neatly-defined fixed sets, which enables evaluating
complex causation. This project creates composite indexes to determine
countries' set membership scores in oppositional mobilizing structures,
sultanistic-autocratic regimes, rentier states, uneven development, and
neoliberal globalization, with fs/QCA locating necessary and/or sufficient
combinations of these factors for the specified outcomes. These combinations are
analyzed vis-Ã -vis case interaction/revolutionary diffusion. Second, this
project uses within- and cross-case analysis for three full and three mini case
studies. Case analysis prioritizes the impact of movement composition and
action-forms, state-military structures, and global relations on the initial and
major political outcomes. Dense event timelines are created using event-level
data from organizational reports and systematically-gathered newspaper data,
generating analytical sketches of actors' activities and interests, protest
events and cycles, and institutional changes. Semi-structured in-depth
interviews of movement organizers further ground this project. By processually
studying positive, negative, and reversed cases, this project will explain why
many Arab Spring cases defy existing revolution theories and inform movement
activists and political leaders on the nature, durability, and change of
autocratic regimes and exploitative economic systems.