* 1702591
* Invisible Luminescent Solar Concentrators
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Babak Borhan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 415,000.00

This project addresses low-cost photovoltaic (PV) thin film technology that can
offer alternative methods to integrating solar energy technology into building
envelops. The integration of solar-harvesting components into the building
envelope is a transformative route to capturing solar energy for electricity
generation while lowering effective solar cell installation costs and improving
building energy efficiency. Widespread adoption of this approach is limited by
difficulties associated with mounting traditional solar cell modules around
buildings due to cost, architectural impedance, and aesthetics. This fundamental
research project addresses low-cost luminescent solar concentrator (LSC) film
technology that is highly transparent in the visible light spectrum enabling
integration onto windows, glazing systems, and siding in the building envelope.
The technology is virtually invisible on glazing while offering additional
renewable electricity generation for the building. The project will leverage the
research results for outreach activities including the development of solar
concentrator kits, deployment of sustainable energy technologies across campus,
and increasing the scientific awareness of renewable energy technologies for
undergraduate students and pre-college students. The fundamental knowledge
gained of these luminescent systems will also have potential in enhancing
traditional solar cells, and light emitting diodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this fundamental research is to investigate novel phosphorescent
nanoclusters and fluorescent organic salts, and exploit their properties to
enable widespread affordable net-zero-energy building technologies. By modifying
the bandgap and the discontinuity of states between molecular orbitals it is
possible to tune the solar harvesting of these materials outside of the visible
light spectrum (e.g. ultra violet, UV region) into the near-infrared (NIR). The
excitonic character and structured absorption of the targeted materials will be
designed to produce luminescent solar concentrator architectures that
selectively and efficiently harvest UV and NIR light by waveguiding deeper-NIR
emission to high efficiency solar cells. The film system will absorb and emit
energy around the visible spectrum. The project will integrate fundamental
understanding of chemical structure-properties, exciton-harvesting, photon
management, and morphology-property relationships with optical and lifetime
engineering necessary to produce a viable solar pathway. Stokes-shift
engineering of luminophores will be investigated to optimize the optical
efficiency and realize large-area scalability.