* 1702438
* Collaborative Research: quantifying precipitation changes in the South American subtropics over the late Pleistocenee
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2021
* USD 87,520.00

Many regions of the world, including the Americas, are experiencing drought and
its political consequences. The critical question is why, and are the causes
natural or man-made? The answer to this and other questions will help us plan
for what is ahead, as some regions of the planet continue to warm and dry. This
project will travel to the central Andes of South America- a region that is both
politically fragile and recently drought stricken. The aim is to study the
interplay of temperature and drought in the past, for clues to their probable
connections in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main purpose of the project
is to create a map of changes in the sizes of ancient lakes in the central
Andes, giant ancestors to modern lakes in the region such as Lake Titicaca.
Well-preserved shorelines mark the extent of these ancient lakes, and using
state-of-the art techniques, the age of these features can be determined. The
mapping and dating is vital to relating lake size (and therefore rainfall
amounts in the past) to the changing temperature state of the planet, which is
well known from other records. In short, these reconstructions will help
scientists to better understand how rainfall in this region will change in the
coming decades to centuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the
Paleo Perspectives on Climate Change Program and the Office of International
Science and Engineering.