* 1702312
* Collborative Research:  Linking Thermal Tolerance to Invasion Dynamics: Climate and Physiological Capacity as Regulators of Geographical Spread
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Dylan Parry, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2021
* USD 32,500.00

Invasive species are an increasing threat to native ecosystems, agriculture, and
forestry. This research addresses fundamental questions about how the
environment, habitat, local life history, and local physiological traits
interact to determine the geographic range of gypsy moths. Introduced from
Europe to Massachusetts in 1869, gypsy moth now occurs over nearly a million
square kilometers of eastern North America, extending from Minnesota to North
Carolina. It is a highly damaging pest of hardwood forests, causing extensive
economic and ecological damage to public and private property, as well as
negatively impacting the forest products industry. In some parts of its range,
gypsy moth is spreading rapidly across the landscape, while in other areas, the
invasion front is static or retracting. So far, only one-third of susceptible
forest types in the United States have been invaded, leaving large portions of
the country still at risk. This project addresses how the invasive potential of
a species can change along its leading edge and how a changing environment can
determine whether ranges expand or contract. This research also includes
training and outreach components that will reach a wide range of student
learners, educators, and community stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to use patterns of expansion, stasis, and
contraction at gypsy moth range limits to examine how local changes in gypsy
moth traits influence the potential for future spread. Specifically, the project
tests for range-wide variation in tolerance to high and low temperature
extremes, local adaptive changes in those physiological limits, and how these
traits interact with temperature to influence invasive spread under predicted
changes in regional environments. To determine how temperature extremes impact
the survival and growth of populations from across the invasion front,
experiments will be performed to quantify temperature-dependent growth rates,
critical thermal limits, and temperature-specific metabolic rates. Additionally,
the effects of current and future environmental conditions will be tested using
growth chambers programed with region-specific current and future temperature
regimes. The effects of current overwintering conditions at the range extremes
on hatching success will be tested by deploying egg masses from a range of
populations at both the northern and southern range edge. Publically available
climate data, as well as the exhaustive sampling effort by state and federal
agencies that annually measures the abundance of gypsy moth along the entire
2000 km range edge, will be used to examine future spread potential. These
experimental approaches, combined with information on the current distribution
and spread rate will lead to a greater understanding of traits underlying the
success of invasive species and help to identify areas that may become more or
less susceptible to invasions in the future.