* 1702555
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Secure Inference in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Rick Blum, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The next generation of communication networks is predicted to provide an
Internet of Things (IoT) interconnecting up to 1 trillion sensors, products,
machines, and devices by 2022. This research addresses the critical problem of
security in these important emerging networks. Due to the limited capability of
typical IoT terminals, the strict delay requirements of anticipated real-time
IoT applications, and the broadcast nature of wireless channels, this project
investigates physical layer and low complexity cryptographic methods to prevent
eavesdroppers from gaining access to IoT data. IoT terminals will often
communicate via short messages, requiring new theory beyond the existing theory
based on infinitely long messages. Since inference takes a central role in IoT
systems, this research focuses on inference-based metrics. This project enables
student training at the three participating universities, organization of
workshops at major conferences, and development of course
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on very recent work by the members of
the project team, the team is developing bounds and approximations to
fundamental performance indices in order to understand and design inferential
networks based on short packet communications. To gain insight into large-scale
inference networks, the team is investigating scaling laws for inferential
performance which achieve optimum scaling behavior as one varies the ratio of
the number of legitimate users to the number of eavesdroppers. New practical
low-complexity cryptographic methods employing non-binary quantization, symbol
flipping, channel state information and related approaches are under development
and are expected provide significant advantages over existing methods of
protecting IoT data. Distributed inference and learning methods that complement
the developed approaches are also under development. Fast bootstrapping methods
and low-complexity estimation, decision making and classification methods for
distributed sensors in IoT are being derived as well.