* 1702850
* WiFIUS: Collaborative Research: Ambient Re-Scatter Inspired Machine Type Communication for Heterogeneous IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Zhu Han, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 299,999.00

Internet of Things (IoT) has potential benefits and numerous applications,
ranging from smart cities to assisted living. IoT is also expected to have many
trillion dollars economic impact in the next decade. IoT is a network of
physical objects, whose connectivity requires low power consumption, long
battery life, low duty cycle and massive number of low cost devices. Based on
the recently standardized Narrowband IoT (NB-IOT) technique for machine type
communications, the proposed scheme targets adding low cost Ambient Re-Scatter
(ARS) devices to an existing NB-IOT communication system, which can
significantly improve the overall system capacity and the excess capacity can be
shared between the NB-IOT and ARS systems. Hence, this project enables to
integrate ultra-low power devices to the communication systems in spectral and
energy efficient manners. Novel methods and transmission schemes allowing ARS
devices to collaborate with each other and with other networks are also
proposed. The success of this project will boost such ultra-low power IoT
solutions. The transformative and interdisciplinary nature of the proposed
research work will advance the knowledge of communications engineering, and the
outcomes of the project can potentially be used by industry for network
development and impact future industrial standardizations. This project will
also strengthen collaboration in the research field of wireless communications
between the United States and Finland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets
enhancing IoT applications through constructing new efficient and secure IoT
connectivity solutions by combining emerging machine type communication system
with ultra-low power ARS devices via four synergistic thrusts: (1) communication
system design and fundamental performance analysis, which will develop robust
non-coherent methods that allow the network to communicate with ARS while
transmitting data, develop signal processing methods for joint reception of
network and ARS data at the receiver, and conduct exhaustive ray-tracing based
simulations of the channel with ARS nodes and apply the results to identify
feasible operation point for the system; (2) novel radio resource management
schemes that exploit matching theory to develop high performance, low
complexity, decentralized, and practical solutions in proposed NB-IoT with ARS;
(3) security mechanisms for IoT deployment, which will cover both physical layer
security in MIMO backscatter and low cost cyber security, considering the
physical and low cost natures of the proposed system; (4) system and protocol
development, which will demonstrate the applicability of the system design by
building a test-bed that integrates the NB-IoT version of the LTE with ARS.