* 1702225
* Support for the 2017 Canadian-American-Mexican Graduate Student Physics Conference in Washington, DC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Amy Flatten, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2018
* USD 39,937.00

This award provides support to the American Physical Society (APS) for
conference planning and student travel to participate in the joint Canadian, US,
and Mexican physical societies' graduate student conference (CAM2017), to be
held in in Washington, D.C. from August 17-19, 2017. This is an opportunity for
physics graduate students to begin networking across borders. Throughout the
conference, students will discuss current research in both formal and informal
settings with international peers and professors.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CAM2017 workshop is designed for and by graduate students in all areas of
physics. Plenary sessions will be given by well-known scientists in their sub-
disciplines including Particle Physics, Astrophysics and Nuclear Physics,
Condensed Matter Physics, Biophysics, Optics, Atomic Physics, Nanoscience,
Computational Physics, and Materials Physics. The plenary sessions will be
followed by contributed talks from the students. There will be two panel
discussions titled "Transcending Boundaries: Geographical, Disciplinary &amp;
Career" and "Transcending Boundaries: Personal and Societal" highlighting
CAM2017s goal to foster student ability to transcend boundaries in physics. A
student poster session will round out the scientific program. All students who
attend will present their research in either a contributed talk or poster
session.