* 1702602
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Standardizing Persecution Narratives in US Asylum Adjudications
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Ann Orloff, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 11,718.00

Doctoral Dissertation Abstract for NSF: Standardizing Persecution Narratives in
US Asylum Adjudications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asylum constitutes a core arena for
negotiating tensions between the national interests of states and the
humanitarian rights of the individuals seeking their protection. The
dissertation project examines the ways in which these tensions are negotiated by
investigating empirically a significant reconfiguration in the meaning and
processing of asylum claims in the United States. The contribution of this study
is twofold. First, the project will expand knowledge about the asylum
adjudication process. Due to limitations of data, previous studies have yielded
a somewhat misleading account of asylum adjudications as inherently
inconsistent. In contrast, analyzing newly available data, this research project
argues that there is considerable uniformity in how officers frame claims.
Applicants are required by the state to align their narratives with the
standardized "knowledge" of conflict formed about their country. Deviations from
these standardized knowledge often meet resistance. This suggests that a key
interpretative stage of asylum adjudications generates heretofore unexpected
uniformity and consistency, with direct policy implications for asylum reform.
Second, this project addresses theoretical debates concerning the gap between
formal commitments to, and compliance with, humanitarianism. Previous studies
have approached this question by focusing on the interrelations between
humanitarianism and nationalism. This research goes beyond the nationalism-
humanitarianism binary and reveals how humanitarianism functions are the
organizing principle of an administrative adjudicatory regime. It suggests that
the primary challenges of adhering to humanitarian principles in the context of
asylum are not only national interests. Rather, it is the diversity of
information inherent to the individuation of the adjudication process, which
leads asylum officers to rely on default generalizations, obscuring the
individual narratives they were supposed to prioritize.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project addresses current gaps in asylum
literature concerning a core stage of the asylum decision-making process, and
sets to determine the impact of sheer information overload and ambiguous law, on
organizational decision-making, by providing the first mixed method based
account of how adjudicators translate individual testimonies of harm into the
standardized rubrics of persecution recognized under law. Specifically, it
analyzes new and comprehensive data, obtained by filing a Freedom of Information
request from the Department of Homeland Security. The data consist of over one
million cases adjudicated by the US asylum office between fiscal years 1995 and
2015. This is the first dataset to include such comprehensive information on
officers' decisions about applicants' bases of claims. Quantitative analysis of
this data is supplemented with participant observations at immigration firms and
interviews with asylum officers and immigration attorneys. The findings of this
study will shed new light on the workings of the asylum office, one of the
largest adjudication systems in the country, and contribute to general
sociological understandings of processes of classification and categorization in
a constantly changing information environment.