* 1702043
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The mechanistic basis of seasonal color molts in snowshoe hares
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Jeffrey Good, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 03/31/2019
* USD 17,952.00

The project will test the hypothesis that the ability of some mammals to change
their coat color seasonally, has evolved via a genetic mutation that
synchronized the expression of coloration genes and hair growth genes. The
results will provide general insights into the processes by which complex traits
evolve. Organisms exhibit many complex and interrelated traits that contribute
to their success in the environment. However, the evolution of complexity is
poorly understood. Investigating the molecular and genetic mechanisms that
produce complex traits clarify the origins of biological complexity. This
project will explore these mechanisms in the expression of seasonal coat color
change in snowshoe hares, which exhibit regional variation in their ability to
change color. The project will involve undergraduates in research and project
participants will work with the University of Montana School of Media Arts to
develop interactive outreach materials based on the study
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking genotypes to adaptive phenotypes in nature
is a fundamental goal in evolutionary biology. The co-option of existing gene
regulatory networks may be an important mechanism underlying the evolution of
adaptive traits, particularly adaptive traits that involve coordination among
distinct biological processes. This research will explore the role of gene
regulatory network co-option in the evolution of seasonal color molts in
snowshoe hares. Using RNA sequencing and DNA-protein binding assays in molting
snowshoe hare skin, the project will explore the hypothesis that coat color
change evolved by the co-option of seasonal hair growth regulatory machinery by
coloration genes to synchronize these processes in the seasonal color molts.
This research will provide a rare glimpse into the molecular mechanisms involved
in the evolution of a complex adaptive trait in a natural population.