* 1702306
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Ecological Patterning and Effects of Child Care Markets
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Jan (Josh) Pacewicz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2019
* USD 11,964.00

The Ecological Patterning and Effects of Child Care Markets

PI: Josh Pacewicz Co-PI: Jennifer Bouek

As mothers have flooded into the workforce over the past fifty years, children
have entered into institutionalized and non maternal care environments in
equally dramatic trends. These seismic social shifts have generated widespread
debate around the implications of institutionalized care for child wellbeing.
Yet, we know little about the ecological and organizational environments in
which families arrange for their children's care. This project questions how and
why local child care markets vary across communities and how this variation
impacts families' child care choices and maternal employment opportunities.
Beyond theoretical contributions, this project will sharpen the currently
limited understanding of child care as an organizational field, responding to
questions of equitable access, variations in quality and safety, and structural
barriers to finding care. Results will be of interest to policymakers and social
advocacy groups seeking to improve access to and the quality of child care,
especially at a time of rising political interest in child care.

This dissertation employs mixed-methods to examine the ecological patterning and
effects of child care markets. The project is based upon a comparative and
multiscalar research design, drawing data from four neighborhoods within two
cities in two states. Phase one links state administrative records of child care
providers and media archives with American Community Survey data within two of
the largest American cities (Boston, MA and Houston, TX) which embody
contrasting regulatory and social policy environments. Using spatial analysis
and logistic regression, the project analyzes how the quality, safety and
composition of local child care markets varies as a function of neighborhood
disadvantage. Results from phase one provide the foundation for phase two, in
which two neighborhoods within each city, each with similar socio demographic
profiles but contrasting child care markets, are chosen for ethnographic study.
Within each neighborhood, semi-structured in-depth interviews will be conducted
among three groups of stakeholders: (1) mothers, (2) care providers, and (3)
bureaucrats and nonprofit workers. Interviews will provide data on how markets
are formed, why they vary, and the implications for families. The geocoded
dataset from phase one, archive materials and non-confidential interview
transcripts from phase two will be made available to the public. Summary reports
will also be provided to nonprofit groups working within the communities of
study.