* 1702417
* A Least-Squares Fit of an Ocean Model to Deglacial Radiocarbon Records
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Olivier Marchal, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 493,037.00

The deep ocean is renewed, or "ventilated", when surface waters present at high
latitudes become sufficiently cold and very dense. These waters subsequently
spread laterally, filling the various deep oceanic basins, and eventually return
to the sea surface. Ventilation is therefore the very process by which the deep
ocean communicates with our atmosphere and as such, is thought to play a
particularly important role in the climate system. This project will estimate
the changes in deep ocean ventilation which took place during the last
deglaciation -- the largest manifestation of natural climate change that remains
relatively well preserved in the geologic record. It will (i) promote the
progress of science by elucidating the contribution of ocean ventilation changes
to the deglacial rise in atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2)
observed in ice cores, (ii) be profitable to the broader scientific community by
making freely available the computer codes developed for this project, (iii)
support education by engaging three students and by drafting a little pocket
book on the methods used for this project and aimed particularly at
undergraduate and graduate students, and (iv) benefit society by furthering
understanding of the ocean's role in the natural changes of atmospheric CO2 --
the most important greenhouse gas in our atmosphere after water vapor and the
subject of major current environmental and societal
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, the history of the
ventilation of deep oceanic basins over the past 20,000 yr will be estimated
from the quantitative combination of ocean radiocarbon (14C) records with an
ocean circulation model using recursive least-squares techniques (a Kalman
filter and a related smoother). The challenge posed by the application of these
powerful but computationally intensive techniques over geologic time scales will
be addressed by using a coarse-resolution model with simplified dynamics in
concert with efficient filtering and smoothing algorithms. The hypothesis that
ocean ventilation changes contributed to the changes in atmospheric CO2
concentration of the last deglaciation will be tested with due regard for the
uncertainties and sparse distribution of the radiocarbon records. The work plan
of this research will comprise four tasks. (1) An ocean circulation model of
intermediate complexity, based on coarse resolution and planetary geostrophy,
will be applied. It will have a grid that accommodates the spatial distribution
of 14C records and include a simplified sea-ice model and transport equation for
14C. (2) Modern and paleo-data, including more than 1000 14C age estimates from
benthic foraminifera and deep-sea corals, will be assembled together with
uncertainty estimates. (3) A Kalman filter will be used to combine the model
with the data during a forward integration of the model from the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM) to today. (4) A smoother will be used to propagate backwards in
time the information provided by the data (including modern data) and hence
further constrain past ocean states. From (3-4), an estimate of basin-scale
ocean ventilation rates from LGM to today will be derived, one that is
consistent with the data and the model, given estimates of their respective
error statistics.