* 1702760
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Developing for Differential Privacy with Formal Methods and Counterexamples
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Daniel Kifer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

Differential privacy is an elegant formulation of conditions an algorithm must
meet in order to avoid leaking personal information contained in its inputs. It
is becoming mainstream in many research communities and has been deployed in
practice in the private sector and some government agencies. Accompanying this
growth is an unfortunate, but expected, difficulty: many algorithms that are
claimed to be differentially private are incorrect. This phenomenon affects both
new-comers and seasoned veterans of the differential privacy field because of
the difficulty and subtlety of developing new differentially private
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a research plan for the
development of a system called DevDP, whose purpose is to enable novice and
expert users to develop prototypes and explore differentially private
algorithms. In particular, the project will develop program analysis tools and
theory that leverage both programming language and machine learning technology
to aid the development of correct differentially private programs by automating
much of the verification and reasoning about errors. As part of broader impacts,
DevDP also has the potential to help educate students and less-technical members
of the scientific community by providing interactive software tools. A solid
understanding of differential privacy will become crucial as it makes its way
into public policy.