* 1702708
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-FRA: Causes, consequences, and cross-scale linkages of environment-driven phenological mismatch across three trophic levels
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Allen Hurlbert, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2022
* USD 507,891.00

The timing and synchrony of seasonal events presents real challenges in the
natural world. Migratory birds coordinate their departure from wintering grounds
in Central or South America to arrive at North American breeding grounds at just
the right time. Too early and they risk experiencing severe weather from late
frosts or blizzards. Too late and they risk missing the peak in early spring
insects that they depend on to successfully raise offspring. For their part,
insects such as butterflies also benefit when their emergence coincides with the
springtime flush of new plant growth. The timing of spring has been shifting
earlier in recent years, and this raises the possibility of mismatches in spring
timing between birds, insects, and plants. A few local scale studies have
suggested that such mismatches may be responsible for long-term population
declines for some species, but the extent of this problem, especially over large
areas remains unknown. In this project, the research team will combine
information on springtime weather, satellite imagery on plant emergence, and
multiple large-scale citizen science data on birds, butterflies, and
caterpillars to perform a comprehensive evaluation of mismatches in seasonal
timing between interacting species. This work is critical for understanding the
potential impacts of continued shifts in seasonality on living systems. The work
will also engage K-college students and the public through a new citizen science
program, educational units, and outreach events focused on learning about the
timing of seasonal changes. &lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be
the first attempt to examine phenological mismatch across three trophic levels
at a semi-continental extent. Local-scale studies have documented specific
instances of phenological mismatch but fail to inform how mismatch consequences
propagate across spatial, temporal, or trophic scales. Birds and butterflies
provide the most expansive, long-term and detailed macroecological data sets on
distribution, diversity, and demography. The project will unite multiple large-
scale citizen science datasets for these taxa with targeted field data
collection, and remotely-sensed climate and vegetation data layers, to examine
the cross-scale and multi-trophic interactions that connect shifting thermal
environments, phenological mismatch, and fitness consequences. This will be
accomplished by: (1) assembling and uniting continental and regional monitoring
and citizen-science databases for Lepidoptera and birds; (2) building spatio-
temporal models in order to assess drivers of phenology, calculate direct
metrics of phenological mismatch across trophic levels, and evaluate fitness and
population consequences of those mismatches; and (3) testing the ability of
generated models to predict phenology and population trends for focal birds and
Lepidoptera across eastern North America as a function of tri-trophic
phenological mismatch. Taking a macro-scale perspective on phenological mismatch
is critical for understanding the range-wide impacts of sustained trends in
seasonal timing. In addition to answering critical research questions on
phenological mismatch the team will extend the impacts of their work through
both specific training opportunities and broad-based education and outreach
efforts.