* 1702319
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the response of tropical temperature to global forcings since the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Meredith Kelly, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 376,997.00

The tropics are the heat engine of the planet and home to about 40% of the
world's population. However, we know very little about how and why tropical
climate has changed through time. This project will develop a temperature record
in the Rwenzori Mountains of Uganda covering the last ice age to the present to
improve the understanding of the mechanisms that cause tropical climate change
and the role of the tropics in the global climate system. The Rwenzori Mountains
are among the very few glaciated tropical areas where such long-term, objective
data can be obtained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize two
different sources of climate information including: 1) surface exposure dating
of glacial moraines (ridges that mark former glacial extents) and glacial
modeling, and 2) chemical analyses of lake sediment cores. The project will
entail fieldwork in Uganda to collect glacial moraine samples and lake sediment
cores. It will evaluate how tropical African temperature changes relate to
similar reconstructions in tropical South America, and how they correspond to
changes in solar radiation, Greenland and Antarctic ice sheet extents, and
atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations. The project will advance the effort
to learn how the global climate worked over the last approximately 20,000
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Paleo Perspectives on
Climate Change Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering.