* 1702694
* WiFiUS: Fault-Tolerant Cognitive IoT Systems Using Sensors of Limited Field-of-View: Fundamental Limits and Practical Strategies
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Pulkit Grover, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 03/31/2019
* USD 299,115.00

Improving reliability and efficiency of Internet of Things (IoT) is necessary to
harness their full potential. IoT systems will sense, communicate, and process
data to produce reliable decisions and inferences. The investigators study three
ways in which each IoT device will be limited: limited "field of view" of each
sensor; severe energy limitations; unreliability of sensing and communication.
This research contributes towards progress of science by obtaining and analyzing
novel cross-layer IoT sensing, communication, and computing strategies that
outperform classical strategies by several orders of magnitude in energy
efficiency and reliability. For validation, the researchers examine improvements
on practically relevant problems of health monitoring through neuro-interfaces
and distributed camera inference. The research involves several graduate and
undergraduate courses, with emphasis on engaging female and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Severe energy constraints provide a compelling
incentive for cross-layer designs of "cognitive" IoT systems to jointly sense,
compress, communicate, and compute. However, naive cross-layer designs can
reduce tolerance to system faults, e.g., sensing/ communication/computation
errors. The investigators pursue a systematic understanding, utilizing it to
obtain novel cross-layer designs of cognitive IoT strategies that gracefully
trade off fault tolerance and efficiency through novel error-correction
techniques compatible with limited fields of view. They benchmark this trade off
against novel information-theoretic fundamental limits. The obtained techniques
increase the robustness of algorithms that use, as a first step, linear
projections on distributedly-sensed large dimensional data. Focusing on
algorithms for the widely applicable k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) problem, the
researchers obtain improved algorithms and analyze performance-efficiency-
robustness tradeoffs, bridging information theory, statistics, and machine
learning.