* 1702667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Disciplinary Networks
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Omar Lizardo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 11,334.00

Title: The Emergence of Disciplinary Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses the emergence of neurology in France to investigate how social networks
form around emerging areas of inquiries, ultimately transitioning them from idea
to institution. What leads to the alignment of a dense community of
relationships among medical researchers with a novel set of ideas, and how might
this coupling process differ among relationship types? The case of French
neurology is an ideal one with which to answer these questions because the
structure of relationships among its practitioners well represents that of other
nascent disciplines in 19th century France and emerging fields more generally.
The project aims to reconstruct apprenticeship, colleagueship, co-authorship,
and communication networks among French medical scientists between 1840 and 1900
and to identify the mechanisms that generated the structure of relationships
among those individuals who would become neurologists. Data are collected from
archives located in Paris, France, and statistical network and text analyses are
used in order to address the research questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to explain why researchers collectively orient themselves toward
institutionalizing particular groundbreaking ideas. Most current work on social
networks in science only examines co-publication or co-citation networks, which
leaves one unable to explain disciplinary emergence. The disciplinary network
theoretical framework of this research advances sociology of science in a key
way.&lt;br/&gt;At the same time, it advances two central areas in social network
analysis. Foci serve as critical organizers of networks, and this research
illuminates the process through which emerging foci come to affect social
networks. Further, while much research in&lt;br/&gt;network science of science
investigates the structure of scientific communities, it neglects how ideas, and
other attributes of researchers, as well as the multitude of relationships that
usually exist between them cohere into the foundations of a new
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;The ability to detect social groups from relationship data
constitutes one of the most active areas being developed by network scientists,
but no models exist that accurately capture how traits of individuals within
networks generate community structure. This research will uncover the mechanisms
that produce community structure. The results of my projectwill also shed light
on the mechanisms that generate relationships among distinct social networks.