* 1702501
* LSU BD-8: 2017 Cohort LA-BRIDGE
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Isiah Warner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." The
vision of this grant is to provide a national model for the production of
underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana State University (LSU) serves as host of a
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) project within the Louis Stokes - Louisiana
Alliance for Minority Participation. The LSU BD activity employs a multifaceted
model that integrates research, education, and mentoring to address challenges
underrepresented students face in doctoral programs. As such this project seeks
to (1) recruit a cohort of twelve highly qualified Fellows from underrepresented
racial and ethnic backgrounds employing evidence-based recruitment and selection
strategies; (2) retain and support Fellows through doctoral candidacy, and
prepare them for successful completion of the PhD and professional research
careers by providing academic and research support, and professional development
opportunities; and (3) expand and institutionalize best mentoring strategies for
underrepresented PhD students. The program components are executed via an
educational model that integrates mentoring and research into recruitment and
retention strategies. This proposal implements additional requirements that BD
Fellows apply for the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP). Toward
this end, scientific communication, especially written communication, will
become a larger focus for this cohort. The use of Individual Development Plans
(IDPs) will be refined and a new Bridge Orientation will be implemented.
Evidence-based recruitment and retention strategies will be employed. The
proposal includes a transformative design that incorporates inter- and intra-
institutional alliances to improve the quality of STEM education at the doctoral
level. This project will implement evidence-based mentoring strategies designed
to support student matriculation and tools to promote self-efficacy toward PhD
candidacy and doctoral attainment.