* 1702321
* RUI: Study of parasite-host model and its biological applications: simulations and theory
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jiajia Dong, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2024
* USD 149,772.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to investigate problems at the interface between soft
matter and biology and to advance fundamental understanding of systems far from
the familiar tranquil but robust state of equilibrium. These systems span from
materials synthesis and growth to living things. Different species of living
systems exhibit rich dynamical behaviors such as coexistence, competition, and
symbiosis. The quantitative understanding of these phenomena requires a
combination of different methods, such as modeling and computer simulations, as
well as an integrated perspective from fundamental physical laws applied to
living systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the parasite-host
type interaction in the context of plasmids - small DNA molecules - transforming
bacteria from susceptible to resistant to antibiotic treatments. In the model,
the spread of antibiotic resistance depends on the physical contact between the
plasmid and the bacteria cells, as well as the susceptible and the resistance
cells. By tuning the physically relevant parameters, such as the bacteria
reproduction rate, plasmid diffusion rate, and the interactions amongst cells,
the research team aims to gain insight into the rapid emergence of antibiotic
resistance in a population, and spark further interest in interdisciplinary
collaborations with biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, this project
will involve six undergraduate students, who will hone their computational
skills through solving a real-world problem. They will also advance their
understanding of complex systems and topics on stochastic processes through this
project. These help broaden the research horizon of the students and bridge the
transition from a learner to a scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to investigate problems at the interface between soft matter and
biology and to advance fundamental understanding of systems far from
equilibrium. Different species of living systems exhibit rich dynamical
behaviors such as coexistence, competition, and symbiosis. The quantitative
understanding of these phenomena is facilitated by the theoretical framework
established in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and modeling aided by
computer simulations. In this project, the aims to integrate fundamental
concepts in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, population dynamics and cell
biology with Monte Carlo simulations to explore a focused class of complex
systems: the parasite-host (PH) model and its biological
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PH dynamics is less systematically
explored, fundamentally different, and immensely important in life sciences.
This project focuses on the parasite-host type interaction in the context of
plasmids - small DNA molecules - transforming bacteria from susceptible to
resistant to antibiotic treatments. The emergence of a resistant population
comes from two mechanisms: plasmid-transformation and cell-cell conjugation.
Both the dynamics, such as birth and death, and the spatial structure of the
bacterial populations will be investigated. Casting this problem in the language
of reaction-diffusion systems and using the theoretical results as a foundation,
the research team plans to develop tools for probing the steady state properties
and the dynamics of the PH system both in a well-mixed scenario and one with
spatial structure. In this way, the PI aims to identify defining characteristics
to curb the growth of a resistant population. Furthermore, the team plans to
provide a more general description of the class of PH-like models and potential
applications in the control of epidemics and the evolution of drug resistance in
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will involve six undergraduate
students over three years. They will hone their computational skills through
solving a real-world problem. They will also advance their understanding of
complex system and topics on stochastic processes through this project. These
help broaden the research horizon of students and bridge the transition from a
learner to a scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.