* 1702011
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Correlated diversification of a male trait and associated female perception
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Todd Oakley, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,955.00

A long-standing question in evolution is whether strong mate competition and
mate selection influences the evolution of species. This question remains
unresolved because species accumulate over deep timescales, and previous studies
have revealed ambiguous results. In contrast to studies across species, studies
across populations show clear links between mate selection and rapid evolution,
and show correlations between male mating signals and the associated female
preferences. Missing in the literature is a study that tests these population-
level findings in a species-level context, specifically, one that correlates
differentiation in male mating signals and female perception. If changes in
female perception are met with changes in male signal, the project will support
a novel finding: that similar mechanisms are at work across species as across
populations. This also suggests that sexual signals may be constrained by female
physiology, and that changes in female physiology allow for changes in male
signal diversity. Results from this project will be disseminated at
international meetings, undergraduates will be actively involved in this
research, and outcomes of this project will contribute to the development of
novel biomedical reporter enzymes that create different colors of
bioluminescence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioluminescent, mate-signaling
ostracod crustaceans offer a unique system to understand how closely sexual
signals associate with their intended receivers. The researchers will first
measure bioluminescent emission spectra from males of 26 species of ostracod
crustaceans collected from the Caribbean Sea. Next, they will measure female
perceptual spectra from 10 species using a visual physiology technique that
determines the absorption of specific wavelengths of light through single
photoreceptor cells in the eye. The researchers will then determine the amount
of overlap of male sexual trait spectra (the color of the bioluminescence) and
the female perceptual spectra. If population genetic theory holds, and
preference is determined by perception, we expect covariation between male
signals and female physiology.