* 1702959
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Interaction Barriers and Mental Health among Older Adults with Physical Disabilities.
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* David Warner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2019
* USD 11,999.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore perceived barriers to
social interaction among older adults with physical disabilities in order to
understand how these perceptions shape mental health. This research will enhance
basic understanding of disability and older adult mental health by moving beyond
understanding physical disability as directly linked to poorer mental health to
emphasize how and why disability compromises emotional well-being. The findings
will have a positive impact through their utility for various stakeholders of
older adults' health by: informing intervention strategies of rehabilitation
hospitals; helping families provide a supportive environment for recovery that
enhances well-being; allowing health insurers to develop early and effective
practices that reduce additional mental and physical health declines; and
informing architects and designers of the ways in which older adults with
physical disabilities encounter the physical environment to optimize
implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a third of older adults in the U.S. are
physically disabled. Disablement likely restricts the ability to engage in
interpersonal interactions and thus the mental health of older adults with
physical disabilities may reflect unmet social needs. Understanding the
processes that lead to lower social interaction among those with physical
disabilities is important because social isolation is associated with not only
poor mental health but also lower self-rated health, greater healthcare use and
cost, and even mortality. The main objective of the project is to identify and
explore how perceived interpersonal and environmental barriers to social
interaction shape mental health among older adults with physical disabilities.
To do this, the proposed project will employ a mixed methods design. Analyses of
nationally representative survey data from the National Social Life, Health, and
Aging Project (NSHAP) will be combined with in-depth interviews with older
adults with physical disabilities. The survey data will be used to establish the
association between physical disability, social interaction, and mental health.
However, assessment of perceived barriers to social interaction, given their
individualized nature, would be difficult to achieve through the standardized
closed-response questionnaire design of large surveys. Consequently, semi-
structured interviews with 60 older adults with physical disabilities who are
(former) patients at a rehabilitation center in the Midwest will be used to
allow for detailed exploration of individuals? perceptions of factors that make
social interaction difficult. This project advances and the findings will test
an expanded theoretical model that integrates biopsychosocial and stress process
theories to identify perceived interpersonal and environmental barriers to
social interaction as situationally dependent and thus intermittent stressors
that shape the mental health of older adults with physical disabilities