* 1702066
* Exploring Temperature Mediated Interspecific Competition & Predation as a Mechanism of Elevation Range Limits
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Cameron Ghalambor, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,760.00

Temperature is thought to be one of the main environmental factors shaping the
geographic distributions of organisms. Yet puzzlingly, the range of temperatures
a species can survive, called its thermal tolerance, is often greater than the
range of temperatures found across the geographic areas they occupy. A common
hypothesis to explain this discrepancy is that species interactions like
competition, predation and parasitism constrain the range of environments
organisms can occupy. This may be particularly important for ectothermic animals
(cold blooded animals), because body temperature, physiological function,
behavior, and performance are determined by environmental temperatures.
Therefore, temperature may indirectly influence species interactions when
species that differ in their thermal tolerance meet. As a result temperature
could indirectly influence which species are found together in ecological
communities living in regions with different temperature regimes, but how these
influences work is not yet well understood. The researchers seek to address this
question by testing the effect of temperature on competitive and predatory
interactions, in temperate and tropical communities of aquatic insects. This
work will test long-standing ecological questions on how temperature directly
shapes the outcome of species interactions, and indirectly shapes geographic
range boundaries and community composition.

The researchers aim to investigate how competition and predation, independently
and in interactions with temperature, explain variation in elevation range size.
First, upward and downward elevation range expansions will be experimentally
simulated by testing how temperature independently and jointly influences the
outcome of interspecific competition between close mayfly relatives. Second, a
similar laboratory approach will be employed to look at the outcome of predation
of mayflies by common stonefly predators found at high and low elevations. These
experiments will be carried out in a replicated controlled laboratory setting,
using closely related Baetid mayflies from Colorado, USA (temperate), and from
Papallacta, Ecuador (tropical). Given the similar, broad thermal tolerances of
temperate mayflies, either asymmetric competition between species or
differential vulnerability to predation by stoneflies is predicted to limit
upward or downward expansion of elevation ranges. In contrast, the "locally
adapted" tropical mayflies are predicted to be restricted to their respective
ranges because of their narrow thermal tolerances, and any biotic interactions
are predicted to exacerbate the effects of reduced performance at temperatures
outside their native range.