* 1702262
* Beyond ocean temperature: Extracting new dimensions of paleoclimatic information from archaeal lipids and their isotopic compositions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Ann Pearson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2020
* USD 332,460.00

A good understanding of past climate requires accurate reconstruction of factors
such as ocean temperature and biological productivity. One such paleotemperature
method is the "TEX86 proxy", which is based on the preserved organic molecules
of Archaea, an important class of ocean microbes. TEX86 records have been
particularly valuable for studying climate of the last 100 million years,
especially during ancient warm episodes where other temperature proxies are
unavailable. Although in the modern ocean there generally is good agreement
between temperatures predicted from TEX86 and the actual observed sea surface
temperatures (SSTs), TEX86 can yield significant regional or seasonal errors.
Disagreement also has been observed during past greenhouse climates associated
with low oxygen levels in the oceans; in particular, TEX86 sometimes predicts
colder temperatures during such intervals, even though the ocean actually is
warming. To improve understanding of TEX86 temperature records, this project
will examine environmental and ecological controls on TEX86, thereby
strengthening its value for paleoceanography. The results may be relevant not
only to climate studies, but also to understanding the importance of Archaea in
tracing nutrient distributions and the biogeochemical history of the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this research is that
temperature errors in TEX86 are due to regional differences in growth rate for
Archaea, which is a function of ammonia oxidation and therefore of marine export
production. This implies that TEX86 is a combined temperature and marine
biogeochemistry signal. The major analytical goal is to incorporate stable
carbon and hydrogen isotopic information into TEX86 temperature proxy records,
by measuring isotopic ratios for the individual TEX86 compounds (called iGDGTs).
Isotopic measurements in tandem with temperature reconstruction will
collectively allow productivity signals to be decoupled from temperature
signals. Specifically, the work will examine three distinct records that are
associated with major shifts in biogeochemical structuring of the ocean over
different time scales. Record 1: the Pliocene-Pleistocene sapropel formation in
the Mediterranean Sea, for which no significant fluctuations in mean ocean
temperature but major temporal changes in the nutrient regime have been
inferred. Record 2: the Pleistocene and Holocene Eastern Equatorial Pacific, a
tropical environment lacking seasonality but showing secular changes in both
temperature and productivity. Record 3: the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
(PETM) and its associated carbon isotope excursion. These three records
collectively allow for separation of the major variables temperature and
productivity. To achieve the goals, the research requires several novel methods:
Spooling Wire Microcombustion-IRMS (SWiM-IRMS) for isotopic analysis of carbon,
all-in-one HPLC-MS approaches to measuring TEX86 and UK37 simultaneously, and
high-temperature GC-IRMS for isotopic analysis of hydrogen; advanced isotopic
technologies therefore also play a role in this project. The project supports
career development for a postdoctoral researcher.