* 1702361
* 2017-2019 Peach State LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program:  University of Georgia
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* William Kisaalita, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,074,900.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to the STEM doctoral degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Georgia (UGA) is the host site for the 2017-2019 Bridge to the
Doctorate (B2D) program for the Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (PSLAMP) under the leadership of University of Georgia. This is
the first post-baccalaureate program at the institution that supports a graduate
student cohort of 12 underrepresented minority (URM) STEM Ph.D. students from
LSAMP campuses across the nation. The BD Activity provides extensive training in
specific STEM disciplines as well as professional development and guidance that
promote peer mentoring and leadership in the scientific community. Students
receive rigorous academic and research training experiences that support
completion of the Ph.D. and the transition to a competitive career in academia
and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the duration of the project and beyond,
the BD program at UGA serves to increase the number and quality of students from
underrepresented groups completing STEM Ph.D. degrees and entering the STEM
workforce. Formative and summative evaluation will occur with the summative
evaluation including a comparison group to assess impact of the program
interventions on student outcomes. The evaluation question asks: Are PSLAMP
completers who participate in B2D more likely than PSLAMP completers who do not
participate in B2D to complete doctoral degrees in STEM
disciplines?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term impact of the BD activity is
reflected in America's STEM workforce, both in academia and in industrial
research and development. By nurturing future STEM leaders, the value added is
seen in the visibility of underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering, increasing representation and providing role models and motivation
for the next generation.