* 1702830
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--ICECAP (Ice Age Chemistry and Proxies) Phase 3: Investigating Fire Activity and its Implications for Climate Across Multiple Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 264,845.00

This project aims to examine the disparate records of past fire activity as a
means to improve the understanding of variation in fire activity over time and
climatic conditions. Wildfires have a large influence on regional and global
climate change. Fires affect carbon storage, biogeochemical cycling, local
hydrology, land albedo, ocean fertilization, and emissions of radiatively
important gases and aerosols. Deposition of fire black carbon (BC) on snow and
ice covered surfaces, for example, decreases albedo and leads to snow- and ice-
melt, further loss of albedo, and subsequent warming.

Despite the importance of fires to the earth-atmosphere system, knowledge of
past fire activity is relatively scant. Ice-core records of carbon monoxide (CO)
and BC in Antarctic ice cores do not show consistent trends over the last150
years, while trends in charcoal records and ice-core BC are sometimes at odds
over longer timescales. Charcoal and BC records from the last glacial period
reveal large variations tied to Dansgaard/Oeschger (D-O) events, but the climate
implications of these variations are unknown.

The first phase of the project involves the rigorous validation of a 250-year
simulation of wildfire activity and climate feedbacks since 1750. After gaining
confidence in model performance, the researchers will simulate wildfire activity
and subsequent radiative forcing during selected phases of an idealized D-O
event. The second phase of the project includes analyzing the variability in BC
size distributions as a potential marker of BC sources and transport processes
in existing ice cores from Greenland and Antarctica.

The main objectives of the project are: 1) Validate model simulations of
wildfire activity in the last glacial and preindustrial eras; 2) Quantify the
impacts of wildfires on regional and global climate on glacial-to-interglacial
and preindustrial-to-present-day timescales. The researchers aim to calculate
the effects of changing fires on aerosol radiative forcing, snow/ice albedo
effects, ocean fertilization, and the atmospheric oxidative capacity; and 3)
Examine observed trends in BC particle size in the ice core record to assess
changes in transport processes and hence large-scale meteorological processes
over abrupt climate change during the glacial period. The main tool for this
analysis will be the Ice-age Chemistry And Proxies (ICECAP) model, which was
developed with prior NSF funding.

The potential broader impacts include an enhanced understanding of fire activity
in warm climates to help reduce uncertainties in future climate trajectory
predictions. The project will support high school teachers during two summers at
Harvard through the NSF Research Experience for Teachers (RET). Participants in
RET will develop a hands-on curriculum on wildfires and climate. The project
will also support a graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow.