* 1702221
* Automorphic Forms and L-Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Matthew Young, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2022
* USD 158,997.00

Automorphic forms and L-functions are special kinds of mathematical functions
that are useful for studying a broad array of questions in number theory. For
instance, the Riemann zeta function, which has proven to be indispensable in
studying the distribution of the prime numbers, is the simplest example of an
L-function. Other types of L-functions are crucial for understanding whether
certain polynomial equations have solutions, or more generally, how many
solutions there are. Often these questions are related to how large the value of
an L-function is at a special point. This project concerns the development of
new tools for studying the values of L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will study moments of L-functions that are beyond the convexity
range, and deduce new bounds for central values of L-functions. A related theme
is to develop foundational tools to study new families of L-functions, including
a Petersson formula for newforms of arbitrary level. Such tools are necessary to
advance the analytic method for studying the representation problem for ternary
quadratic forms. In addition, the investigator will study different aspects of
the equidistribution of automorphic forms, such as restricted quantum unique
ergodicity (QUE) as well as QUE in higher rank settings. Finally, the
investigator will study the zeros of automorphic functions of various types. The
methods employed will be techniques from analytic number theory such as
summation formulas, exponential sums and integrals, and the spectral theory of
automorphic forms.