* 1702975
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2:  RUI:  Combining Glacier and Paleolake Records to Limit Latest Pleistocene Climate Change in the Northern Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jeffrey Munroe, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2020
* USD 74,014.00

This collaboration between professors and students at North Dakota State
University and Middlebury College will reconstruct changes in climate and
surface water in the southwestern United States between 20,000 and 11,500 years
ago. These changes caused glaciers and lakes to expand during the last
glaciation, and then disappear entirely as climate warmed. Reconstructing the
climatic conditions that drove this behavior will yield important information
about how quickly climate and resulting surface water resources can change,
which will improve projections of future surface water changes under a warming
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnitude and pace of temperature and
precipitation changes in the southwestern United States at the end of the last
glaciation have been difficult to resolve. This project will use a new approach
that has shown promise in smaller-scale applications. Glaciers and lakes respond
to changes in temperature and precipitation with differing sensitivities.
Studying geologic records of former glaciers and lakes simultaneously,
therefore, provides the opportunity to identify the relative roles of
temperature and precipitation in driving glacier and lake behavior. This project
will combine field-based geologic data with computer modeling to quantify
changes in temperature and precipitation during the last episode of major
climatic change in the southwestern United States.