* 1702474
* SHF: Small: ASF: An Adaptive Scaling Framework for High Scalability of XOR-Based RAID Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Xubin He, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2019
* USD 162,438.00

Explosive growth in data volume, heterogeneity, and complexity imposes
unprecedented challenges in data analysis and organization in data centers. RAID
particularly XOR-based RAID plays an important role to provide both reliability
and high performance storage services for these data centers. However, they
suffer from problems on the scalability issue due to multi-folded factors,
including: heterogeneous RAID layouts and various erasure codes, high overhead
of existing scaling process to significantly downgrade the storage performance,
and lack of bidirectional scaling support.

The objective of this project is to address the scalability challenge for
storage systems in large data centers. This project designs novel techniques to
exploit XOR-based parity codes to achieve efficient scaling, develops a series
of scalable XOR-based erasure codes to bridge the relations among heterogeneous
RAID forms for interoperability, and integrates various erasure codes in a
framework to provide a unified user interface for RAID scaling.

The research will facilitate the storage systems to effectively tackle the
scalability challenge in large data centers. It cohesively investigates how to
utilize and integrate proper RAID scaling technologies to improve the
scalability of storage systems. This project will yield fundamental
contributions to research on efficient big data management in high-performance
data centers, and greatly contribute to enabling high-performance computing
systems to stay on track of their historic scaling, and hence benefit numerous
real-life data-intensive applications such as biology, chemistry, earth science,
health care, and so on.