* 1702134
* GEM: Simulation Studies of Plasma Redistribution in the Ionosphere and Plasma Supply to the Magnetosphere in Geomagnetic Active Periods
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jiannan Tu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 279,038.00

This project is focused on investigating how changes in the structure of the
upper levels of the atmosphere can lead to changes in the plasma flowing out
into the outer space. During periods of significant space weather the
circulation of plasma in the upper atmosphere can be dramatically changed,
resulting in high density regions flowing over the polar cap that can lead to
enhanced outflow of plasma flowing out along magnetic field lines into outer
space. These changes can impact radio communications through the ionosphere and
may cause significant errors in positions derived from satellite based
navigation systems. The investigators will address this important topic through
the development of a numerical model. This model will be able to address how the
outflow plasma relates to these density enhancements. Success in modeling these
interactions could potentially lead to improved numerical models for forecasting
space weather. In addition, this investigation will support training of a
graduate student in computer programming and data analysis techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of this investigation will be simulation
studies of plasma redistribution associated with the storm enhanced density
(SED) and its possible counterpart plasmaspheric plume, polar cap tongues and
patches, and enhanced ion outflow associated with such plasma redistribution
during geomagnetic active times. The objective of the proposed studies is to
expand the Dynamic Fluid Kinetic (DyFK) model to simultaneously follow multiple
drifting individual flux tubes for simulating global plasma transport; to
quantitatively understand physical processes that cause plasma redistribution
and ion outflow; to provide quantitative measure of global ion outflow fluxes of
multiple species necessary to understand effects of ionospheric plasma supply on
the magnetospheric dynamics.