* 1702788
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Collective Cognition and Group Performance
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* James Evans, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2019
* USD 11,967.00

Title: Collective Cognition and Group
Performance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of new products and services,
solutions to important public policy problems, scientific discovery, and
artistic accomplishments are all the outcome of work carried out by small teams
and organizations. The determinants of strong team performance, however, are not
well understood. Part of the reason for this lack of understanding is that
important variables, such as the structure of the language that a team speaks
and the dynamic nature of social interactions, have yet to be thoroughly
investigated. This project will analyze how the language spoken by teams affects
how they socially interact and will trace how these patterns of interaction
affect team performance. Drawing on linguistic, cognitive, and information
theory, the project will enhance our knowledge of the determinants of
exceptional team creativity and decision-making. The project will directly
impact society in three ways. First, and concretely, it will train one college-
aspiring, first-generation, Hispanic high school student as a research assistant
to prepare him or her for college-level research. Second, it will inform better
ways of organizing teams and organizations and will create new tools for the
creation of better and more efficient teams. Finally, it will create a new
measure of language complexity for approximately 700 languages, which other
scholars will be able to use in their own research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-researched linguistic relativity hypothesis argues that the structure of a
person's language influences his or her cognition. While this hypothesis has
only been pursued in the context of how language affects individual cognition,
this dissertation extends the argument into sociological territory by moving
beyond the individual, asking: 1) Can differences in language structure affect
the performance of groups? And, if so, 2) what accounts for this performance
difference? This project creates novel estimates of the average rate of
ambiguity contained within the world's languages. It argues that due to the
analogical reasoning process that underlies much of human cognition, teams
speaking high ambiguity languages will engage in social interaction patterns
that lead to higher rates of performance for some kinds of team tasks and lower
rates of performance for others. This study will enrich the sociological
understanding of team performance, which has heretofore focused on the manner in
which network structures influence trust and information flow within and between
groups, but has yet to focus on the structure of the communication protocols
used. By using computational, archival, and experimental methodology, the
project will trace how language ambiguity can affect the nature of social
interactions as well as the manner in which information flows through those
interactions, thereby affecting overall rates of team performance.