* 1702988
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Application of Humanistic and Social Knowledge to Medicine
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Lauren Olsen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 3,024.00

NSF Proposal 1702988&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: John H.
Evans&lt;br/&gt;Graduate Student: Lauren D. Olsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Interdisciplinary Collaboration and Medical Curricular
Change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address how scholars from diverse disciplinary backgrounds successfully
integrate humanistic and social scientific knowledge with biomedical knowledge
in the education of medical students, with the overarching objective of
improving future patient care. Amidst a litany of crises confronting the
American medical profession at the turn of the 21st century (from patient
satisfaction to widespread health and health care disparities to complex health
care systems), the leaders of the medical profession made the education
objective of 'understanding people' a national priority for medical education.
Such a move entails an integration of humanistic and social scientific knowledge
into what traditionally is a biomedical learning and work environment.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance the basic theoretical and practical
understanding of how humanistic and social scientific knowledge is produced,
evaluated, and applied, identifying the institutional features of universities
that encourage productive relationships between the liberal and practical arts.
This project will be both a platform for increasing each university's
institutional capacity for diversity and inclusion, as well as a springboard for
university-based educational programs to evaluate various initiatives pitched to
improve patient care. In addition, this project will contribute to the
improvement of STEM education and educator development, by revealing how medical
educators collaborate across epistemological and methodological divides toward
achieving their goals. Finally, by better understanding the challenges that
beset interdisciplinary collaboration between the liberal and practical arts,
universities will be able to establish more empirically-informed programming
that traditional and interdisciplinary programs can implement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea that scientific knowledge should be used to
improve society has long underwritten the organization of academic knowledge
production and evaluation. The cultural value of applying scientific knowledge
to solve social problems has recently been supplemented by the promise of
interdisciplinary collaboration. With diverse disciplinary perspectives
concentrated on a single social problem, the logic goes, the better the
solution. Despite the prevalence of humanistic and social scientific knowledge
becoming increasingly called upon to contribute in applied and interdisciplinary
ways, there is a remarkable lack of understanding about how scholars
successfully apply these forms of knowledge in interdisciplinary contexts. This
project takes up that task by examining how humanistic and social scientific
knowledge is successfully integrated with biomedical knowledge into medical
education, paying close attention to how scholars with different epistemological
and methodological commitments construct how humanistic and social scientific
knowledge is 'relevant' for medical practice and how scholars negotiate these
differences while engaging in interdisciplinary collaboration. To answer these
questions, this project uses in-depth, semi-structured interviews with
humanities scholars, social science scholars, medical educators, and medical
students; historical data from professional and legislative decisions,
curricular materials, and publications; and non-participant observation at
scientific meetings.