* 1702418
* Microdynamics and Macroscopic Function of Active Colloidal Gels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Solomon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 346,740.00

CBET - 1702418&lt;br/&gt;PI: Solomon, Michael&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a
concentrated suspension of colloidal particles forms networks of particles, the
result is a material called a soft colloidal gel. The elastic properties of
colloidal gels can be tuned by changing the characteristics of the particles,
which makes colloidal gels useful in many consumer products, agricultural
applications, and pharmaceuticals. This award will support the development and
characterization of colloidal gels that incorporate active particles into their
structures. Active particles can generate their own propulsion under certain
conditions. When active particles are embedded in a colloidal gel, the extent to
which the properties of the gel can be varied and controlled is expanded, which
could increase the use of colloidal gels in practice. The properties of the gels
containing active particles will be investigated using a combination of
microscopy and mechanical testing. Results of the research will be disseminated
through an industry/academic workshop. In addition, the research will be used to
create hands-on demonstrations for middle school girls participating in a summer
school that introduces young students to engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will establish the relationship between the microdynamics of active
colloids embedded in colloidal gels and their macroscopic functional properties
of linear elasticity and non-linear yielding. These micro/macro relationships
will be generated by investigating active colloids introduced into fractal
cluster gels, a system whose structure, dynamics, elasticity, and yielding are
well understood for the case of passive, Brownian colloids. Active platinum
Janus particles driven by hydrogen peroxide decomposition, two-channel confocal
microscopy, fractal cluster gel self-assembly, and macroscopic rheology with a
novel, permeable fixture will be used to discover: (i) how microscopic activity
affects the linear elastic modulus of gels; (ii) how internally-induced yielding
presents macroscopically, and; (iii) how consolidation and disintegration of
gels is produced by the external pressure of active colloids. The work will
yield insight into how the unusual microdynamics of active systems determine
their macroscopic rheological function.