* 1702651
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Race, Achievement and Trust in Student-Teacher Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Thomas DiPrete, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 11,786.00

Racial inequality in education has a long history in the United States. The most
persistent manifestation of this history is the racial achievement gap. This
project will address the racial achievement gap from the vantage point of black
students in racially segregated, high-poverty schools. More specifically, this
study examines how trust shapes the quality of their relationships with teachers
and their educational outcomes. This research is guided by the premise that
trust can be a lever for improving the schooling experiences and academic
performance of disadvantaged students. Prior studies demonstrate that trust is a
salient component of effective and cohesive school communities. However, much of
the existing research on this topic fails to consider trust from the perspective
of students. Trust should be a topic of concern for researchers interested in
racial inequality in education and youth inequality more broadly, since research
suggests that pervasive feelings of distrust can cement disadvantage initiated
by larger meso-and marco-level forces. Recognizing the power of trust in shaping
one?s life chances, a study of black young people's propensity to trust their
teachers (i.e., student?teacher trust) is warranted as a potentially significant
determinant of their educational outcomes and future well-being.

The aims of this dissertation are threefold. First, this work sets out to
investigate the academic consequences of trust both for individual students and
schools. Second, this work will examine the causes of students' (dis)trust in
their teachers and reveal the mechanisms linking trust to student achievement.
Finally, by focusing on youth, this study will advance the social science
literature on trust, which to date has been preoccupied with the adult
experience. To address these aims, this mixed-method study will proceed in two
phases. Phase one entails a quantitative analysis of survey and administrative
data on New York City (NYC) public schools. This analysis will illuminate the
relationship between student?teacher trust and achievement at the school-level
and will identify comparative case study schools for phase two of the study.
Phase two entails semi-structured, in-depth interviews with 48 students and 20
educators across four NYC public high schools. These interviews will permit an
examination of trust on the interpersonal level. While this study is centered on
the student-teacher relationship, it will provide insight into processes of
youth trust and inequality that can be applied to other institutional settings
(e.g., the justice system). Study findings will also highlight how educators and
other authority figures can harness trust as a tool for better engaging youth on
the social margins.