* 1702008
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Biomass estimation and uncertainty analysis: Integrating Bayesian modeling and small-footprint waveform LiDAR data
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Tan Zhou, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,213.00

Remote sensing is used to characterize and map the spatial variationÂ of Earth's
vegetation and its changes over time. A relatively new airborne laser sensor
called LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) has been used to accurately
characterize the three-dimensional vegetation structure and to measure plant
biomass and carbon content. With increased LiDAR data availability, there is a
need to develop open source tools for processing these data effectively to
obtain the vegetation and terrain information. With current methods, substantial
variation and uncertainty remain in estimating the amount and type of
vegetation. Support from this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant (DDIG)
will be used to develop open source tools to process LiDAR data from the
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and to explore their potential
for use in identifying tree species, estimating vegetation amounts, and
determining the statistical uncertainty in the analysis. The methods developed
from this project will facilitate the creation of 3D-vegetation structure and
enable the understanding of ecosystem patterns and processes. The quantification
of errors and uncertainties of vegetation structure and amount are also
conducive to designing effective plans for sustainable forest management and
providing accurate inputs for biogeochemical models to inform science-based
policy.

This research will be accomplished through the following steps: (1) Develop
algorithms and open source tools for LiDAR data processing, (2) Segment
individual trees and identify tree species with raw LiDAR data alone using
Random forests and Bayesian machine learning method, (3) Build different models
(step-wise, Random forests, and hierarchical Bayesian models) to estimate forest
biomass and carbon stocks using LiDAR metrics and variables derived from point
clouds, and (4) Quantify the uncertainty of estimations in different processing
stages based on different approaches and model parameters. The algorithms and
processing methodologies developed in this proposal will provide open source
tools for LiDAR waveform processing and enhance the use and value of NEON data.
Moreover, the products of this research will assist forest managers to better
manage precious natural resources and make more informed decisions.