* 1702803
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Refugee Adaptation in the United States, Canada, and Italy
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Hebatalla Gowayed, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

Almost five million refugees have been externally displaced by the Syrian civil
war, which began in March 2011. This displacement contributes to the largest
international refugee crisis since World War II. Only 1% of those refugees have
been resettled to countries where they can restart their lives. This
dissertation asks how Syrian refugees make new lives in countries of
resettlement by comparing the experience of refugees resettled to the United
States, Canada and Italy. War has not only displaced but also declassed the once
middle-income families included in this study. These refugees were resettled to
each of these countries though they had few if any preexisting ties, did not
know the local language, and had skills mismatched to local economies. Most
studies of immigration examine outcomes of newcomers years after a cohort's
arrival. By contrast, this study focuses on the first 18-24 months after
arrival. It considers how Syrian refugees attempt to acquire the skills that
matter, how they create new communities, and how their daily lives are shaped by
the policy contexts of the countries in which they land. This study has direct,
actionable, implications for policy due to its selection of countries with
varied resettlement policies for comparison, and its examination of the varied
adaptation processes they shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines
refugees' process of adaptation, defined as the strategies by which newcomers
attempt to adjust their family lives, form social relationships, and pursue
economic livelihoods in their new setting. This involves refugees finding,
together, as families and as an emergent community, new ways of doing things,
while retaining aspects of their identity from which they derive a sense of
self. This study explores differences in the process of adaptation across
political realities of heightened islamophobia, and in the eras of Trump,
Trudeau and Pope Francis. This study also looks at country-specific resettlement
logics that inform not only the kind of assistance that refugees receive, but
also who does the work of resettlement, and the locations where refugees are
resettled, near or far from co-ethnics. For this examination, this study uses a
combination of ethnographic observation and in-depth interviews. Included in the
sample are eighteen Syrian refugee families in New Haven, Connecticut (n=81),
five families resettled in and near Toronto, Ontario in Canada (n=25), and six
families resettled in the Italian cities of Rome, Todi and Bologna (n=22).