* 1702952
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Scalable Edge Architecture for Massive Location-Aware Heterogeneous IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 159,999.00

The "Scalable Edge Architecture for Massive Location-Aware Heterogeneous IoT
Systems" project addresses essential research problems for developing network
design and Internet of Things (IoT) systems in both high bandwidth and low
bandwidth environments. By defining an efficient security and scalability-
enhancing edge architecture that moves data processing close to users, it
minimizes data transfer latencies and overhead in the network. The fusion of
sensor data from different sources can significantly improve the efficiency of
many existing systems. In some areas, massive bandwidth is about to become
available to cellular and WiFi networks in the millimeter wave bands. The
Federal Government recently opened up 28 GHz at frequencies above 24 GHz, which
promises to revolutionize wireless systems and enable IoT applications never
before conceived, particularly in dense urban areas. Smart traffic and connected
(autonomous) cars are an example application area enabled by the new bandwidth,
which requires combining these different approaches in the architectural design
of large-scale IoT systems. Integrating IoT with edge/fog computing, millimeter
wave (mmWave) technologies and distributed processing enables optimizing the
system level performance considering system capacity, reduced network bandwidth
for data and control traffic, increased system level programmability and
automation, accurate location-awareness, virtualization, low latency,
scalability, and enhanced security and privacy. One of the novel aspects of our
proposed system is that it transitions seamlessly from an emulated and simulated
environment to actual production deployment, and mixtures of these modes,
facilitating robust and reliable IoT systems at scale.

The project provides contributions in several essential areas of IoT network
architectures and security: 1) minimizing the need of manual configuration in
large-scale IoT networks; 2) scalable authentication and key management systems;
3) efficient distributed IoT architecture to perform complex and delay-sensitive
tasks, with rapid deployment and prototyping; 4) secure interoperability between
heterogeneous IoT devices; and 5) positioning and capacity optimization based on
mmWave communications, considering especially smart traffic and vehicle-to-
vehicle communications. The project proposes a multi-layered approach for
scaling IoT systems in simulation and emulation, allowing to combine physical
systems with emulated systems, incorporating new mmWave RF and network models,
network emulation, virtual systems, models of the physical world and user
interfaces. The emulation system allows the team to explore mobile edge and fog
computing to enhance efficiency, reduce control-loop delays and assure privacy
of sensitive data. A new authentication model and naming system allows scaling
for deployment and programming. The prototype open-source IoT emulator, along
with the mmWave channel models, developed in the project will allow industrial
IoT system developers to more rapidly and reliably develop new IoT systems. The
authentication and naming components will be submitted for possible
standardization. The new channel models are likely to inform spectrum allocation
decisions for mmWave bands by national regulators.