* 1702083
* Bridge to Doctorate: WAESO LSAMP, Multidisciplinary STEM Solutions 2017-2019
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Carlos Castillo-Chavez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,075,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists universities and colleges in
diversifying the STEM workforce through the development of highly competitive
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate
students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation
and completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University's (ASU) commitment to the
establishment, development and implementation of programs driven by
interdisciplinary studies and intellectual fusion through varied academic
programs are at the heart of the grant. Over the past 26 years, the Western
Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities (WAESO) LSAMP alliance has demonstrated
unparalleled success in recruiting, retaining, and graduating bachelors' STEM
degrees from currently underrepresented populations. The Bridge to Doctorate:
WAESO LSAMP, Multidisciplinary STEM Solutions 2017-2019 will expand efforts to
recruit, admit, enroll, graduate with thesis masters degrees, and fully prepare
for admission to highly reputable doctoral programs 12 underrepresented minority
(URM) STEM students. This new cohort of 12 students will receive specialized
attention as a group by faculty and staff while engaging in peer mentoring,
challenging research and academic study opportunities and activities while
receiving intensive support from their mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will utilize a framework derived from elements of the evidence based
research literature and MTBI's 21-year model of mentorship that have focused on
the study of the underlying factors, forces and methods that have led to the
graduation of URM alumni earning PhDs predominantly in the mathematical sciences
since 2005. Some of these factors include: improving a URM student's research
self-efficacy, research experience, personalized training for fellowship
applications, PhD program applications, and manuscript writing and mentoring to
increase student self-confidence and increase the likelihood that a student will
pursue a PhD in a STEM field. BD students will be immersed in the existing
academic community and inclusive national and local (ASU) communities via
regularly scheduled professional development workshops and community building
social events to decrease attrition and increase experience in utilizing
research tools and specific disciplinary skills. BD students will be paired with
mentors and peers via the academically stimulating MTBI community, a community
that promotes scientific immersion and intellectual fusion year round.