* 1702231
* Millennial-scale atmospheric CO2 variability during the last deglaciation: Testing the biological pump hypothesis using upper ocean carbon isotope records
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* David Lund, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2019
* USD 262,951.00

The largest increase in atmospheric CO2 in the recent geologic past occurred
during the last deglaciation (from 20,000 to 10,000 years ago). As ice sheets in
the Northern Hemisphere melted, atmospheric CO2 levels rose by ~30%. Despite
extensive research, the underlying cause of the CO2 change has yet to be fully
explained. Recent ice core results show that the CO2 rise can be traced to an
isotopically light carbon source (i.e. carbon with a low 13C/12C ratio). One
possible cause is reduced marine photosynthesis, which would result in the
accumulation of light carbon in the surface ocean and atmosphere. Less
photosynthesis would also reduce the amount of low 13C/12C carbon that falls
from the surface ocean to intermediate depths in the form of organic matter.
Thus, reduced marine biological productivity should yield opposing carbon
isotopic signals at surface and intermediate depths, with the surface ocean
becoming isotopically lighter (lower 13C/12C) and intermediate depths becoming
heavier (higher 13C/12C). The results of this work could transform our
understanding of the climate system by constraining the source of carbon
isotopic signals and therefore the driver of atmospheric CO2 variability during
the last deglaciation. The broader educational impact of the proposed work
includes the participation of a graduate student and an undergraduate at the
University of Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project
is to use data from multiple locations to assess changes in marine
photosynthesis during the last deglaciation. The research team will use high
resolution sediment cores from five different locations, including the Southwest
Atlantic, the Southeast Atlantic, the Southern Ocean, and Southwest Pacific, and
the eastern tropical Pacific. Each core was retrieved from intermediate (~1000
m) depths that should be sensitive to the amount of organic matter falling
through the water column. The team will assess variations in photosynthesis by
analyzing the carbon isotopic ratio in the fossils of benthic (sea floor
dwelling) and planktonic (surface ocean dwelling) organisms. The team will also
analyze the ratio of boron to calcium in the benthic fossils to infer overall
changes in carbon concentration at intermediate water depths.