* 1702352
* An experimental study of rheology and microscopic dynamics of sheared active fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Xiang Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 02/28/2022
* USD 466,991.00

CBET - 1702352&lt;br/&gt;PI: Cheng, Xiang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide support to develop two new instruments to study the properties of active
fluids. An active fluid is a suspension of particles in liquid that can generate
their own motion and propel themselves. There are both synthetic and naturally-
occurring active suspensions. This proposal will focus on suspensions of
bacterial cells, which exhibit fascinating motions based on the coordinated
behavior of many cells. The cells' motions cause these fluids to flow in new and
unusual ways. An ultra-fast confocal microscope equipped with a chamber that can
generate flow will be built at the University of Minnesota. This instrument will
allow investigators to observe cellular motion on the scale of individual cells
as well as detect coordinated structures that develop among the cells in flow. A
thin-film rheometer will be built at Cal Poly - San Luis Obispo. This instrument
will measure bulk properties of the active suspensions. The results of these
experiments will help validate computational and theoretical studies of active
suspensions. The instruments will also be useful for studying other complex
fluids where microscopic arrangements of suspended particles influence the fluid
dynamics of the suspension. The investigators will involve undergraduates in the
research, including students from traditionally underrepresented groups in
science and engineering. In addition, they will create new demonstrations of
active suspensions to engage the public at the Minnesota State Fair and at Cal
Poly's open house and pre-collegiate symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will reveal direct correlations between microscopic active particle
dynamics and macroscopic flow behaviors of active suspensions. Specifically, the
most-widely studied active suspension, that of E. coli, will be investigated.
Two fundamental questions will be addressed. First, what is the dynamical origin
of the superfluid phase of bacterial suspensions with extremely low or even zero
apparent viscosity? Second, how does an externally imposed shear flow influence
the dynamics of individual active particles in concentrated bacterial
suspensions? Thus, the experiments will address two key questions underlying the
predictions of theories of active suspensions. The experiments will
unambiguously reveal the microscopic origin of unusual rheology of active fluids
and provide a solid experimental foundation for the development of the field.
Results from this project are expected to help practitioners find better ways to
control transport in biological suspensions, prevent formation of biofilms,
control viscosity in suspensions, and improve mixing in microfluidic devices
used in bioassays and advanced materials synthesis.