* 1702230
* Interaction of Low-Energy Positrons with Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* C. Surko, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 564,651.00

The laws of physics indicate that for every matter particle there is a "twin"
particle of antimatter. When an electron and its antiparticle (the positron)
collide, they can convert into two photons, each carrying off the particle rest
energy. The universe contains relatively little antimatter, and this asymmetry
is currently not understood. Nevertheless, positrons play an important role in
many areas of science and technology, including atomic and plasma physics,
astrophysics, materials science, biology and medicine. An important medical
application is Positron Emission Tomography (PET) used to image internal organs
and measure metabolic activity. In many of these contexts, positron interactions
with molecules are significant. This project studies how positrons bind (or
"stick") to most molecules, albeit for short times, less than about a billionth
of a second. Even though transient, these bound states can have important
consequences for medical effects and imaging technologies. This project seeks to
understand the nature of positron binding and its potential implications for the
fate of positrons in biology and material systems, and also in settings of
astrophysical relevance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator and
collaborators have recently developed a new cryogenic, trap-based positron beam
with energy resolution of 7 meV FWHM resolution, a factor of 5 better than the
previous state of the art. This device will be used to study the interaction of
low-energy positrons with molecules with unprecedented precision. Of interest is
the excitation of vibrational Feshbach resonances in two-body, positron-molecule
collisions; a process in which a positron excites a vibrational mode and becomes
trapped on the molecule. While positrons bind to atoms, there are no low-lying
excitations to absorb excess energy, and so such resonances cannot occur in two-
body collisions in the same manner as for molecules. One objective of the
project is to conduct new experiments to gain an understanding of the greatly
enhanced molecular annihilation rates as a function of incident positron energy.
While a successful theory exists for the excitation of dipole-allowed
fundamental resonances, multi-mode effects appear to be important. Their role in
annihilation spectra is less well studied to date and less well understood
theoretically. The second objective is to make more precise measurements of
positron-molecule binding energies. Prediction of these binding energies
presents a considerable challenge to theory, particularly in treating accurately
electron-positron correlation effects. The new high-resolution beam is expected
to provide more precise measurements of binding energies and hence more precise
tests of theory.