* 1702296
* Analytic and Combinatorial Problems in Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Thai Hoang Le, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2021
* USD 106,497.00

Number theory is the study of integers. One central notion in number theory is
that of prime numbers (i.e., numbers divisible only by themselves and one).
These are the building blocks of the integers. While originally studied for
purely aesthetic reasons, for several decades number theory and prime numbers
have found practical applications in computer science (e.g., in coding theory)
and cryptography. As such, prime numbers are ubiquitous in real life (e.g., in
cryptosystems to encode messages sent over the Internet). The research in this
project is directed at some problems in number theory using tools from analysis
and combinatorics. This area, also known as arithmetic combinatorics, has seen
tremendous growth in recent years due to its connection with other branches of
mathematics as well as theoretical computer science.

This project will explore configurations pertaining to dense subsets of the
integers and the primes. Thanks to the insights of Szemeredi, Furstenberg,
Gowers, Green and Tao, among others, many advances have been made, but there are
still many questions to answer and interesting configurations to explore.
Furthermore, recent breakthroughs on the twin prime conjecture due to Zhang,
Maynard, and Tao give more insights on the primes and the PI intends to find
patterns in almost twin primes. He will also study the function field model, in
which one has more tools but where additional complications also arise. For
example, the understanding of the distribution of high-degree polynomials in
function fields is still incomplete due to the failure of Weyl differencing in
low characteristic.