* 1702394
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Cyber-Physical Sensing, Modeling, and Control for Large-Scale Wastewater Reuse and Algal Biomass Production
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Piya Pal, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2019
* USD 105,767.00

This project develops advanced cyber-physical sensing, modeling, control, and
optimization methods to significantly improve the efficiency of algal biomass
production using membrane bioreactor technologies for waste water processing and
algal biofuel. Currently, many wastewater treatment plants are discharging
treated wastewater containing significant amounts of nutrients, such as
nitrogen, ammonium, and phosphate ions, directly into the water system, posing
significant threats to the environment. Large-scale algae production represents
one of the most promising and attractive solutions for simultaneous wastewater
treatment and biofuel production. The critical bottleneck is low algae
productivity and high biofuel production cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The previous
work of this research team has successfully developed an algae membrane
bioreactor (A-MBR) technology for high-density algae production which doubles
the productivity in an indoor bench-scale environment. The goal of this project
is to explore advanced cyber-physical sensing, modeling, control, and
optimization methods and co-design of the A-MBR system to bring the new algae
production technology into the field. The specific goal is to increase the algal
biomass productivity in current practice by three times in the field environment
while minimizing land, capital, and operating costs. Specifically, the project
will (1) adapt the A-MBR design to address unique new challenges for algae
cultivation in field environments, (2) develop a multi-modality sensor network
for real-time in-situ monitoring of key environmental variables for algae
growth, (3) develop data-driven knowledge-based kinetic models for algae growth
and automated methods for model calibration and verification using the real-time
sensor network data, and (4) deploy the proposed CPS system and technologies in
the field for performance evaluations and demonstrate its
potentials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate a new pathway
toward green and sustainable algae cultivation and biofuel production using
wastewater, addressing two important challenging issues faced by our nation and
the world: wastewater treatment and renewable energy. It will provide unique and
exciting opportunities for mentoring graduate students with interdisciplinary
training opportunities, involving K-12 students, women and minority students.
With web-based access and control, this project will convert the bench-scale and
pilot scale algae cultivation systems into an exciting interactive online
learning platform to educate undergraduate and high-school students about cyber-
physical system design, process control, and renewable biofuel production.