* 1702342
* Digitization PEN: Digitizing the Fossil Insects of LA: Critical Additions to the Fossil Insect Collaborative
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Austin Hendy, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 157,544.00

The primary goal of this project is to digitize five fossil insect collections
from the United States, Germany, and Canada. These efforts will make nearly
27,000 new specimen records digitally available online. Collectively, these data
will complement the previously awarded Fossil Insect Collaborative (FIC)
Digitization (FIC) TCN by filling gaps in the existing dataset, and make these
otherwise difficult to access collections significantly more visible to the
interested public and research community. This information will facilitate
current research aimed at better understanding the globally most diverse group
of animals in the context of past, present, and future environments. Results of
this project will be communicated to the public through museum events and K-12
classroom programming, ongoing partnership with local avocational
paleontologists, and other educational resources developed by the FIC-TCN,
including iDigPaleo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fossil insect collections to be
digitized through this award include compression fossils from the Oligocene Rott
Formation ("Statz Collection") of Germany, silicified insects from the Miocene
Barstow Formation of California, asphalt-preserved insects from the Pleistocene
deposits of Rancho La Brea and McKittrick in California, and lignite-associated
insects of Lynn Creek, British Columbia. Notably, these collections are largely
historic in nature and include 1,819 type specimens that have been inaccessible
for taxonomic re-evaluation by the international research community for decades.
Further, the Rott fauna represents an important calibration point in
understanding fossil insect diversity trends with respect to global climate
transitions (the primary research theme of the FIC-TCN), and the Barstow fauna
is taphonomically distinct, as it includes three-dimensionally silicified insect
body fossils. Digitization will involve cataloging 10,906 specimens and
selectively imaging 6,207 specimens, as well as making available an additional
15,684 specimen records from the La Brea Tar Pits and Museum in this data
aggregation, all of which will be made available online via the national
resource for Advancing Digitization of Biodiversity Collections
(http://www.idigbio.com).