* 1702765
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Neighborhood-School Link in Gentrifying Areas
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Ann Owens, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2019
* USD 9,397.00

This dissertation explores the changing relationship between neighborhoods and
traditional public schools in the United States. In earlier decades, nearly all
children attended their neighborhood school. Recent reports suggest, however,
that the historically tight relationship between where families live and send
their child to school has weakened. With a particular focus on how neighborhood
and school processes play out in gentrifying areas, the investigators examine
the neighborhood-school link in three key ways: (1) the link between
neighborhood and local school racial and socioeconomic composition over time;
(2) the link between where families live and whether they enroll their child in
the local school; (3) how the loosening link between neighborhoods and schools
affects educational outcomes. This dissertation represents one of the first
multi-city, longitudinal studies to examine the evolving relationship between
neighborhoods and traditional public schools in the U.S.; one of few national-
level quantitative studies exploring the relationship between residential and
school enrollment choices; and one of the first quantitative studies to explore
the relationship between gentrification and schools. While most prior research
focuses on either the neighborhood or school environment, this project analyzes
both contexts simultaneously and takes seriously the spatial interdependence of
neighborhoods and schools, enhancing basic understanding of the changing
relationship between neighborhoods and schools. Such an approach will inform
policies that jointly consider residential and school contexts. Together, these
analyses will contribute to our understanding of trends, mechanisms, and effects
of the changing neighborhood-school link and how this relationship unfolds in a
context of urban and neighborhood change. Given how demographic changes are
reconfiguring urban areas across the U.S., this research has important
implications for theory, as well as for urban, housing, and education
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing upon multiple waves of data from several
national data sources, this dissertation employs statistical analyses to address
its questions, as well as geographic software and techniques to match
neighborhood and school characteristics to families and students. First, this
project combines data from the Census and National Center for Educational
Statistics (NCES) with unique school attendance boundary data on a subset of
U.S. school districts for 2000 and 2010 to examine how school racial and
socioeconomic composition changes as neighborhoods change, particularly in
schools serving gentrifying neighborhoods. Next, this project moves beyond
aggregate-level analyses, combining data from the Census, NCES, and the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics to model school enrollment outcomes among families in
gentrifying neighborhoods, exploring how schooling decisions are shaped by
family and school characteristics and the availability of alternative schooling
options. Finally, the investigators will model the effects of the changing
neighborhood-school relationship on student achievement and persistence over
time.