* 1702395
* Algebraic and Geometric Methods in Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ezra Miller, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 08/31/2020
* USD 122,474.00

The diversity of biological forms and the nature of their variation lend
themselves to geometric data analysis by topological methods. These methods
quantify shape by recording the values of parameters (such as height, thickness,
time, distance, temperature, or curvature) across which the topology of the
geometric object changes: holes emerge or collapse; connected components join or
diverge; cavities form or fill. Current geometric methods of this sort can
handle one varying parameter, but data often call for more than one. This
project develops an algebraic framework to encode and compute in the context of
this multiparameter topological data analysis. The proposed methodology is
general, applicable to datasets from any scientific inquiry, but it is being
developed here in service to a fundamental question in evolutionary biology:
what mechanism drives the generation of topological variants in sufficient
quantity for selection to act? The model organism for this investigation is the
fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, specifically the pattern of veins in its
wings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops mathematical foundations for
multiparameter persistent homology. This investigation is in service to a
specific question in evolutionary biology, using fruit fly wings as the model
system, but the proposed methodology is general, applying homological algebra,
real algebraic geometry, combinatorics, and computational techniques to encode,
control, and provide insight theoretically as well as for applied and
algorithmic purposes. The parameters are allowed to vary continuously on
stratified spaces, instead of the usual discrete setup with one parameter on a
simplicial complex. As such, the project transforms the way we think about
commutative algebra in two independent ways simultaneously: by considering real
vectors or an arbitrary poset instead of integer vectors for multigradings, and
by splicing together the augmentation maps of free and injective resolutions to
get "fringe presentations" of modules. The combination of techniques from free
resolutions and injective resolutions also transforms how we think about
topology and geometry, since it renders the new conception of multiparameter
persistent homology transparent topologically -- features are described in terms
of birth and death (generators and cogenerators) rather than by birth and
relations between births (generators and relations) -- while greatly expanding
the potential for effective computation.