* 1702016
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolution of Hummingbird Coloration and Courtship Displays
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Kevin McGraw, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 20,085.00

Non-technical paragraph&lt;br/&gt;Animals possess an incredible diversity of
exaggerated traits that they use for communication, and often animals
communicate using multiple traits. How this signal diversity came about and why
animals use more than one trait to communicate has long interested scientists.
To understand why and how this diversity in multiple signaling traits evolved,
we are studying hummingbird iridescent plumage and exaggerated courtship
displays. Iridescent coloration is angle-dependent and hummingbirds can easily
manipulate the color observed as they behaviorally display. The PIs are
exploring how the surface and internal structures of iridescent feathers co-
evolved with courtship displays (shuttles) across hummingbird species. The PIs
work combines measurements of micro- and nano-scale structural morphology with
behavioral ecology and evolutionary theory, allowing the PIs to understand
hummingbird communication from the behavior down to feather architecture.
Additionally, the PIs will collect data on hummingbird mating and courtship
biology, especially in terms of how hummingbirds use their environment while
courting, which could prove useful to future conservation efforts. Additionally,
recent work on the structure of iridescent butterfly wing scales has helped the
development of more efficient solar panels. The PIs work on the angle-dependent
nanostructures of hummingbird feathers could further help improve solar panel
efficiency through a better understanding of how biological materials
directionally reflect specific wavelengths of
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph&lt;br/&gt;Animals exhibit a
great diversity of ornamental traits and display behaviors, and many animals
possess multiple such traits that they use to communicate. Previous work has
explained the diversity in these traits by examining how they evolved in
relation to the environment; however these traits can also interact with each
other as they are displayed, which will further shape their evolutionary
history. The PIs are testing how interactions between ornamental traits, display
behaviors, and environment influence the diversity of these traits through a
comparative study on several species in the bee hummingbird tribe. Bee
hummingbirds are ideal for this type of study because they possess two types of
conspicuous visual traits - iridescent plumage coloration and stereotyped
courtship displays (shuttles) - that vary across species. Iridescent coloration
is angle-dependent, such that the observed color changes depending upon the
feather structure and viewing/lighting angles. Thus, perceived coloration is the
result of interactions between behavioral displays, the environment, and the
micro- and nanostructures of iridescent feathers. The PIs are currently studying
the complex interactions between these factors in several hummingbird species to
understand how each species produces a specific color that is perceived by a
receiver, and how this varies interspecifically. The PIs are expanding this work
by evaluating how variation in iridescent micro- and nanostructure of feathers
helped shaped the evolutionary relationships between bee hummingbird plumage,
display, and environment. This work allows the PIs to study how hummingbird
communication evolved at multiple levels, from behaviors to nanostructure of
their ornaments.