* 1702987
* Multiscale cardiac fluid-structure-growth model
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lik Chuan Lee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,989.00

Patient-specific computational models have tremendous potential in
revolutionizing disease management and advancing heart failure treatments.
Significant advances have been made in the last twenty years on the theoretical
and computational developments of cardiac computational models. However, there
is currently a lack of a complete computational model that is capable of taking
into account all the principal physics occurring in a beating heart,
specifically, electrical conduction in the heart, dynamics of blood flow,
mechanics of the cardiac wall motion, and the long-term changes in heart
function and geometry. The lack of such a modeling framework is a critical
barrier to the development of in-depth knowledge about the heart function and
diseases. This is especially so as the interactions of these physics are
important aspects that need to be taken into account when designing heart
disease treatments and understanding heart function. The proposed project aims
to develop a strongly-coupled cardiac electromechanics-fluid-growth
computational modeling framework that takes into account the key principal
physics occurring in the beating heart. Both graduate and undergraduate students
will be involved with the research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
bottom-up multiscale model will be versatile to allow for arbitrary 3D heart
geometries as well as multiscale physics, including: (i) cellular excitation-
contraction coupling processes, (ii) contribution of constituents found in the
cardiac tissue to its anisotropic mechanical behavior, (iii) macroscale fluid-
structure interactions between the heart wall and blood, and (iv) long term
growth and remodeling processes. Specific goals that will be accomplished in
this project are as follows. First, a strongly coupled cardiac electromechanics-
fluid modeling framework will be developed based on a hybrid Fictitious-Domain
Arbitrary-Lagrange-Eulerian formulation to describe the short-term bidirectional
fluid-elastic-structure interactions between blood flow and ventricular wall
deformation driven by the cellular excitation-contraction coupling processes.
Second, a cardiac growth model will be integrated into the modeling framework
based on the principle of timescale separation to describe long-term changes in
the heart geometry and function driven by pathophysiological insults. Last, with
clinical data obtained from collaborators, the PIs will apply the modeling
framework to develop new understanding concerning normal and abnormal heart
functions, such as the short- and long-term effects arising from flow
obstruction due to abnormalities in the geometry and deformation of the
ventricular wall in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.