* 1702789
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Reconstructing South American Monsoon Sensitivity to Internal and External Forcing: Reconciling Models and Tree-ring Proxies in the Central Andes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Rosanne D'Arrigo, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/28/2023
* USD 544,853.00

The potential Broader Impacts include the potential for better understanding the
South American monsoon, for filling in sparse hydroclimate records, and for
fuller understanding climate variability. Collaboration with South American
colleagues is planned as is extensive student
involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to employ classical
dendrochronological techniques to generate new tropical tree-ring chronologies
that are annually resolved and absolutely dated. Radiocarbon measurements
(14-Carbon) will ensure accurate dating assessments. Thus, successful tree
species will be selected to improve the 14-Carbon curve for the Southern
Hemisphere. The resulting tree-ring series will be used to reconstruct past
climate variability and regional to large--scale atmospheric dynamics for the
last several centuries. The specific aims of the project are to improve
understanding of: (1) the spatiotemporal variability of the South American
summer monsoon (SASM); (2) long-term interactions between El Ni√±o-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) and the SASM; and (3) the impact of volcanic forcing on past
hydroclimate of the tropical Andes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to
provide significant advances in the science of tropical dendrochronology
by&lt;br/&gt;developing a tree-ring network for the tropical Andes in Peru and
Bolivia, a region with exceedingly scarce coverage of high-resolution
terrestrial paleo-records. While tree rings have been extensively used in
temperate climates, the tropics remain relatively unexplored due to the
difficulty, in particular, of identifying consistent wood layers (tree rings)
corresponding to seasonal or annual growing periods. The Central Andes are an
ideal region for overcoming these difficulties, due to the pronounced
precipitation seasonality and diverse forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tropical
Andes are a hotspot for biodiversity and its geographic position makes it
extremely vulnerable to climate change. It also contains nearly all the tropical
glaciers on the globe, and recent, widespread glacial retreat is causing a rapid
decline in hydrological reserves. This decline, in combination with increasing
water demand due to population growth and economic expansion poses an enormous
challenge for water availability, biodiversity and food security. The complex
topography of the Andean Cordillera leads to a climate that is characterized by
strong zonal and vertical precipitation gradients. Moisture influx from the
tropical Atlantic Ocean and the Amazon basin is modulated by the SASM and ENSO.
The scientific understanding of this variability is challenged by the scarcity
of long instrumental observations, which also limits the ability to constrain
uncertainties in future climate change projections over this
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.