* 1702693
* Separation of Colloidal Particles by Diffusiophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1702693: Stone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filtration is the most common method to
remove particles from solution. We take it for granted that we can remove a wide
range of particulate materials, such as dirt, bacteria, and viruses, from water
by using filters that usually consist of porous materials, such as sand beds.
Filtration is critical to obtaining safe drinking water and other liquids
suitable for industrial processing. Nevertheless, instead of filtration there
are technologies that use "fields", such as gravitational sedimentation, to
remove particles and/or separate different kinds of particles. This project
investigates how simple chemical gradients, even modest variations in salt
concentration, can transport particles and achieve particle removal or
separation by size without using filters or gravitational sedimentation. This
approach is called diffusiophoresis, and it works for a wide range of particle
sizes, is portable, can potentially be operated in field or resource-poor
settings, and can be scaled to different sizes as may be required in a variety
of applications. Importantly, diffusiophoresis may work for difficult
separations of small particles using environmentally benign salts, when
traditional filtration or sedimentation methods may be highly inefficient or
even ineffective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to
investigate diffusiophoretic-driven separation processes for a large class of
particles, e.g. rigid particles of different size, shape and surface charge,
droplets, and vesicles, in confined configurations, which typify a wide range of
biological, chemical, and engineering materials and systems, e.g. porous media,
structured surfaces and microdevices. Here "separation" is considered in its
broadest sense, e.g. fractionation of different particles, isolation of
particles from the fluid, and transport of particles to specific destinations.
Diffusiophoresis refers to the migration of colloidal particles owing to osmotic
pressure variations (chemiphoresis) and local electric fields generated by
differences in diffusivities of cations and anions (electrophoresis). In the
first aspect of this work these ideas are explored in confined geometries and
separation of different particles is characterized. In particular, time-
dependent diffusiophoretic strategies are described to achieve particle
transport over long times. In the second aspect of this work, diffusiophoresis
is created using interphase mass transfer, e.g. dissolution of CO2 gas.
Consequently, approaches for removing particles in a membrane-less flow approach
are described, and a new strategy for field flow fractionation is introduced.
Experiments and modeling will be developed for a wide range of particles,
particles of all types, rigid/soft particles, bacterial cells, vesicles. The
research will achieve fundamental understanding of diffusiophoretic transport in
confined spaces and improve macroscopic transport processes.