* 1702266
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Drivers for Past Variability in Tropospheric Reactive Halogens: Implications for Climate and Evaluation of Ice Core Proxies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Becky Alexander, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 364,209.00

This project aims to examine reactive halogens and their impacts on the
chemistry of the troposphere and stratosphere especially with regards to
climate. Reactive halogens impact the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere
thereby influencing reduced concentrations of trace gases such as methane CH4
and the abundance of short lived climate forcing agents such as ozone (O3) and
aerosols in the atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice-core observations of the
precursors and/or sinks of reactive halogens in the troposphere suggest both
anthropogenic- and climate-induced changes in the abundance of reactive halogens
in the troposphere. This has an, as of yet, unquantified impact on several
paleoclimate proxies in ice cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers plan to
investigate the sensitivity of reactive halogen abundance to anthropogenic
emissions and to climate change in a global model and examine its potential
feedbacks on climate. As such, the project will focus on the following two
research questions: (1) What are the biggest drivers for changes in the
abundance of reactive halogens over the preindustrial-industrial and glacial-
interglacial timescales; and (2) What are the potential implications for the
oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere and short-lived climate forcing agents CH4,
tropospheric O3, and aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential broader
impacts include the potential to advance knowledge and understanding within
atmospheric chemistry and climate and paleoclimatology, via potential
improvement of the representation of reactive chemistry in global climate system
models with interactive carbon simulation. The project supports the training
graduate students in numerical modeling of atmospheric chemistry, outreach and
education. It also provides for the wider community dissemination of research
results of GEOS-CHEM model development through workshops and meeting sessions
and public and K12 outreach and education efforts by the researchers.