* 1702471
* INFEWS N/P/H2O: Photo-thermal ammonia synthesis of plasmonic metal nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 340,000.00

The project investigates a low-temperature, low-pressure photocatalytic
alternative to the high temperature and pressure thermo-catalytic Haber-Bosch
(H-B) commercial process for ammonia (NH3) production. Ammonia is a primary
feedstock for fertilizer production, and its synthesis via the H-B process
accounts for 1-2% of global energy consumption. The project will investigate a
class of plasmonic metal particles as catalysts for activating the direct, gas-
phase synthesis of NH3 from nitrogen (N2) and hydrogen (H2) at low temperatures
and pressures utilizing natural ultra-violet and visible light. Photocatalytic
synthesis of NH3 thus helps enable a future sustainable-energy path to meet
global food needs based on harvesting energy from the sun rather than
hydrocarbon resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is built on the
hypothesis that plasmonic metal nanoparticles can activate direct, gas-phase
ammonia synthesis at low temperatures and pressures when illuminated by UV-vis
light of solar intensity. The defining characteristic of plasmonic metallic
nanostructures is their strong resonant interaction with UV-vis light through
the excitation of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) which results in
high rates of formation of high-energy electrons at the surface of the
nanoparticles. The energetic electrons can induce chemical reactions on metals,
including the activation of strong chemical bonds at low temperatures. The
project will seek to enhance the plasmonic effect for NH3 synthesis by utilizing
core-shell particles with a plasmonic metal core (Au, or Ag) and a thin shell
(or even a small cluster) of a chemically more active metal (Ru, Rh, Pt, Pd,
etc.). In the proposed bimetallic systems, the role of the plasmonic core is to
efficiently harvest the energy of light and transfer it in the form of energetic
electrons to the more active material. The role of the more active metal is to
provide the catalytic sites for binding and dissociation of N2 using the
energetic electrons. Further reduction of the N and NHx intermediates is fast on
these metals. Beyond NH3 synthesis, the project will address a number of
fundamental questions about the interaction of local light-induced electric
fields on plasmonic metals and adsorbates. These questions are critical for
controlling the hot-electron flow at nanoscales, which is of importance in the
fields of photochemistry, photovoltaics and any application where photo-
excitation and energetic charge harvesting play a role. The project will also
employ a number of educational and outreach activities designed to promote
learning via trickle-down of research findings through the curriculum to
graduate, undergraduate, and even younger students while also involving a
diverse group of younger students in conventional outreach programs and less
conventional strategies aimed at improving the utilization of the World Wide Web
in reaching students and the general public.