* 1702944
* SuSChEM: Engineering Local Conductivity in MIS Photoelectrodes for Solar-Powered Water Splitting
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Edward Yu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

Solar-powered production of hydrogen from water offers the potential to enable
solar power, which is available on a transient basis, to be stored in the form
of a chemical fuel. This capability would allow the energy to be stored
temporarily, then deployed during times of high demand but relatively low
availability of sunlight. In addition, conversion of solar energy into hydrogen
fuel would help provide the foundation for a hydrogen-based transportation
infrastructure incorporating fuel-cell vehicles. Efficient and cost-effective
solar-powered production of hydrogen from water remains a scientific and
technological challenge. This project will investigate concepts from the field
of semiconductor electronics to enable new approaches to make efficient, low-
cost photoelectrodes for splitting water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen
using the energy in sunlight. Specifically, photoelectrodes will be designed
with thick oxide layers that serve as a protective coating at the liquid water
interface with the device. At a smaller scale in the photoelectrode, local
regions that are electrically conductive will be designed to enable electrons to
move easily between the semiconductor region where sunlight is absorbed and the
aqueous solution in which the electrons help split water molecules into hydrogen
and oxygen. For educational impacts, the project will introduce new components
into an introductory-level course for freshman students in electrical
engineering. These components will provide students with expertise required to
design and to create physical prototypes of a wide range of engineered systems.
By developing these capabilities at the outset of their university academic
careers, students will be able to deploy them extensively throughout the
remainder of their education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to
engineer localized electrical conduction paths across insulating oxide layers
for efficient and stable Si-based metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS)
photoelectrodes for solar-driven water splitting. These investigations will
build upon recent advances in the engineering of local conductivity via
electrical breakdown in MIS devices that have enabled highly stable, Si-based
MIS photocathodes and photoanodes. Three primary fundamental research directions
will be pursued: (i) investigation of the influence of localized conduction
paths between absorber and catalyst on photocurrent density, photovoltage and
other aspects of MIS photoelectrode performance; (ii) engineering of a new,
scalable approach, based on thin-film metallization reactions, for engineering
and optimizing local conductivity across protective oxide layers for MIS
photoelectrodes for water splitting; and (iii) characterization of spatial
inhomogeneity in water splitting activity, and its relationship with material
and device fabrication processes, using scanning electrochemical microscopy.
Cross-fertilization spanning the disciplines of materials processing,
electrochemistry, and solid-state device physics could enable increased impact
of the technological infrastructure associated with silicon-based electronics
and photovoltaics on solar fuel generation and the associated energy storage
capability.