* 1702007
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phylogeny, reticulate evolution, and historical biogeography in the Hawaiian lobeliad genera Cyanea and Clermontia
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Thomas Givnish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2019
* USD 19,870.00

Adaptive radiations, where a group of organisms has radiated to perform a number
of ecological roles, offer an opportunity to investigate the mechanisms that
allow species to diversify rapidly within a limited geographical area. Members
of the lobelia plant family (Lobeliaceae) restricted to the Hawaiian Islands
have undergone a remarkable divergence in habitat, growth form, leaf size and
shape, floral morphology, and mechanism of seed dispersal, and are considered
one of the best examples of an adaptive radiation in plants. Previous studies
have shown that this group of 140 species was derived from a single colonization
13 million years ago, long before many of the Hawaiian islands of today had
emerged from the Pacific. Hawaiian lobeliads now represent 12% of the native
Hawaiian flora and are the most species-rich plant lineage found on any single
group of oceanic islands on Earth. The two largest genera, Cyanea and
Clermontia, comprising approximately 100 species form the largest sublineage
within the group. Previous phylogenetic analyses of Cyanea-Clermontia were
inconclusive due to a combination of limited sampling within the group and
insufficient DNA sequence variation to reconstruct a well-supported estimate of
relationships. Cyanea-Clermontia, by its very size, ecological and morphological
diversity, and high proportion of species restricted to single islands (each of
known age), offers unique opportunities for studying adaptive radiation,
speciation, and historical biogeography. Understanding relationships within this
lineage could provide new insights into the rise of plant and animal diversity
on Hawaii, and identify traits associated with a tendency to become rare or
extinct. This project will (1) broadly train a graduate student in plant
systematics and historical biogeography analyses; (2) develop molecular
phylogenetic analysis pipelines to aid in the study of other recent radiations;
(3) produce a well-documented collection of DNA samples to permit future studies
of this important group; and (4) create a website on the diversification of
native Hawaiian lobeliads, to disseminate findings to a broad range of amateur
botanists and lobeliad enthusiasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation DNA
sequencing data will be used to infer phylogenies of Cyanea-Clermontia from
whole-chloroplast genomes and &gt;400 nuclear genes for all living species
sampled across their range. Analyses of these data will permit derivation of
species trees and networks, analysis of hybridization, introgression, and other
forms of reticulate evolution (important in Clermontia), reconstruct its
geographic spread through time, and infer the pattern and tempo of evolution of
key morphological and ecological character-states using a variety of tree- and
network-based approaches.