* 1702423
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Assimilation of Cool and Warm Season Moisture Reconstructions and Atmospheric Conditions Over North America for the Past Millennium
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Gregory Hakim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2021
* USD 145,127.00

Droughts and floods have had a major impact on the economy and ecosystems in the
United States (US) during the instrumental period. All of these hydroclimate
extremes exhibited noticeable seasonal variability, suggesting that the
seasonality is an important component of variability and forcing behind drought
and wetness regimes. There is robust evidence from paleoclimate records that the
U.S. was struck by more intense, long lasting, and widespread drought and wet
episodes during the last two thousand years. However, many of the available
proxy records cannot resolve the seasonality of droughts and pluvials.
Therefore, the discrete seasonality of hydroclimate variations needs to be
specified in proxy reconstructions to the extent possible to provide the most
realistic estimation of past climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
outlined in this project is a plan to estimate discrete cool and warm season
surface moisture and associated atmospheric states on an annual basis over North
America during the last millennium using an offline data assimilation approach.
These new estimations will then be used to understand the atmospheric
circulation and large-scale forcing of cool and warm season droughts and
pluvials on interannual, decadal, and centennial time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will reconstruct gridded cool and warm
season moisture and three dimensional atmospheric states across North America
during the last millennium using paleoclimate data assimilation (PDA)
techniques. The explicit seasonal reconstructions will be based on the North
American Seasonal Drought Atlas (NASDA) and a subset of existing annual tree
ring chronologies with restricted seasonal climate responses. The paleoclimate
data assimilation uses dynamical models to infer spatial relationships within
and between climate fields. Therefore, the estimated seasonal moisture and
atmospheric states are physically and dynamically consistent. The cool and warm
season moisture and atmospheric states will all be exactly dated and annually
resolved. The new reconstructions will provide an unprecedented opportunity to
quantify the cross-season coherency and casual mechanisms of major drought and
pluvial events during the last millennium. This project will examine whether the
physical processes that initiated, sustained and/or diminished past droughts or
pluvials in North America could vary at different time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the new reconstructions will be used to test
hypotheses concerning: 1) the ocean-atmospheric forcing of cool and warm season
hydroclimate over North America, 2) the climate dynamics responsible for
persistent droughts and pluvials on seasonal basis, 3) the linkages between cool
and warm season hydroclimate variability, and 4) the causal mechanisms for
individual hydroclimate extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader
Impacts (B.I.) include the development of an online and interactive atlas of
cool and warm season moisture and atmospheric states for each year over the past
millennium. This atlas will include maps of cool and warm season moisture, sea
level pressure, 500hPa geopotential height and other key variables. Users from
academic communities and the general public will be able to access the detailed
seasonal atmospheric information for any particular year or group of years. The
seasonal reconstructions will also provide an objective framework to evaluate
the impacts of hydroclimate extremes on social and ecological changes during the
prehistoric, colonial, and modern eras. The researchers will collaborate with
the Arkansas State Climate Office to promote the awareness of potential water
issues associated with droughts and pluvials. This project will also support one
graduate student&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.