* 1702684
* Collaborative Research: P2C2 - Reconstructing rates and sources of sea-level change over the last ~150 thousand years from a new coral database
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Jerry Mitrovica, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Hovan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 68,116.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RECONSTRUCTING RATES AND SOURCES OF SEA LEVEL CHANGE
OVER THE LAST ~150 THOUSAND YEARS FROM A NEW CORAL DATABASE

Future sea level rise, driven by shrinking land ice and ocean warming, threatens
coastal populations, economic activity, infrastructure, and ecosystems around
the world. Data on past sea level positions are critical for understanding how
sensitive sea level and ice sheets are to temperature change. Paleo-sea level
records come from several different sources. For time periods older than about
4000 years, some of the records with the best vertical resolution and most
precise ages come from coral reefs, which grow at distinctive elevation ranges
with respect to mean sea level.

During the Last Interglacial stage, about 125,000 years ago, global average sea-
surface temperature peaked around its current level, while analyses of corals
and other proxies indicate global mean sea level peaked about 6-9 m higher than
today. This magnitude of sea level rise - implying considerably smaller ice
sheets in Greenland and West Antarctica - hints at the long-term commitment
current warming has imparted to future sea level rise. The researchers in this
project will use the coral sea level database to better understand rates of sea
level and ice-sheet change over time, and how these rates relate to changes in
the global climate. The knowledge gained will contribute to work by this team
and others in the research community on future sea level projections. The
project will provide a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher with
interdisciplinary training in oceanography, geology, geophysics and statistics.
It will also synthesize a global reconstruction of sea-level over the last
150,000 years, and associated numerical methods for producing this
reconstruction, that can be broadly used by the research community.

This project focuses on four basic questions: (1) How much did global mean sea
level vary over time, and how do local, relative sea levels vary in space, over
this time period? (2) How fast did global mean sea level change during the last
150,000 years, and what was the relationship between changes in sea level and
changes in temperature? (3) Can the spatial patterns of sea level change be used
to separate the contributions of different ice sheets to global mean sea level
change? (4) How does global mean sea level reconstructed using corals compare to
other continuous records of sea level and climate change? To address these
questions, the researchers will: (1) develop emulators of geophysical models of
glacio-isostatic adjustment and mantle dynamic topography in order to estimate
the contribution of different ice sheets to sea level change, (2) refine the
history of seawater uranium isotope compositions that are important to
interpreting accurate ages from U-Th-dated corals, and (3) incorporate
ecological data about the relationship between coral growth position and sea
level into a spatio-temporal statistical framework that links together the coral
database and the geophysical models. The application of these techniques to the
coral database for the last 150,000 years will provide a uniquely high-
precision, continuous record of global mean sea level variability over this time
period. This reconstruction will enable a more precise estimate of the magnitude
of global mean sea level variability and rates of global mean sea level change,
and should allow discrimination between global mean sea level contributions from
North American and Arctic sources and those from Antarctic sources. These
reconstructions will provide data with which to test the ice sheet models used
to project future changes in addition to supporting the career development of a
postdoctoral scholar and the training of a Ph.D. student.