* 1702036
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Testing the Hypothesis of Ecological Speciation in Malaysia's Karst Geckos
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Rafe Brown, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,474.00

Limestone karst formations are unique ecosystems that harbor many species found
nowhere else in the world. Unfortunately, these ecosystems are severely
threatened due to their importance in the cement industry. This is especially
notable in Southeast Asia where extensive tracts of karst outcrops are being
quarried to the ground, resulting in the inevitable extinction of numerous
species of plants and animals. Consequently, conservation efforts have been
geared towards the discovery and description of new species to highlight the
importance of this ecosystem as imperiled arks of biodiversity. However,
relatively little research has focused on understanding the mechanisms that have
generated this biodiversity. This project aims to elucidate the genetic
mechanisms responsible for the evolution of karst-adapted organisms by
investigating how genes interact with the environment to drive the formation of
new species. Results from this study will not only aid in informing conservation
measures in threatened karst habitats worldwide, but will also contribute
towards the understanding of how species adapt to an ever changing environment.

Bent-toed Geckos of the genus Cyrtodactylus exhibit a wide array of specialized
ecotypes that are associated with different habitats. Among these, karst-adapted
species have evolved independently six times in three distantly related clades
in Malaysia, indicating that the diversification of karst lineages may be
ecologically driven (ecological speciation). The replicated evolution of karst
adaptation in Bent-toed Geckos represents a unique and compelling natural system
to determine whether geckos transitioning to karsts are subjected to
ecologically-based divergent selection that ultimately leads to speciation.
Because karst ecosystems are characterized by unique geomorphological features
and physiochemical conditions that set them apart from non-calcareous
environments, divergent selection is expected to act on independently evolving
karst lineages that occur in separate but similar karst environments. This study
will use genome-wide SNP data obtained using a double-digest restriction-site
associated DNA (ddRADseq) protocol due to the availability of large numbers of
independent loci across the genome, which enable the detection of departure from
neutrality and signatures of selection. A hybridization capture using RAD probes
method (hyRAD) will then be used to obtain comparable and orthologous loci among
more distantly related groups. Signatures of ecologically-based divergent
selection can then be detected by identifying genetic polymorphisms that exhibit
high correlation with environmental variables using a latent factor mixed model
(LFMM) method. Additionally, karst and non-karst lineages are expected to be in
different stages of reproductive isolation, with older lineages showing less (or
a complete lack of) gene flow among populations compared to lineages that have
diverged more recently, in which gene flow may be common.