* 1702166
* SusChEM: Chemical Reaction Engineering for Sustainable Production of Nitrogen Fertilizer and Hydrogen Peroxide by Non Thermal Plasma
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Bruce Locke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2021
* USD 357,534.00

1702166 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Locke, Bruce &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major aim of the
proposed work is to experimentally investigate the sustainable chemical
production of nitrate and hydrogen peroxide using a gas-liquid non-thermal
plasma reactor. This project also seeks to advance the understanding of the
design principles of gas-liquid plasma reactors for chemical synthesis. The
underlying theme of this proposal is that providing farmers a way to produce
nitrogen fertilizer and hydrogen peroxide pesticide locally from sustainable
resources, e.g., water, air, and solar energy, in a green chemical process, is
an ideal approach to both reducing the environmental impact of fertilizer
production and improving the productivity and profit margin of farmers. This
project will advance sustainability in chemical reaction engineering through
reduction in utilization of petroleum feedstocks for fertilizer and pesticide
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to develop a
detailed analysis of how non-thermal plasma reactors can be utilized to form
nitrate and other species. In the plasma reactor the plasma discharge channels
form on, and propagate along, the interface between a flowing gas and a flowing
liquid. The reactor design principles to be developed include determination of
how plasma properties interact with reactor characteristics and electrical
conditions to facilitate synthetic chemical reactions involving nitrogen oxides.
The project has three specific aims directed to three major hypotheses. The
first specific aim involves the analysis of the chemical reaction mechanisms,
and the major hypothesis is that the primary reaction pathway for nitrate
formation is through hydroxyl radical reactions. The second specific aim deals
with the analysis of the plasma properties and power supply characteristics, and
determination of how these properties interact and affect the chemical reaction
pathways. The major hypothesis is that nitrate formation efficiency can be
controlled by variation of the plasma temperature, electron density, and input
power characteristics (pulse power, voltage, frequency). The third specific aim
deals with the analysis and development of novel chemical reactor design
features for improved performance. The major hypothesis is that modifications of
the internal geometry of the gas-liquid plasma reactor (including channel size
and nozzle diameter), which affect the surface area, gas and liquid residence
times, and plasma contacting, can affect the formation of nitrate via effects on
formation of key reactive species including hydroxyl radicals. Outreach
activities through the Challenger Center of the FAMU-FSU College of Engineering
are proposed and will include presentations and learning modules about plasma
applications and topics related to green chemical synthesis and agriculture.