* 1702805
* Collaborative Research:   GEM--The Effect of Magnetosonic Waves on Energetic Electrons in the Earth's Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Lunjin Chen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2021
* USD 203,068.00

This project aims to address the electromagnetic waves in Earth's magnetic field
(magnetosphere) on charged particles,specifically electrons. This work is timely
and highly relevant for improving the modeling and prediction of radiation belt
electrons, which are of considerable practical importance due to their potential
risk to space systems - radiation hazards have damaging effects on spacecraft
through surface and internal charging. The research is directed towards
advancing our understanding of the fundamental physical processes in the inner
magnetosphere and dynamics of the radiation belt. The results will be utilized
to improve current radiation belt modeling capabilities. This project also
supports two early career scientists and a doctoral student. The findings of
this project will be incorporated into a new introductory course in
magnetospheric physics that the lead Principal Investigator is developing at
University of Texas-Dallas .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a unified
investigation, taking advantage of both observations and modeling, to quantify
the effect of equatorial magnetosonic (MS) waves on energetic electron dynamics
in the inner magnetosphere. MS waves have gained an increasing amount of
attention in the research community, due to their potential mechanism for
electron acceleration via Landau resonance, and their scattering of equatorially
mirroring electron via bounce resonance. Recent Van Allen Probes observations
have revealed the formation of electron butterfly distributions associated with
MS waves, and in-situ modulation of the electron pitch angle distribution by the
MS waves. The dynamics of equatorially mirroring electrons is important
scientific question, which currently is not implemented in radiation belt
models. This project will address the three fundamental scientific questions:
What is the relation between MS waves and the electron butterfly pitch angle
distribution in the inner magnetosphere? How do electron transport coefficients
depend on magnetosonic wave normal and wave spectra and background plasma
parameters? And how can bounce resonance effects be incorporated into models? To
address these questions, high-resolution wave and particle measurements from the
twin Van Allen Probes will be analyzed. Test particle simulations will be
carried out to calculate the electron transport coefficients as a function of
pitch angle and energy, and then perform a parametric study of those transport
coefficients. Phase space density evolution due to MS waves will be modelled and
compared with high-resolution electron pitch angle distributions from Van Allen
Probes.