* 1702080
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genomic architecture as a species delimitation tool: validating a novel approach using rDNA variation for discovering species boundaries in ground beetles.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2018
* David Maddison, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2018
* USD 16,561.00

With millions of undiscovered or undescribed species estimated, new techniques
that increase scientists' ability to discover species is urgently needed.
Recognizing biodiversity is important not only for comparative biology, but also
because it provides an important decision-making framework for very diverse
applied disciplines related to biology, such as agriculture, bioremediation,
biophysics, biomedicine (among others). This research proposes to develop a new,
widely applicable approach to identifying species using ground beetles (genus
Bembidion) as a model. Preliminary data show that species in this group can have
large differences in some aspects of the structure of their genomes despite
being very closely related. These differences in genome structure are revealed
by examining a set of genes (ribosomal DNA (rDNA) genes) with modern sequencing
techniques. This analysis of 'rDNA fingerprints' costs little to obtain and has
potential to help discover new species more efficiently than more traditionally
used methods. Results from this research will be used for training opportunities
for undergraduate students, as well as a community outreach project involving
high school students.

The use of rDNA fingerprints as a species delimitation tool will be validated by
profiling additional specimens through low-coverage Illumina sequencing and
comparing patterns in rDNA fingerprints to existing species concepts that are
built on five gene trees and morphological analysis. The extent of variation in
rDNA fingerprints across a wider group of carabid beetles will be explored using
a real-time PCR assay followed by additional sequencing of relevant specimens.
Finally, the mechanism of copy number inflation within the rDNA cistron will be
explored through comparative fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), to test
the hypothesis that many copies of fragments of rDNA have been transferred to
heterochromatic DNA near its boundary with euchromatin.