* 1702991
* RCN:MSB:FRA: Grassroots global network science: a macrosystems model
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Kathleen Weathers, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 09/30/2023
* USD 498,930.00

Freshwater lakes and rivers sustain human economies, food supplies, and
environmental and human health. In fact, modern societies are global networks of
goods and services that are entirely dependent on freshwater. Rapid global
changes threaten many freshwater ecosystems across the globe, and the human
networks that depend on them. Given the 100+ million lakes across the globe,
very little is known about the role of lakes in regional-to-continental and even
global-scale landscape function. The limited understanding comes from in-depth
study of a handful of lakes, and it is assumed these represent the whole. What
is needed is an expansion of studies to regions, continents, and ultimately the
globe and to put that knowledge in the system contexts in which lakes sit -
their atmospheric and surrounding land systems. Diverse perspectives, tools, and
networks must be brought together to understand how global influences affect
local water quality, the role of freshwater lakes in landscapes, and whether
there are scaling rules (space and time) for generating regional- to
continental- to cross-continental models for understanding how lake function.
This need is far too vast to be the exclusive purview of any existing academic,
research, federal, or private-sector network. This project will build a global
network of networks that includes scientists, as well as citizen scientists, to
understand lake function over a variety of spatial and temporal scales and with
different intensities of human-induced change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is to use lessons, data, and physical and
human infrastructure developed within the Global Lake Ecological Observatory
Network to build an inclusive global network of networks capable of synthesizing
information about lakes in the context of their connections to and feedbacks
from the atmospheric, terrestrial, and human landscapes in which they sit. The
assembly of resources, including human, data, and technical, will work in
concert with the global network as a Research Coordination Network in the
service of diverse teams of scientists who can take on big macrosystem science
questions with effectiveness and persistence. Specifically, the proposed work
will (i) develop a network capacity for incorporating and studying the
interactions of atmosphere-terrestrial-aquatic systems by expanding their
resource availability, human expertise, and connection to existing research
programs; (ii) build on an existing, successful, learning organization that can
accommodate new disciplines and needs; and (iii) use the enhanced/expanded
network to provide a new capacity for doing the science of - and scientific
training essential for - macrosystems biology about lakes embedded in
atmosphere-terrestrial-human landscapes. Cross cutting scientific themes include
exploration of feedbacks among and drivers in atmospheric-terrestrial-lake
ecosystems, controls on material flow, and scaling from ecosystems to
macrosystems. Early career scientists will be encouraged to lead expeditions,
with later career scientists as co-leaders. Based on past experience, this model
builds the team for team science, leads to a major expansion of collaborative
networks for participants, especially for early career scientists, and results
in innovative interdisciplinary products. This award is cofunded by the Office
of International Science and Engineering and includes collaborations with
scientists in Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, Netherlands, Switzerland,
Estonia, Taiwan, China, and Argentina.