* 1702051
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Experimental Test of Generalist Foraging Behavior as a Community Stabilization Mechanism
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Mark Novak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2019
* USD 18,340.00

Species can become rare or common for many reasons. Scientists are increasingly
interested in how such changes in the abundance of one species can impact other
species, particularly those that eat species that become rare. Some scientists
think that the rareness of one species leads to the rareness of other species
that rely on this species, potentially causing a lot of local extinctions --
perhaps even the collapse of an entire ecosystem. Other scientists disagree.
They think that declines in one species can benefit other species if the first
species might compete with the second, leading to a stable ecosystem in which
there is an overall balance in the number of species that are increasing
relative to those that are decreasing. Key to predicting the vulnerability of
plants and animals to changes in their environment is figuring out which of
these opposing views is most likely. Such understanding will help managers,
policy makers and scientists develop strategies to support the diversity of life
on earth. The goal of this project is to test how a coastal ecosystem responds
to disturbances and, in particular, whether a top predator can adjust to changes
in the abundance in its prey.

This research uses a predatory whelk on the Oregon coast to examine how
different possible foraging strategies of generalist predators influence the
stability of rocky intertidal communities. The researchers will use whelks
trained on different prey in the laboratory to replicate different methods of
generalist foraging in the field (e.g., constant prey preferences and adaptive
foraging). The whelks will be exposed to two natural pulse recruitment
perturbations in the field. Researchers will use the changes in species
densities following the perturbations to determine the resilience and resistance
of the communities. This will allow the researchers to examine the role that
generalists play in promoting community stability and what forms of generalist
foraging are the most likely to stabilize communities. This study will support
the training of a graduate and undergraduate students and will provide
opportunities for outreach through the development of an exhibit for a science
center that explains the concept of food webs and how food webs influence the
everyday lives of visitors to the science center.