* 1702147
* GEM: Multi-scale Empirical Geomagnetic Field Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mikhail Sitnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 335,193.00

Sophisticated empirical models of the Earth's magnetic field have been built
over decades of data collected from spaceborne instruments. These models are a
necessary compliment to the physics-based first-principles models. The project
goals are to improve one such empirical model of the magnetosphere to include
longer, solar cycle time scales and shorter, substorm time scales. This will
vastly improve understanding of the near-Earth environment, which is important
for ultimately protecting modern technology. The effort will promote hands-on
research training for a graduate student and a summer
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to fundamentally upgrade the
storm-scale empirical geomagnetic field TS07D model to include geomagnetic
variations on time scales both longer and shorter than those of storms. The
former are caused by the solar cycle variations of the solar radiation
(quantified by the F10.7 flux). The latter represent substorm effects quantified
by auroral indices. The work will address what the impact of the solar
irradiance on the structure of the geomagnetic field and underlying current
system is, and how substorm thinning and dipolarization of the magnetotail
affect the empirical picture of the geomagnetic field. The new model upgrade,
which is aimed to answer these questions, employs multiple expansions of
equatorial currents with different current sheet thickness values as well as an
improved description of the field aligned current system. It combines the system
science approach, when the evolution of a few global parameters of the
magnetosphere is reconstructed empirically, with the physics-based approach,
which is used to constrain spatio-temporal scales and structure of the empirical
model.