* 1702716
* Spectroscopy with Quantum Sensors at the Nanoscale
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Paola Cappellaro, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Non-Technical Description: Spectroscopy is a powerful tool in many physical
settings, with applications ranging from analysis of basic physical properties
to sample analysis in chemistry, material science and bio-imaging. This project
aims at translating the powerful techniques used in spectroscopy to a novel type
of sensors, based on the quantum properties of defects in diamond.
&lt;br/&gt;These optically active defects (color centers) have an associated
electronic spin that is sensitive to magnetic and electric fields, temperature,
pressure, etc. The project will develop spectroscopic techniques, tailored to
the quantum realm, that can be implemented with these nanoscale sensors in
diamond. In particular, the project will focus on achieving noise spectroscopy,
that is, measuring spatial and temporal correlation of random fields (in
particular magnetic fields), which are ubiquitous in materials and biological
sciences. By combining novel noise spectroscopic techniques that work for
quantum sensors, with the nanoscale resolution of the quantum sensors
themselves, the novel quantum noise spectroscopy technique will be able to
measure fields at scales not previously accessible. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
project will provide opportunities for training graduate and undergraduate
students in broad areas, ranging from magnetic resonance, to quantum
information, as well as experimental skills in electronics and quantum optics.
The project will in addition develop outreach activities, including a diamond
sensor demo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The advent
of novel nanoscale sensors exploiting individual quantum systems promise to shed
light into our fundamental understanding of nano-electronics, photonics and
magnetics devices, and their underlying physical phenomena. These novel quantum
probes, such as the Nitrogen-Vacancy center in diamond, can perform in
conditions and with a spatial resolution previously inaccessible: they can be
brought very close to the system of interest and measure minute magnetic (or
electric) fields with nanoscale resolution. &lt;br/&gt;After the first proof-of-
principle demonstrations in recent years, these sensors are on the verge of
becoming transformative tools for the exploration of electromagnetic devices and
materials. To reach this goal, these spin sensors should be able not only to
measure the magnitude of a given field, but more importantly its temporal and
spatial correlations that carry most of the information about underlying
physical properties. The goal of this project is to transform quantum sensors
associated with spins in diamond into powerful spectrometers, able to detect
spatiotemporal correlations of magnetic fields at the nanoscale due to, e.g.,
biological or magnetic materials dynamics, with a spatial resolution and
sensitivity previously unattainable. Moreover, characterizing the noise spectrum
is critical for devising effective strategies to counteract decoherence in
emerging quantum devices. &lt;br/&gt;This project will combine expertise on
noise spectroscopy and on quantum digital filtering to achieve an efficient and
complete reconstruction of the noise spectrum via a quantum nanoscale sensor.
The ultimate goal is to develop a new field of quantum digital noise
spectroscopy, based on noise spectroscopy combined with the complete basis of
Walsh digital filtering functions, and applying it to enhanced sensing of
magnetic samples, and their structure and spatiotemporal correlations. Quantum
digital noise spectroscopy with NV centers in diamond, also combined with super-
resolution addressing of NVs, will be applied to nanoscale magnetic resonance
imaging of biological samples and to measure spatial noise correlations of
magnetic 2D materials. Such experiments could shed new light on the structure
and dynamics of the measured samples, leading to new insights in biological
functions and in universal properties of magnetic phase transitions.