* 1702891
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Madagascar Caves and Paleoclimate (MADCAP), Investigating Climate Variability in the Southern Hemisphere of the Western Indian Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2021
* Stephen Burns, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2021
* USD 491,563.00

The project will produce educational materials and exhibits prepared for a
general audience and displayed in a modest museum now under construction at
Tsimanampetsotse National Park. The displays will reveal how research with
stalagmites helps uncover the climate and vegetation history of Madagascar and
will help heighten public awareness of the Park's natural history and
biodiversity. This project will involve several Malagasy scientists and includes
mentoring for a doctoral student and post-doctoral scholar. The project will
also support research and laboratory experiences for undergraduates at both MIT
and UMass. Finally, a better understanding of the causes of decadal-scale
climate variability will help in providing insights into potential future
changes in rainfall in a country that experiences severe drought and flooding on
inter-annual time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of the research are: 1)
to investigate sub-decadal to annual resolution changes in precipitation over
the past 2,000 years and determine the relationships between precipitation in
Madagascar and variability in the Indian Ocean Zonal Mode, El Nino-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) and other drivers of inter-annual and decadal-scale climate
variability; 2) investigate the relationships between climate, landscape
evolution and the disappearance of Madagascar's endemic megafauna in the Late
Holocene; and 3) investigate the timing and nature of millennial and orbital
scale variability in the Indian Ocean Monsoon in the Southern Hemisphere and
determine how it relates to Northern Hemisphere Monsoon variability and climate
changes in East Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use
speleothems from caves at two locations in Madagascar to reconstruct climate and
landscape evolution in the Late Pleistocene and Holocene. High-resolution time
series of speleothem delta 18-Oxygen and Strontium/Calcium and Magnesium/Calcium
trace element ratios measured on stalagmites collected from northwest and
southwest Madagascar will be used to reconstruct past changes in precipitation.
Speleothem delta 13-Carbon measurements will be used as a proxy for the
evolution of the landscape between forest and grassland. Precise age models will
be constructed using 230 Thorium/Uranium.