* 1702161
* Moduli of Galois Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Savitt, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 189,854.00

Number theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. At its most
fundamental, number theory is the study of whole number solutions to polynomial
equations, and especially to equations motivated by geometry. For example, the
lengths of the three sides of a right triangle are related by the Pythagorean
theorem. While it is straightforward to find all right triangles whose side
lengths are rational numbers, it perhaps surprisingly remains an unsolved
problem to determine which whole numbers can be the area of a right triangle
with rational sides. Number theory has many important practical applications.
For instance, most cellular telephone calls are protected by a code based on
elliptic curves, one of the primary objects of study in the Langlands program,
the principal investigator's area of research.

Significant progress has been made in recent decades towards understanding
Langlands's conjectural reciprocity between automorphic forms and Galois
representations. Techniques for proving reciprocity laws generally require the
consideration of p-adic families of Galois representations. Three projects to
investigate p-adic families of Galois representations will be undertaken. The
first project will produce moduli stacks of certain Galois representations in
which the residual representation is allowed to vary. This will open up the
possibility of proving results in the Langlands program by establishing them
generically on these spaces. The second project, on Breuil's local-global
compatibility conjecture for types in the p-adic Langlands program, will be a
demonstration of this technique. A third project is to study the weight part of
Serre's conjecture for GL(n), for n larger than 2, in non-generic cases.