* 1702635
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-ECA: A multi-scale framework to quantify and forecast population changes and associated uncertainties
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Elise Zipkin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2021
* USD 293,865.00

Monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus) have rapidly declined across North
America over the last 19 years from environmental change, although the exact
causes are under intensive study. Understanding and forecasting species changes
in monarch butterflies at regional and continental scales is challenging because
both local- and broad-scale environmental dynamics affect their changes. This
project will develop a modeling framework which recognizes that butterfly
abundance patterns reflect not only butterfly responses to their environments at
fine scales (e.g., local weather), but also to broad-scale factors (e.g.,
distributions of suitable habitat). The specific goal is to determine the
relative effects of climate and land-use on a model migratory species, the
monarch butterfly and then forecast population changes at multiple scales under
future climate and resource availability scenarios. This project will integrate
continental-scale data from multiple regional and national butterfly monitoring
programs and climate and land-use databases, spanning their entire migratory
cycle, across all seasons, over 20 years. The modeling approach will explicitly
quantify uncertainties from both population-environment relationships and future
climate projections to evaluate how conservation actions may reverse population
declines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work meets a significant challenge that has
long-hindered large-scale ecological research: the integration of biological
processes at multi-scales using different data types coupled with predictive
environmental models. The data integration modeling framework incorporates
mechanism into broad-scale models, representing the best possible approach for
many real-world macrosystems in which the development of wholly mechanistic
models is not tractable due to data limitations and/or difficulties describing
the details of every relevant process. Additionally, predications about the size
and distribution of future populations can be made with a quantifiable level of
confidence in those estimates. The modeling framework developed in this project
will help determine how different regions and periods of a species annual cycle
contribute to population trends, leading to more accurate estimations at broad
spatial scales, and targeted data collection, modeling, and conservation
efforts. The results will contribute broadly to scientific advancement in this
field because of the transferability of the modeling framework to other cross-
continental species where it is similarly difficult to track and predict
population abundance and trends. The project will also offer a rigorous analysis
of the factors causing declines of a high profile species and how effective
specific conservation and restoration acts could be under changing climate
conditions. The research team will collaborate with the Monarch Joint Venture, a
multi-institutional partnership, to promote science and conservation of monarchs
and disseminate results to the general public through their existing online
resources and newsletters.