* 1702915
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Emergence and Persistence of Labor Market Dualism
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Beverly Silver, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 11,998.00

This project will examine the processes leading to the worldwide emergence and
persistence of labor market dualism. The growth of labor market dualism has
become the subject of widespread debate in the scholarly and policy literature,
with the existing literature focusing either on formal workers or
informal/precarious workers. This project, in contrast, focuses on the
interaction between these two groups of workers, providing fresh insights into
the institutionalization and limits of polarized employment systems. By
conducting a comparative analysis of four industries in post-1987 South Korea
with divergent outcomes, this project will help identify the specific conditions
facilitating (or impeding) dualism, and assist policymakers in finding solutions
to the problems of precarious work and workplace inequality.

This project addresses unanswered questions in the academic debate between the
proponents of the "revitalization" thesis and the "dualization" thesis about the
origins and limits of precarious work. The proponents of the revitalization
thesis have argued that precarious workers are being empowered by ongoing
economic transformations, creating the preconditions for them to organize and
make demands for better wages and job security on their own behalf. By contrast,
the proponents of the dualization thesis have suggested that micro-corporatist
compromises between formal workers and employers have created insurmountable
obstacles for the effective self-organization of precarious workers, thereby
facilitating the long-term entrenchment of labor dualism. Through a comparison
of four industries--textiles, electronics, automobile and shipbuilding-this
project will assess the validity of these two hypotheses. The research conducted
for this project will include (1) identifying the divergent patterns of labor
dualism in the four industries since 1987; (2) creating and analyzing a new
database of protests by formal and precarious workers in these four industries
since 1987; and (3) conducting a narrative analysis in order to illuminate the
causal mechanisms linking industrial structure, labor dualism, and the agency of
both precarious and formal workers.