* 1702837
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Immigration, Mixed-Status Families, Risk Management and Vulnerability
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Cecilia Menjivar, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This project examines the challenges Latino mixed-status families face in
Kansas. Mixed-status families have, by definition, family members of different
legal statuses, such as undocumented, semi-legal, or citizen. For Latino mixed-
status families, the spillover consequences of current enforcement practices and
limited options for regularizing their legal status include family separation,
economic strain, and low educational attainment as well as problems with mental
health and cognitive development. Previous studies on mixed-status families
homogenize Latinos as a pan-ethnic group, blurring intragroup differences and
ignoring long histories of colonization, discrimination, and resistance efforts
of Indigenous- and Afro-Latino groups. To fill this gap, this project explores
Indigenous (Mixteco and Tlapaneco) and non-Indigenous Latino mixed-status
families' experiences and investigates the consequences for family dynamics,
individual identity, and community engagement. Research involving immigrant
families is typically conducted in cities in the West, East, and Southwest parts
of the U.S., traditional destinations for immigrant populations. This project
takes place in Kansas, allowing for a critical examination of the effects of
structural arrangements in this specific context on mixed-status families.

Using an intersectional analysis and sociolegal scholarship on immigration
policy, this research asks: (1) How does the intersection of structural
inequalities based on race, class, gender, and legal status shape mixed-status
families' experiences in Kansas? and (2) How do mixed-status family members
manage risk, negotiate their legally vulnerable lives, and respond to their
conditions? A qualitative study of sixty in-depth interviews with Indigenous
(Mixteco and Tlapaneco) and non-Indigenous Latino mixed-status family members
and a year-long participant observation in social gatherings, cultural events,
and pro-immigration protests in east-central Kansas constitute the main sources
of data to investigate these questions. This project gives a voice to a highly
marginalized group--mixed-status Indigenous (Mixteco and Tlapaneco) and non-
Indigenous Latino families, showing not only how structures affect their
livelihoods, but also how they negotiate and contest systems of power and
oppression. The findings will provide bases and recommendations for new
directions on immigration policy. Through the analysis of the link between
citizenship and "illegality," and a careful examination of the blurred
boundaries of marginalization, this research can ultimately lead to initiatives
in which these transgressions are recognized and made just.