* 1702825
* Collaborative Research: The California Precipitation Dipole:  Spatiotemporal Variability and Forcings Over the Past 3000 Years
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Matthew Kirby, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 363,329.00

California faces a constant fresh water problem. This problem is intensified by
its complex water geography. In other words, where California receives
precipitation is as important as how much precipitation it receives. This
project will investigate the history of where and why it rains in California
over the past 3000 years. Knowing where and why it rains in California is
critical to water management, water storage infrastructure, and water conveyance
from regions of excess to regions of deficit. As the largest state economy in
the United States, the health of California is important to the health of the
United States. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal's goal is to investigate
California's precipitation history as related to the position and strength of
its North-South antiphased precipitation regime over the past 3000 years. To
accomplish this goal, tubes of mud will be extracted from three lakes. Like a
history book, these tubes of mud record California's precipitation history. The
team will study the mud's physical, chemical, and biological properties to infer
a history of floods, droughts, vegetation change, and fire activity. Training of
students from groups historically underrepresented in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math is a key component of this study.