* 1702683
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Organizational, Community, and State Regulatory Characteristics Influence on Venting and Flaring Rates of Texas Gas Wells.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Katherine Ann Willyard, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2019
* USD 11,954.00

This project examines why some gas wells and operating companies vent and flare
at a higher rate than others by testing hypotheses developed using the
organizational political economy framework. Specifically, it analyzes how
community, business, and state regulatory organizational characteristics at the
branch plant (i.e., gas well) and central headquarters (i.e., operating company)
level relate to Texas gas well flaring and venting rates in 2012. This project
advances basic understandings of the way social organization influences
industrial environmental pollution and waste of natural resources. The primary
aim of this project is to assist business practitioners, state managers, and
communities to better combat climate change, economic waste, and community
health hazards by identifying the social structural factors related to venting
and flaring practices in the natural gas production industry and making this
information publicly available by publishing high-quality, mobile-friendly maps,
presentations, and scientific and technical papers.

Venting and flaring in the gas production industry are processes by which
natural gas is extracted from a well and purposefully burned (i.e., flaring) or
released or leaked into the air (i.e., venting), sometimes after first
collecting the crude petroleum oil and associated gas extracted along with the
natural gas. There is currently no systematic explanation for why some
organizations in the natural gas production industry vent and flare natural gas
at a higher rate than others. There is an urgent need to identify the social
organizational structures associated with pollution and waste, so that
organizations and public policies can be reorganized to better achieve
environmental sustainability. This project will fill this need by testing
several hypotheses developed using the organizational political economy of the
environment framework. Hypotheses are tested by quantifying the relationship
between Texas gas well venting and flaring rates in 2012, and organizational
characteristics at the gas well and operating company level using multilevel
statistical modeling. Statistical analysis will be conducted on a created
dataset using Texas Railroad Commission, National Center for Charitable
Statistics, United States Energy Information Administration, and United States
Census Bureau data. Using the created dataset, this project will examine the
characteristics of affected communities surrounding gas wells and develop high-
quality, mobile-friendly maps of gas well venting and flaring rates and
overlying business, community, and state regulatory organizational
characteristics. By producing high quality maps, presentations, and papers, this
project will increase public understanding of scientific knowledge regarding the
relationship between social organizational structures and venting and flaring
rates.