* 1702967
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Scalable Edge Architecture for Massive Location-Aware Heterogeneous IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Theodore Rappaport, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The "Scalable Edge Architecture for Massive Location-Aware Heterogeneous IoT
Systems" project&lt;br/&gt;addresses essential research problems for developing
network design and Internet of Things (IoT)&lt;br/&gt;systems in both high
bandwidth and low bandwidth environments. By defining an efficient
security&lt;br/&gt;and scalability-enhancing edge architecture that moves data
processing close to users, it minimizes&lt;br/&gt;data transfer latencies and
overhead in the network. The fusion of sensor data from different
sources&lt;br/&gt;can significantly improve the efficiency of many existing
systems. In some areas, massive&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth is about to become available
to cellular and WiFi networks in the millimeter wave bands.&lt;br/&gt;The
Federal Government recently opened up 28 GHz at frequencies above
24&lt;br/&gt;GHz and promises to revolutionize wireless systems and enable IoT
applications never before&lt;br/&gt;conceived, particularly in dense urban
areas. Smart traffic and connected (autonomous) cars are an&lt;br/&gt;example
application area enabled by the new bandwidth, which requires combining these
different&lt;br/&gt;approaches in the architectural design of large-scale IoT
systems. Integrating IoT with edge/fog&lt;br/&gt;computing, millimeter wave
(mmWave) technologies and distributed processing enables
optimizing&lt;br/&gt;the system level performance considering system capacity,
reduced network bandwidth for data and&lt;br/&gt;control traffic, increased
system level programmability and automation, accurate location-
aawareness,&lt;br/&gt;virtualization, low latency, scalability, and enhanced
security and privacy. One of the&lt;br/&gt;novel aspects of our proposed system
is that it transitions seamlessly from an emulated and&lt;br/&gt;simulated
environment to actual production deployment, and mixtures of these modes,
facilitating&lt;br/&gt;robust and reliable IoT systems at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides contributions in several
essential areas of IoT network architectures and&lt;br/&gt;security: 1)
minimizing the need of manual configuration in large-scale IoT networks; 2)
scalable&lt;br/&gt;authentication and key management systems; 3) efficient
distributed IoT architecture to perform&lt;br/&gt;complex and delay-sensitive
tasks, with rapid deployment and prototyping; 4)
secure&lt;br/&gt;interoperability between heterogeneous IoT devices; and 5)
positioning and capacity optimization&lt;br/&gt;based on mmWave communications,
considering especially smart traffic and vehicle-to-
vehicle&lt;br/&gt;communications. The project proposes a multi-layered approach
for scaling IoT systems in&lt;br/&gt;simulation and emulation, allowing to
combine physical systems with emulated systems,&lt;br/&gt;incorporating new
mmWave RF and network models, network emulation, virtual systems,
models&lt;br/&gt;of the physical world and user interfaces. The emulation system
allows the team to explore mobile&lt;br/&gt;edge and fog computing to enhance
efficiency, reduce control-loop delays and assure privacy of&lt;br/&gt;sensitive
data. A new authentication model and naming system allows scaling for deployment
and&lt;br/&gt;programming. The prototype open-source IoT emulator, along with
the mmWave channel models,&lt;br/&gt;developed in the project will allow
industrial IoT system developers to more rapidly and reliably&lt;br/&gt;develop
new IoT systems. The authentication and naming components will be submitted
for&lt;br/&gt;possible standardization. The new channel models are likely to
inform spectrum allocation&lt;br/&gt;decisions for mmWave bands by national
regulators.