* 1702379
* MSB-ECA: Ecosystems in four dimensions: Measuring changes to forest structure and function in the Anthropocene
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Kyla Dahlin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 01/31/2023
* USD 384,395.00

Photosynthesis in forests is controlled by a variety of processes acting across
scales ranging from individual cells, whole leaves, individual trees, entire
forest canopies, regions, and continents. Lack of understanding of the
interactions among this complex set of processes is a significant contributor to
the uncertainty of global carbon budgets. How much carbon do forests take up via
photosynthesis? How much do they lose? How do these rates change with an
increasing frequency of droughts, floods, or other extreme events? It is
impossible to measure the activity of every cell in every leaf on every tree
around the world, but recent technological advances have made it possible to get
much closer to this ideal than was previously possible. This award uses emerging
remote observation technologies, including light detection and ranging (LiDAR)
and imaging spectroscopy, which now make it possible to map the two-dimensional
distribution of plant nutrients across landscapes and the vertical distribution
of leaves throughout a canopy from aircraft and other platforms. These two
technologies will be combined to develop three dimensional maps of forest
nutrients, then, using sophisticated models of light and photosynthesis, forest
carbon uptake will be simulated over time. In addition to scientific advances,
this award will train undergraduate and graduate students, will result in
educational materials to improve ecological and geographical education, and all
data, computer code, and teaching materials will be made publicly available via
existing databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal
is to answer two critical questions in forest ecology. First, does a greater
diversity of leaf traits (higher functional diversity) increase the
photosynthetic production of regions? And, second, is detailed information about
the physical structure of the forest and functional diversity necessary to
accurately predict current and future productivity of forests? Current
predictive models of plant productivity assume that knowledge of the three-
dimensional structure of forests is not essential to estimating their
productivity. Yet empirical studies have shown that this assumption is
incorrect. The National Ecological Observatory Network?s Airborne Observation
Platform (NEON AOP), with its fine spatial resolution combined with high-
fidelity imaging spectroscopy and LiDAR systems, offers an unprecedented
opportunity to measure and understand ecosystem productivity across three-
dimensional space and through time. Ultimately, this award will test the
hypothesis that detailed information about forest structural and functional
diversity is critical to predicting key elements of forest photosynthetic
production, including peak growing season and daily cycles of productivity in
temperate forest ecosystems. To test this hypothesis, 3-D leaf structure and
function reconstructions based on NEON AOP data will be used. Realistic models
capable of simulating the light regime in forests will use this structural and
functional reconstruction and detailed predictions of the study sites'
photosynthetic productivity will be made.