* 1702914
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Market concentration, skill segregation, and rising wage inequality
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Bruce Western, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2018
* USD 11,955.00

Pay differences between a company's managers and its workers are striking, and
much studied, but the rise in inequality over the last 40 years has come mostly
from growing differences between people working at different employers, not
between those working together. This fact is hard to explain for theories that
explain inequality with differences in workers' education levels: even
similarly-educated workers get paid differently depending on which companies
they end up working at. This project instead aims to explain rising inequality
by measuring changes in the intensity of competition between rival companies and
changes in the balance of power between buyer and supplier companies. By
studying the sources of pay differences between workplaces, this project points
to a novel set of employer-targeted policies to address rising wage inequality.
The research proposed here could help assess how antitrust enforcement,
competition policy and product market regulation affect the wage structure.
Advocates and policy makers alike have neglected these indirect policy
determinants of inequality.

To clarify the sources of rising between-firm inequality, this project brings
insights from economic sociology to the analysis of inequality. It builds on and
reformulates the structuralist sociology of wages to ask how hierarchical
relations between firms can affect wage inequality. Changes in market power are
expected to affect inequality by shifting the allocation of good jobs and high
wages across different employers. Specifically, the project uses establishment-
level and linked employer-employee data to test several contributing sources of
changing relations between firms. First, it considers whether shifting product
market power has benefited some firms and workers and undermined others. Second,
it asks how the reliance of supplier firms on powerful corporate buyers affects
suppliers? workers? wages. Finally, it tests whether trends in educational and
occupational segregation across workplaces contribute to rising inequality. More
broadly, it asks about the consequences of the structured nature of product
markets for the distribution of wages: if businesses operate in settings that
depart from the assumptions of perfect markets, what are the consequences for
their workers? wages?