* 1702456
* Collaborative Research: The Distributed Biological Observatory (DBO)-A Change Detection Array in the Pacific Arctic Region
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jacqueline Grebmeier, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2020
* USD 813,701.00

The Arctic is changing. The Distributed Biological Observatory studies these
changes in the northern Bering and Chukchi seas. Investigators sample locations
that are biologically important in U.S. territorial waters. These locations have
been sampled annually since 2010. Other investigators also sample the same
locations. As a result, the locations are sampled multiple times a year. Data
are collected on environmental conditions including water column and sea floor
animals that are food for whales, seals, and birds. Data are shared
internationally. The project contributes to the U.S. National Ocean Policy and
Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee 5-year plan. The data will be of
value to U.S. and international science and management agencies, private
industry, and local communities as they try to understand changes to the
environment. The project supports three graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observational plan includes standard
hydrographic and biological measurements along five transect lines located in
the northern Bering and Chukchi Seas. These sampling locations are arrayed
south-to-north and reflect a gradient of seasonal sea ice change and seawater
warming. The investigators chose these 5 regions because they are zones of high
biological productivity and biodiversity. Results so far indicate a freshening
and warming of Pacific seawater which transits northward over the spring to fall
season. These changes have impacted prey for larger marine mammals and seabirds.
Satellite observations are also used to evaluate seasonal changes in sea ice
concentration, surface seawater temperature, and chlorophyll concentration. The
biological measurements focus on lower trophic levels and shipboard surveys of
upper trophic level organisms. This research will increase our understanding of
the impact of key environmental forcing parameters on biological change in the
system. The collection of key prey-predator biological data along with physical
and chemical measurements will allow for analyses and ecosystem modeling which
will promote better understanding of Arctic environmental changes.