* 1702689
* Collaborative Research: Multi-scale Modeling and Measurement of Clay Aggregate Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Andrew Whittle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 350,112.00

The goal of this research is to advance the understanding of the mechanical
behavior of clays as engineering materials. Clays comprise very fine (< 2 um),
electrically charged, chemically active particles whose behavior and assembly
are strongly affected by physico-chemical forces operating on individual
particles at the smaller (i.e., molecular and interfacial) scales. Clay minerals
of different varieties occur widely in natural geological environments and are
generally found in the form of aggregates or clusters whose interactions control
the macroscopic engineering properties of clay-rich soils used in the design and
construction of infrastructure. While micromechanics-based experimental and
computational research has advanced significantly the understanding of the
behavior of sands (particle sizes greater than 75um), the importance of the
particulate nature of clays has not been extensively investigated. This
collaborative project aims to develop and validate a new multiscale framework
for understanding the macroscopic (i.e., continuum scale) mechanical properties
of clays by studying the microscale aggregation of elementary clay particles and
the interactions between the resultant clay aggregates. The project will provide
the fundamental understanding needed to develop the next generation of
constitutive models for mechanical properties of clays that can be used for
subsurface engineering, ultimately reducing risks and costs associated with the
design of foundations, underground construction and use of geological energy
resources (e.g., clay shales, etc.). The research will impact directly upon the
education of future geotechnical engineering and geomechanics students through
the creation of online modules related to the small-scale measurement and
multiscale modeling of clay behavior.

The research work comprises a closely-integrated program of multiscale
experimentation, atomistic and coarse-grained multiscale simulations for one
common clay mineral, illite. The research involves the following main tasks: 1)
modeling and experimental validation of individual clay aggregate behavior under
a range of porewater chemistry conditions; 2) development of new modeling
techniques and experimental methods for investigating aggregate-aggregate
interactions and fabric (i.e., quantitative measurement of particle orientation
and of orientation distribution function); and 3) validation of multiscale model
predictions through comparison with macroscopic measurements of clay properties.
Experimental measurements will use existing laboratory facilities at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass) as well as the analytical facilities
at the Argonne National Laboratory, while numerical simulations at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) will take advantages of NSF eXtreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) national supercomputing
resources. By developing a framework for understanding particulate-based clay
micromechanics, the research aims to provide an innovative multiscale
perspective for explaining the underlying basis of continuum-based clay
properties such as cohesion and creep, which have to date only been observed
phenomenologically via macroscopic approaches. The long-term goal is to
generalize the methodology to enable bottom-up prediction of mechanical
properties for complex natural soils that comprise mixtures of different clay
minerals with silt- and sand-sized particles as well as varying porewater
chemistry.