* 1702328
* RAPID: Spatiotemporal Evolution of Radio-induced Aurora at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) High-frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Christopher Fallen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 11/30/2018
* USD 60,000.00

This RAPID would support ionosphere radio modification experiments at the Alaska
High-frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) Observatory during its
first university-run campaign, planned for February 2017. The application of the
research specifically is to study with high temporal resolution the evolution of
the white-light morphology of the artificial radio-induced aurora. Ownership of
the HAARP facility was transferred from the US Air Force to the University of
Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) in August, 2015. During campaigns, significant
expenditures for fuel and personnel are required. Large start-up costs make
HAARP experiments largely inaccessible to individual researchers unless multiple
experiments and funding sources can be bundled together during a campaign of up
to two-week duration. Based on recent pledged support from sponsors, UAF plans
to conduct a limited experiment campaign in February 2017; this schedule is
unflexible and consequently, the RAPID management of the award would enable the
schedule to be enhanced with additional experiments thus utilizing the HAARP
facility more effectively. Broader impacts will be maximized by encouraging
public participation in various roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
singular opportunity for researchers to conduct ionosphere modification
experiments by taking advantage of efficiencies gained through bundling onto the
campaign already planned for February. The primary experimental objective of
this project is to measure time-dependent artificial airglow or "aurora"
morphology with a sensitive white-light video camera capable of 30 frames per
second temporal resolution. The secondary experimental objective is to test
Arctic HF radio propagation paths using community and amateur radio (ham)
participation. Both experiment objectives are highly relevant to active areas of
space physics and Arctic radio communications research. Ionosphere radio
modification is an important experimental technique for investigating: 1) plasma
processes difficult or impossible to replicate in a laboratory, 2) the near-
earth space environment, 3) radio propagation properties, and 4) natural
processes such as aurora that transfer energy into the upper atmosphere. The
primary and secondary objectives are 1) to measure the white-light artificial
aurora morphology with high temporal resolution and 2) to test possible HF radio
propagation paths in the Arctic. Both experiment objectives align with formerly
active areas of research at HAARP prior to the suspension of operations.