* 1702085
* Dissertation Research:  Phylogenetic analysis of the Neotropical plant genus Clusia (Clusiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Lucinda McDade, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2018
* USD 17,301.00

Clusia is a tropical group of about 300 species of shrubs and trees in the
mangosteen family (Clusiaceae). Clusia plants have a number of notable
characteristics that make them important for study. In addition to being one of
the few trees and shrubs to grow on other plants (epiphytes), Clusia is the only
known tree group to have Crassulacean Acid Metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis in
which carbon (CO2) is absorbed during the night, when temperatures are lower and
water loss is reduced. It is also one of only two groups of flowering plants in
which flowers of some species produce floral resins instead of nectar as reward
for pollinators. This project seeks to use genome-wide DNA sequence data to
understand how species of Clusia are related to each other, and to estimate the
evolutionary history of CAM photosynthesis and floral resins in the group.
Results will enable the researchers to understand patterns of plant adaptation
to water stress, and provide new insights into the evolution of pollination
reward systems. Taken together, these results will permit a better understanding
of how plants have evolved and how they have adapted to different environments.
One graduate student and an undergraduate will be trained in molecular
systematic and anatomical methods. Data from the project will also be used to
enhance a summer research program at Rancho Santa Ana Botanical Garden that
provides research experiences and training for students from Principally
Undergraduate Institutions across the U.S. Results from the study will also be
broadly disseminated in popular science magazines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work focuses on reconstructing phylogenetic relationships in the Neotropical
plant genus Clusia (Clusiaceae) using phylogenomic data. The resulting phylogeny
will be used to: 1) test the monophyly of currently recognized sections and
revise the classification for the genus, 2) investigate the distribution of CAM
photosynthesis within the group and reconstruct the pattern of its evolution,
and 3) reconstruct the evolution of resin-producing flowers within the genus.
The resulting analyses will provide a better general understanding of plant
physiology and plant-pollinator interactions.