* 1702062
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evaluating Methods to Study the Phylogenetic Distribution of Genome Sizes in Carabid Beetles, including Next-Generation Sequencing of Old Museum Specimens
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* David Maddison, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,104.00

The goal of this project is to measure and investigate genome sizes in ground
beetles, a diverse and economically important group of insects, using a
combination of new and traditional techniques. Genome size is a measurement of
the amount of DNA found inside the nucleus of a single cell. A puzzling question
about genome size is why it varies so much in different organisms. The largest
animal genome is over 3,000 times bigger than the smallest. Understanding the
cause of these differences can provide important insights into the evolutionary
processes and history that shaped organisms, since differences in genome size
may be caused by organisms gaining or loosing genes or other parts of the
genome. Genome size is also important to consider when planning DNA sequencing
projects, as larger genomes require more resources than small ones. An important
barrier to understanding the patterns that cause genome size variation is how
few measurements there are. Currently, genome size estimates exist for only 0.4%
of animal species. This number is so small due to how difficult it is to get a
reliable estimate. Traditional methods rely on specially prepared cells from
living organisms. However, live specimens can be difficult or impossible to
obtain for species that are rare, endangered, or extinct. Fortunately, there are
new methods to estimate genome size using DNA sequencing that do not require
living tissue. This project will examine the reliability of DNA sequence-based
genome size estimates on both live beetles and old, preserved specimens from
museum collections. No previous experiments have specifically compared these
methods or tested their reliability in old specimens. This project will also
contribute additional data points for the broader study of genome sizes across
the tree of life, and will further the use of museum collections in the study of
the world's diversity.

Next generation sequencing (NGS) has given researchers a new set of tools for
estimating genome size. This project will investigate the viability of NGS
coverage-based methods for determining genome size in carabid beetles by
performing flow cytometry and shallow Illumina sequencing on ten species of
carabid beetle. It will also determine if genome size estimation by coverage
analysis can be reliably employed on preserved material from museum collections
by repeating shallow Illumina sequencing on old museum specimens of the same ten
species. A total of 36 genomic libraries will be prepared and sequenced across
four Illumina lanes. Coverage-based analyses will be performed on all resulting
sequences, and the resulting genome size estimates will then be compared with
those obtained by flow cytometry using a one-way ANOVA test to determine if
coverage-based estimation is a viable alternative for both fresh and museum
specimens. If shallow genome sequencing is successful in estimating genomes
sizes, it will allow for the study of material from the world's natural history
museums without the cost of extensive fieldwork to collect fresh material. This
could potentially transform the study of genome size by increasing the number of
species it is possible to analyze by orders of magnitude.