* 1702592
* Collaborative Research: Optimizing learning from chemistry simulations: Comparing attention allocation and learning outcomes for assignments with and without instructor screencasts
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Ryan Sweeder, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 94,695.00

Many college students struggle with learning chemistry, in part due to the
inherent difficulty of visualizing and developing mental models of molecular
level particle interactions that they cannot directly observe. To help students
connect these molecular level particle behaviors with what they can observe at
the macroscopic level, educators have developed computer-based simulations.
Simulations of chemical systems allow students to observe scientific models of
what happens at the molecular level when they change different variables. Such
simulations are increasingly being incorporated into high school and college
courses as they have been shown to positively impact students' conceptual
understanding of chemistry. However, the research also indicates that students
may misinterpret certain aspects of simulations and thus develop some incorrect
ideas. This is a particularly important consideration with the increased
popularity of online, blended, and flipped courses that use simulations to aid
student learning outside of the classroom. A possible way to address this issue
is to incorporate screencasts that consist of videos in which an instructor
demonstrates how to use the simulations, focusing students on key features of
the simulation environments and helping them interpret aspects of the
simulations. By comparing students' understanding of key chemistry concepts
before and after they complete such simulation-based assignments, as well as the
ways in which students use different online resources, the project team will
identify effective ways for students to use chemistry simulations outside of the
classroom. The instructional materials developed by the project team - including
guided assignments and screencasts to be used with chemistry simulations - will
also be made freely available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives of this Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE:EHR) Exploration
&amp; Design project are to (1) develop a set of simulation-based assignments
and associated screencasts using research-based design practices; (2) assess and
compare student attention allocation and learning gains from the online
resources via the different active learning methods (guided use of simulations
and instructor-led screencasts); and (3) disseminate the materials and methods
developed to chemistry instructors. To accomplish these goals, scaffolded
assignments will be developed, to be used with pre-existing chemistry
simulations, to focus students on attaining key learning goals common to many
general chemistry courses. These assignments will be used as the basis for
developing associated screencasts. An iterative design process will be used to
develop high quality, validated materials. The project team will then compare
student use of simulations with and without the instructor-led screencasts. In
both conditions, students will work independently outside of class time to
complete simulation-based assignments. In one condition (no screencast),
students will complete an assignment in which written instructions guide them in
manipulating the simulation. A second group of matched students will complete
the same assignment by watching a screencast and manipulating the simulation.
Eye tracking studies will be employed to better understand how students interact
with the simulations and screencasts, how students use the resources to address
questions in the assignments, and how students allocate their attention while
completing the assignments. Student learning will be assessed through analyses
of pre-/post-test gains; answers to open-ended questions; and near transfer
tasks that will involve drawing molecular-level representations, producing
graphs, or interpreting data. Research findings, and associated instructional
materials developed, are expected to inform chemistry instructors regarding how
to optimize student learning from simulations of molecular-level phenomena.