* 1702979
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Legacies of Vagrancy Law in Contemporary Homelessness Regulation.
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2019
* Matthew Marr, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 09/30/2019
* USD 11,940.00

NSF Proposal 1702979 - Doctoral Dissertation Research:

Title: The Legacies of Vagrancy Law in Contemporary Homelessness Regulation

PI: Matthew Marr Co-PI: Rayna Rusenko

Studies examining new initiatives in twenty-first century regulation of
homelessness tend to center on advanced Western contexts. They focus on either
the significance of contemporary neoliberal ideas or on policy histories. Over
the last decade, Japanese and Malaysian government agencies have enacted new
policing, shelter, and housing initiatives to achieve zero homelessness. This
project will investigate contemporary homelessness regulation in two capital
cities in the Asian region;namely, Tokyo, Japan, and Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. It
will examine how homelessness regulations are rooted in the historical
development of each nation's welfare and penal systems, thereby giving attention
to post/metropolitan and post/colonial contexts. The project will use a global
historical lens to inform interdisciplinary literature on neoliberal governance,
homelessness regulation, and legacies of imperial and colonial politico-legal
cultures. By analyzing key shifts in homelessness regulation across two distinct
developmental contexts in Asia, this investigation will advance understanding of
the influences of particular state forms and their respective penal and welfare
infrastructures with regard to homelessness management. In addition, the project
will identify the influences of cross-border networks in the adoption,
transformation, and exchange of globally-mobile ideas and practices relating to
homelessness regulation in the Asian region. Such investigation is critical for
understanding the distinct local forms of contemporary policy regimes, as well
as broader cross-border innovations and inter-relations, particularly in light
of shared global histories of vagrancy laws and related policy networks.

This project will illustrate how current trends in homelessness policy tap into
historically-established institutional arrangements and their ideational
underpinnings, thereby driving unique policy variations and individual street-
level experiences. This project includes the use of comparative historical and
ethnographic methods to examine shifts in homelessness regulation in two sites
from the late-nineteenth century to the present. The investigator will identify
key historical shifts in ideas and institutions underpinning contemporary
organization through archival research and interviews, and trace street-level
impacts of policy through archival ethnography and ethnographic fieldwork. This
project, by its focus on Asian cities of varied developmental statuses, seeks to
answer questions regarding historical continuities and breaks in global and
local trajectories of homelessness regulation.