* 1702385
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Junior Police Youth, Labeling, and Social Control in School
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Mai Thai, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 11,822.00

NSF Proposal 1702385&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Junior Police Youth, Labeling, and
Social Control in School&lt;br/&gt;Dina Okamoto (PI), Mai Thai (Co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Junior police academies are youth pipeline programs
that aim to diversify local law enforcement and target low-income communities
under the rationale that they provide structure and career opportunities for
youth. Their mission is to produce good citizens by promoting academics,
leadership, discipline, and community service. This project will explore the
role of junior police programs in schools and how they shape students'
experiences with adults and peers within the educational institution. While much
of the research on school-police partnerships focuses on punishment and
exclusionary discipline practices such as detentions, suspensions, expulsions,
and arrests, junior police programs are another avenue through which criminal
justice and educational institutions collaborate. Thus, the intellectual merit
of this study will expand knowledge on various forms of policing and how it
shapes the experiences of young people. In terms of broader impacts, findings
related to school practices, peer culture, and vocational programs will inform
policies and practices to improve the well-being of youth, particularly those in
marginalized communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how membership in
the junior police program shapes youth's experiences in school, this study will
use qualitative methods to compare the experiences of junior police students
with that of their non-member peers at an urban high school. Observations will
be conducted in various spaces such as classrooms, school events, and junior
police activities to examine themes related to educational resources, mentoring,
disciplinary practices, and peer networks. Interviews will be conducted with
actors across various positions in the institutional setting, such as teachers,
administrators, junior police students, and other students not in the program.
Questions for adults will address topics such as their experiences in their
professional role, interactions with students, and perceptions of school
activities. Questions for students will address topics such as their
interactions with authorities, resources they receive, relationships with peers,
and future aspirations. The goal of this research will be to capture the social
dynamics in the school organization and to understand the discourses related to
the junior police in the context of a community that regularly faces various
forms of criminal justice intervention. This research will thus theorize new
ways of understanding social control beyond existing punitive frameworks.