* 1702171
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Stress and Instability on the Resilience and Well-Being of Children with Autism
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Stefanie Mollborn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 11,917.00

This project will analyze how the type and timing of adverse childhood
experiences (ACEs) affect the well-being and resilience of children with autism.
This project will advance understanding of how the type and timing of adverse
childhood events affects children with autism and similar vulnerable populations
within the fields of sociology, disability studies, and public health, expand
current theory to include disability, and inform potential interventions to
reduce adverse events in families of children with autism and other vulnerable
populations. The broader impacts of this study include contributions to
individuals with autism and their families by promoting an increased presence of
the experiences of people with autism into current theory and creating knowledge
about how children with autism cope with adverse events.

Autism is a lifelong developmental disability estimated to affect 1 in 68 U.S.
children. Compared to their peers, this population experiences a variety of
health disparities, including decreased well-being, increased family stress, and
significantly more adverse childhood experiences (e.g., psychological, physical,
or sexual abuse, and/or household dysfunction). Remaining unknowns include: (1)
how these disparities may be connected (e.g., does family stress lead to more
adverse childhood experiences, which in turn leads to decreased well-being?);
(2) how autism itself, as well as the timing of the diagnostic process for
autism, may enhance these disparities; (3) how the combination of these
disparities may affect life course trajectories of individuals with autism; and
(4) how children with autism cope with family stress or adverse experiences.
This project will fill in these gaps in the literature by answering three
primary questions. Firstly, How is age of diagnosis associated with ACEs (e.g.,
do these events primarily occur prior to, during, or post diagnosis)? Secondly,
For children with autism, how are ACEs related to health, internalizing
behavior, externalizing behavior, and academic performance? Thirdly, Does an
expanded construction of resilience (including both internal and external
characteristics) mediate the relationship between ACEs and well-being for
children with autism? This study requires the collection of original data
through a survey instrument, which will be disseminated online to parents of
children with autism in five states (Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, Montana, and
Utah). Disability organizations in each of these states have agreed to
distribute the online survey link to potential participants through their
electronic listservs. A minimum of 300 parent responses will be collected to
provide a large enough sample size for the necessary quantitative analyses.