* 1702672
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Minority Population Experiences of Healthcare
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Emily Paine, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2018
* USD 11,996.00

Title: Minority Population Experiences of Healthcare&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will analyze the healthcare experiences and needs of racially diverse
sexual and gender identity minorities (SGMs) patients within two different
healthcare organizations to reveal factors that shape SGM decisions about
seeking or delaying access to healthcare. By doing so, this project will bridge
urgent gaps in our knowledge about how social forces influence SGM access to
healthcare, as well as contribute a theoretical model to help future scholars
understand how organizations impact healthcare use. Insight generated by this
project will address the important social problems of discrimination and
inequality within healthcare by helping to decrease barriers to care for
minority populations at high risk of underutilization and poor
health.&lt;br/&gt; Compared to heterosexuals, SGMs are in poorer health as
indicated by a wide variety of measures and at every stage of the lifecourse?yet
SGMs are significantly less likely to access healthcare. Although one primary
strategy for addressing SGMs' underutilization in the U.S. has been the creation
of SGM healthcare organizations, how different organizational contexts influence
SGM healthcare experiences and use has yet to be empirically examined. This
project uses interviews with patients and providers as well as ethnographic
observation at two healthcare organizations in New York City: one specialized
for SGMs and one designed for the general population. Questions driving the
project include: why do diverse SGMs delay seeking healthcare? How do they make
decisions about care? What do diverse SGMs understand to be their specific needs
within different health settings? And (how) do organizational factors and
contexts shape diverse SGM patients' experiences and healthcare decisions?
Gathering and analyzing three data sources: patient perspectives, provider
perspectives, and direct observation will allow for triangulation during
analysis, which will help ensure robust findings about how individual and
organizational factors come together to influence minority experiences of and
decisions about care.