* 1702014
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolutionary origin and genetics of color pattern diversity in Phyllobates poison frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Marcus Kronforst, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,956.00

This project will identify the genes responsible for color pattern variation
between different Poison-dart frogs. These frogs are well known for their
brightly colored patterns, which serve as warning signals to deter potential
predators. Within one small group of Poison-dart frogs (Phyllobates), vivid
bright yellow colorations have independently evolved multiple times from dark,
striped ancestors; in one species, different color morphs even occur within the
same population. The researchers will take advantage of new genomic technologies
and statistical analyses to identify the genes that differ between striped and
solid-colored frogs. Results will provide critical insights on the genetic
processes that underlie the independent evolution of color pattern variants in
this group of frogs. The research will also reveal important information on the
spread of beneficial genetic mutations within and across populations. In
addition, the project will provide research opportunities for undergraduate
students. Planned outreach includes public seminars and educational activities
for elementary and middle school children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To pinpoint the
genetic elements responsible for convergent evolution across Phyllobates
species, this project takes advantage of ontogenetic, interspecific, and
intraspecific variation in color pattern. First there is striking variation in
color pattern between two pairs of closely related Phyllobates lineages, and
within a population of Phyllobates aurotaenia from the upper San Juan River in
Colombia. The researchers will use exon enrichment and next-generation
sequencing to find loci that are highly differentiated between striped and
solid-colored lineages, and statistically associated with color pattern
variation within P. aurotaenia. Second, gene expression during coloration
development will be studied using RNAseq, in order to identify genes that are up
or down-regulated when changes in coloration occur throughout development. These
two approaches will yield a set of putative loci behind color pattern variation
in Phyllobates. The researchers will then use a combination of molecular
phylogenetics and coalescent simulations to infer the evolutionary history of
these loci, in order to shed light on the genetic mechanisms behind the
convergent evolution of bright yellow coloration in this group of frogs.