* 1702450
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Intersection of Race and Region
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Enkeshi Thom, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 7,173.00

Title: The Intersection of Race and Region

Popular perceptions of Appalachia depict a rural region populated by poor,
"backward," uneducated Whites. Despite a more than two-hundred-year Black
presence in Appalachia, the perceived racial homogeneity of the region and the
scholarly discourse that downplay racial difference create a story of Appalachia
focused on poor (White) problems that ignore race. Through a qualitative case
study of Knoxville, this dissertation seeks to disrupt popular and scholarly
conceptions of Appalachia by considering how scholars might research, recognize
and think about race in the region not simply through the experiences of Whites,
but through an examination of the lives of the sizable but almost invisible
population of Blacks. US Black identity research has overwhelmingly focused on
Great Migration destinations such as Philadelphia and, recently, Southern cities
like Atlanta. This research adds sociological nuance and expands the
understanding of Black regional identity by focusing on a region where Black
identity is shaped by neglect. The researcher will integrate and expand upon
Black identity research theoretically attached to regionalization and inter-
sectionality in Appalachia and that class, gender and generation compound these
distinctions. This research not only gives voice to a Black Appalachian
community but it also raises awareness of the issues that may affect Black
communities throughout Appalachia.

There has long been a substantial number of Blacks particularly in urban areas
in Southern Appalachia, such as Knoxville, Tennessee. Knoxville presents an
ideal city to conduct a case study of African American experiences and identity
in Appalachia given the number of African Americans who call Knoxville home and
the historical significance of the city for African Americans in the region.
Three primary questions drive this research. The first research question (what
are the dimensions of Black identity in Appalachia) is interested in everyday
Black life and experiences in Knoxville. The researcher will examine how Black
identities are constructed, maintained, and contested in particular spaces in
Knoxville. The second research question asks how other identities, such as
class, gender, and generation shape Blackness. This question is concerned with
the intersections of identity categories and how a person's experiences might
differ depending on the intersections of their identity. The third question asks
what are the historical, structural, racial and cultural practices that result
in Black invisibility? This question seeks to understand the structuring factors
that have organized Black lives in Knoxville historically, and how race and
racism have impacted blacks in the region generally. To answer these question
this research will employ qualitative and archival research methods. The
researcher will conduct approximately 50 semi-structured interviews with a
diverse cross-section of African Americans in Knoxville including men and women
of different socio-economic backgrounds, neighborhoods of residence and age
ranges. The researcher will use purposeful and snowball sampling to recruit
participants of the three geographic spaces that have historically been
associated with African Americans in Knoxville, East Knoxville, Mechanicsville
and Lonsdale, as well as from other areas. The researcher will also review
newspaper articles, major studies of Appalachia communities, and government
documents to examine how cultural, geographical, and social narratives of
Appalachia and Blacks in the region have been constructed historically.