* 1702102
* 2017 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Matt Clay, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 01/31/2018
* USD 27,606.00

This NSF award will provide partial support for speakers and participants of two
meetings in the Redbud Geometry/Topology Conference series. The first meeting
will take place at the University of Arkansas, in Fayetteville, Arkansas on
April 27-29, 2017. The fall meeting will be held at the University of Oklahoma
in Norman, Oklahoma in fall of 2017. A key objective of the Redbud Conference
series is to increase interaction and collaboration between geometers and
topologists in the EPSCoR states of Arkansas and Oklahoma. These meetings
continue the series of Redbud Conferences held twice per year beginning in Fall
2011 on a rotating basis at the University of Arkansas, Oklahoma State
University, and the University of Oklahoma. The mathematical focus of the spring
meeting in 2017 is geometric group theory and low dimensional topology. The
opening day of the spring meeting is a graduate student workshop featuring three
talks of an expository nature delivered by speakers from the conference. This
gives graduate students from the Arkansas-Oklahoma region the opportunity to
interact with the larger mathematical community. The fall meeting is intended to
showcase the work of graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and junior
faculty from the region.

The specific focus of each meetings is as follows. The spring meeting will
feature ten talks on geometric group theory and low dimensional topology. These
are areas of intense research that utilize the interaction between the dynamics
of group actions and the geometry of the spaces they act on to understand
algebraic structure. Specific topics to be included are the outer automorphism
group of a free group or a right-angled Artin group, the mapping class group of
a surface and hyperbolic geometry. The fall meeting will feature five talks
primarily by early-career mathematicians on a range of topics in topology and
geometric group theory, based around the research interests of faculty at the
three schools. The organizers will post notes and/or slides from the talks on
the conference website. The conference website is
comp.uark.edu/~mattclay/Redbud/