* 1702132
* 2017-2019 Northeast LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Program: University of Connecticut
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Kent Holsinger, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,071,484.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality&lt;br/&gt;degree programs in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM)disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention
strategies and experiences in support of groups&lt;br/&gt;historically under-
represented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American
Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for
postbaccalaureate&lt;br/&gt;studies in STEM programs leading to the STEM
doctoral degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Connecticut (UConn) is
the host site for the 2017-2019 Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program for the
Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (NELSAMP) under the
leadership of this institution. This is the third post-baccalaureate program at
the institution that supports a graduate student cohort of underrepresented
minority (URM) STEM Ph.D. students from LSAMP campuses across the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD Activity provides extensive training in specific
STEM disciplines as well as professional development and guidance that promote
peer mentoring and leadership in the scientific community. Students receive
rigorous academic and research training experiences that support completion of
the Ph.D. and the transition to a competitive career in academia and industry.
Over the duration of the project and beyond, the BD program at UConn serves to
increase the number and quality of students from underrepresented groups
completing STEM&lt;br/&gt;Ph.D. degrees and entering the STEM workforce.
Formative and summative evaluation will occur with the summative evaluation
including a comparison group to assess impact of the program interventions on
student outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term impact of the BD activity
is reflected in America's STEM workforce, both academia and in industrial
research and development. By nurturing future STEM leaders, the value added is
seen in the visibility of underrepresented minorities in&lt;br/&gt;science and
engineering, increasing representation and providing role models and motivation
for the next generation.