* 1702851
* Collaborative Research: The role of pCO2 in the astronomically-paced climatic cycles of the Miocene
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Pincelli Hull, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 357,287.00

Earth's geologic record is paced by cyclical variations in the geometry of our
planet's orbit around the sun, generally called Milankovitch cycles (named for
the Serbian mathematician who first predicted the orbital variations). Over the
last ~1 million years, these orbital variations caused global climatic
oscillations between cold Ice Ages, when large ice sheets covered much of North
America, and warmer Interglacial periods with climates similar to today's.
Measurements of air bubbles of ancient atmosphere trapped in Antarctic ice cores
has shown that these Ice Age cycles coincide with significant swings in
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels. This suggests that the CO2 greenhouse
effect plays a role climate change on orbital timescales. However, estimates of
atmospheric CO2 from ice cores cover only the last 800,000 years, leaving open
the question of whether atmospheric CO2 played a role in the Milankovitch
forcing of climate during earlier times in Earth history. This research aims to
fill this major knowledge gap by applying geochemical methods to reconstruct
ancient CO2 at unprecedented resolution during a time interval with well-
documented Milankovitch cycles ~14 million years ago, when global climate was
warmer, and the continents were in different positions compared to today. The
resulting high-resolution CO2 record will be coupled to a cutting-edge Earth
System model to test hypotheses regarding how Milankovitch cycles control
Earth's carbon cycle and climate. Together, new geochemical records and modeling
undertaken during this project promise to refine understanding of the role of
atmospheric CO2 during warm climates -- an issue of significant societal
importance in light of currently increasing atmospheric CO2. Results will be
communicated to the scientific community by publications in widely-read
scientific journals, and to grade school students through by the creation and
distribution of an illustrated book exploring the interaction between
atmospheric CO2 and climate in Earth history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project aims to generate the first high-resolution (1 sample
per ~5 thousand years) records of atmospheric pCO2 using the foraminiferal boron
isotope proxy system coupled with matching proxy records of global temperature
and carbon cycle dynamics in the mid-Miocene. This time interval was selected as
an example of a warmer-than modern Earth with slightly higher background pCO2,
smaller continental ice sheets, and well-defined Milankovitch cycles in climate
and carbon cycling. The primary, high-resolution boron isotope record will be
generated at Site 926 (Ceara Rise, Atlantic Ocean) with supplementary, lower
resolution data generated at Sites 608 (North Atlantic) and 806 (Western
Pacific). Boron isotope measurements will include the development and rigorous
analytical testing of a new microsublimation method for boron separation from
carbonate samples, which offers the prospect of smaller sample sizes and faster
throughput. At Site 926, boron isotopes will be complemented by measurements of
carbon isotopes (placing constraints on carbon cycling), oxygen isotopes (as a
measure of paleotemperature and ice volume) and trace metal concentration
including Mg/Ca (a paleotemperature proxy) and B/Ca (an emerging carbonate
chemistry proxy) on both planktic and benthic foraminifera. These combined
datasets will be used to reconstruct ocean temperatures and carbon cycle
dynamics, and by comparison to the boron isotope-based CO2 record, allow
estimates of temperature sensitivity to changing CO2 levels on orbital
timescales. The new records will be used to guide model simulations of
Milankovitch climate forcing in an Earth system model of intermediate complexity
(cGENIE), providing quantitative constraints on the mechanisms and feedbacks
responsible for the Milankovitch control of climate and carbon cycling.
Contrasting mid-Miocene and Pleistocene Milankovitch cycles will enable a direct
assessment of the role of large continental ice-sheets in modulating the
dynamics, and role, of orbitally-forced pCO2 variations.