* 1702957
* WiFiUS: RF Sensing in Internet of Things: When Deep Learning Meets CSI Tensor
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Shiwen Mao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 339,994.00

Internet of Things (IoT) refers to a worldwide network of interconnected
uniquely addressable things based on standard communication protocols. In recent
years, medical care and healthcare are recognized as one of the most attractive
application areas of the IoT, with applications ranging from patient and
equipment tracking in medical facilities to health monitoring. The goal of this
project is to investigate an IoT healthcare monitoring system, which is likely
to continue to grow in popularity as it utilizes IoT in various ways for
improving the quality of patient care. The outcomes from this project will
significantly improve the state-of-the-art of RF sensing in the IoT, and provide
a significant step toward enriched user experience at greatly reduced costs. The
educational plan includes developing and enhancing undergraduate and graduate-
level courses in the field. The simulation tool and testbed will provide
excellent opportunities for students to gain hands-on experience in the cutting-
edge technology. Outcomes from this project will be disseminated through
publications, presentations, and a project website. The PIs are fully committed
to increasing participation from under-represented groups in research, and will
continue to further such efforts via outreach, in particular, through
collaboration with Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project aims to gain a deep
understanding of RF sensing in healthcare IoT by exploiting advanced statistics
and learning techniques, and to develop effective algorithms to make healthcare
IoT more efficient. This research intends to significantly reduce the cost and
improve the accuracy of RF sensing in healthcare IoT with intelligent
exploration of CSI tensor and deep learning. The research work falls into the
following three interwoven thrusts. (i) RF Sensing in Indoor IoT Environments:
to address several fundamental challenges in RF sensing in indoor IoT
environments, including developing a stochastic model for CSI based
fingerprinting, incorporating nested arrays, and applying deep learning for
indoor device-free localization. (ii) RF Sensing for Healthcare: to develop
effective solutions for contact-free and long-term vital signs and human
behavior monitoring, using RF and inaudible sound signals. (iii) System
integration and evaluation: we will integrate the components from the first two
thrusts into a healthcare IoT environment to understand the interaction of these
components and evaluate the overall system performance.