* 1702243
* Bridge to the Doctorate: Greater Philadelphia Region Cohort XV Project - Drexel University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." The
vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce underrepresented
scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drexel University (DU) serves as host of a Bridge to
the Doctorate (BD) project within the Greater Philadelphia Region Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation. The DU BD activity employs a multifaceted
model that integrates research, education, and mentoring to address challenges
underrepresented students face in doctoral programs. As such this project seeks
to (1) recruit twelve students into Ph.D. degree programs at Drexel University;
(2) develop each student in their science or engineering discipline through
individual and group mentorship and graduate professional development
activities; (3) engage and retain these students through the completion of the
Ph.D., and (4) monitor all student progress through Ph.D. completion into the
professoriate and/or industry. The program components are executed via academic
coursework for scientific and technical competency that prepares BD students for
the doctoral degree qualifying and candidacy examinations; substantive cutting-
edge laboratory research experiences beginning in the first-year to expose
fellows to research that can form the basis for their doctoral dissertation;
professional development experiences such as workshops, seminars and/or
conferences to help students to develop the ancillary skills needed for personal
and professional success; facilitated interaction with faculty and peers to
fully integrate students into research groups; opportunities for students to
present their research nationally and/or internationally to promote their
engagement with the larger scientific and technical community; and opportunities
for student reflection, and the development of coping skills to contextualize
the pressures and challenges associated with graduate study.