* 1702060
* Collaborative Research: A New Inverse Theory for Joint Parameter and Boundary Conditions Estimation to Improve Characterization of Deep Geologic Formations and Leakage Monitoring
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Andrew Trautz, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2023
* USD 380,014.00

Eighty percent of U.S. energy demands are met by subsurface resources while deep
geologic formations are also used as waste repository such as in the proposed
actions of carbon storage. However, activities in deep zones have the potential
to impact potable water in overlying shallow aquifers that is subject to
contamination from leaking brine, hydraulic fracturing fluids, or gasses. Hence,
to manage extraction and storage operations from deep reservoirs and to minimize
the environmental impact on them, both an understanding of the processes that
contribute to potential leakage and the methods to monitor such leakage are
needed. This information helps to evaluate environmental risks and to assess
corrective actions. The methods that are currently available for such
understanding require extensive data collection from the subsurface which is
very costly for deep formations. This research aims to develop an innovative
method to integrate all available data from both shallow aquifers and often
limited data from deep geologic zones to improve the monitoring of adverse
environmental impacts. This new method, when validated in the laboratory, will
use more easily available data from the shallow aquifers, thus reducing the need
for costly drilling into deep formations. The new science that will be developed
will allow for safer extraction of energy from deep formations and provide more
secure subsurface storage of carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, in order to
mitigate global climate change that has potential human, ecological, and
environmental impacts. The training opportunities associated with the execution
of this research at two universities will contribute to scientific and technical
human capacity building and new workforce development that will address emerging
problems at the water-energy nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal is to
develop, and experimentally verify, a novel inverse theory that integrates
limited data from deep formations with more abundant or easily obtainable
shallow aquifer data for improved characterization of deep geologic zones as
well as for the monitoring of connected, overlying aquifers for potential
contamination. For data-poor subsurface systems, existing techniques that assume
boundary conditions (BC) can result in non-unique and uncertain parameter
estimates, leading to inaccurate models. Compared to the earlier techniques, the
proposed theory does not use forward simulations to assess model-data misfits.
Thus the knowledge of the difficult-to-determine site BC is not required.
Instead, it imposes fluid flow and/or solute mass continuities conditioned to
limited and noisy measurements. In this research, the theory will be further
developed and tested by (1) inverting pressure and flow observations for
hydraulic characterization of a deep formation, and (2) jointly inverting flow
and water quality data for both deep zone characterization and leakage
monitoring. This new theory, which is capable of simultaneous parameter and BC
estimation, has been successfully tested with synthetic numerical data.
Generation of accurate and comprehensive data for theory validation in the field
is however not feasible. Thus, an approach that uses data from intermediate-
scale laboratory testbeds is proposed. The experimental method allows for the
creation of different aquifer heterogeneities in the laboratory and the accurate
control of flow and transport initial and BC that emulate deep zone operations.
The theory will be first tested by comparing parameters estimated using
measurements made in a laboratory aquifer with accurately known parameters and
BC. As a second step, hydraulic and tracer measurements will be made in a two-
layered aquifer separated by a leaky aquitard. Data from both the shallow
unconfined layer and the deep confined layer (i.e., source of the disturbance)
will be jointly inverted to characterize the entire system and to identify
leakage pathways and rates from the deep layer. The inversion algorithms will be
validated by independent measurements from the same testbeds (i.e., fixed
packing), but under different BC and leakage scenarios. After this validation,
the theory will be demonstrated using synthetic data taken from a model
representing a deep formation with geologically relevant parameters and
conditions. The new method will aim to make characterization and monitoring more
accurate and efficient for data-poor environments, making this research
potentially transformational in both theory development and practical problem
solution.&lt;br/&gt;