* 1702050
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Are offspring polymorphic species hedging their bets?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Joshua Scholl, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,813.00

Stock markets are dynamic. Therefore, investors hedge their bets by investing in
multiple stocks simultaneously or dividing investments between stocks and bonds.
This reduces the chance of complete loss due to a stock crash but also reduces
potential gains when a stock dramatically rises. Similarly, organisms may have
evolved bet hedging strategies that allow them to cope with dynamic
environments. To date the evidence supporting the existence of biological bet-
hedging strategies stems primarily from theoretical work. To robustly assess
evidence for bet hedging in nature, this study takes advantage of a fascinating
reproductive strategy, termed offspring polymorphism, in which organisms produce
multiple different kinds of offspring simultaneously. This strategy can be
observed across many life forms including animals (e.g. frogs) and bacteria but
is especially common in plants. Investigators will test the hypothesis that
seed-polymorphism plants produce one seed or offspring type that is good at
surviving in dry years and one that is good at surviving in wet years. This
research will help scientists gain a better understanding of how organisms cope
with change. This will increase predictive power about organisms' responses to
environmental change and increasing desertification. Outreach to the public will
occur, and undergraduate students will be trained as part of this
work.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;Through the combination of an innovative field
experiment and stochastic population models parameterized with long-term field
and experimental data, the researchers will rigorously evaluate seed
polymorphism as a bet hedging strategy in Pectocarya heterocarpa, a winter,
desert annual species. P. heterocarpa is particularly suitable as it produces
three visually distinct and spatially separated seed types which are easy to
distinguish and count. These morphs will be sown in a natural field setting
under various rain reducing shelters to examine how seeds differ in their
germination timing, growth, and fitness under different rainfall regimes. The
ecologists will combine this data with multi-decadal temporal and spatial
demographic data on P. heterocarpa. They will then parameterize density-
dependent and independent models to rigorously evaluate offspring polymorphism
as a bet hedging strategy. Specifically, the density-independent model will
allow researchers to find optimal seed ratios under different environmental
regimes while the density-dependent models allow for an adaptive dynamics
approach to find evolutionary stable seed polymorphism strategies.