* 1702345
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Using Herbarium Data To  Describe Plant Niches In The High Peaks And High Plains Of The  Southern Rockies: Past, Present, And Future
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gregory Brown, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 301,352.00

The rugged and expansive terrain of the Southern Rocky Mountains (SoRo) yields
the most crucial resource for human existence in western North America: Water.
From upper reaches of the high peaks of Colorado, Wyoming, New Mexico, and
surrounding states, the headwaters of numerous major rivers of the West
originate and give rise to the highest outflow and freshwater runoff west of the
Mississippi River: The Platte, Arkansas, Rio Grande, Colorado, and Green Rivers
and portions of the Snake and Missouri Rivers. The cleanliness and reliability
of these water resources are in large part attributable to the plant life that
forms the basis for all SoRo ecosystems. Plant species from the high peaks and
adjacent high plains of the SoRo derive from different geographic origins,
evolutionary histories, and ecological affinities. They grow in varied habitats
and represent one of the most narrowly adapted floras in the world. This unique
and fragile flora is widely documented in natural history collections (i.e.,
herbaria), but specimens themselves and the scientific data that accompany them
remain poorly 'visible' owing to a lack of data in digitized format. The SoRo
Herbarium Consortium brings together 38 collaborating institutions
(universities, botanical gardens, national parks, Native American Nations) to
digitize more than 1.7 million botanical specimens from the study area. The
overarching goal of this project is to make these data available to a broad
community of users (scientists, educators, government officials, land managers,
the general public) via openly accessible, free data portals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southern Rocky Mountains (SoRo) support a diverse and
highly adapted flora of species with varied ecologies, ranging from alpine to
sagebrush plains to shortgrass prairies. The plant biota of the SoRo shares
important evolutionary and geological histories with the adjacent plains and
prairies, and together these ecosystems are among the most endangered landscapes
in North America. Human demands on these systems are escalating, and risk
factors such as fire, development, and environmental change are predicted to
grow. Thus, building digital resources to document plant niches in the SoRo is
met with a sense of urgency. The proposed work will address a major gap in
accessible information among North American natural history collections by
digitizing more than 1.7 million botanical collections from the SoRo.
Specifically, 38 collaborative institutions (universities, botanical gardens,
national parks, Native American Nations) will collaborate to generate these new
resources and make them available via data portals, including iDigBio
(www.idigbio.org). Additionally, new tools will be developed within the open
source Symbiota platform that will allow users to quickly search and compile
vetted, herbarium data records that can then be used for analysis in external
software applications such as niche modeling packages, or to update source data
repositories for subsequent in-house curation.