* 1702727
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-FRA: Improved Understanding of Feedbacks between Ecosystem Phenology and the Weather-Environment Nexus at Local-to-Continental Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Stephen Frolking, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2023
* USD 395,701.00

Phenology--the rhythm of the seasons--drives the progression of vegetation
through its annual cycles from dormancy to activity and back to dormancy.
Phenology is thus critical for many ecological processes. It also directly
influences ecosystem productivity and the production of many goods and ecosystem
services on which human society is reliant. Importantly, phenological rhythms
are highly sensitive to year-to-year variability in weather, but they can also
in turn influence weather itself. Thus, there are feedbacks between terrestrial
ecosystems and the atmosphere that are phenologically-controlled. This project
will use imagery from a network of digital cameras--the PhenoCam Network--to
track vegetation phenology at high spatial and temporal resolution across North
America, from tundra to the tropics. Together with sophisticated computer
simulations, this project will then investigate phenologically-controlled
ecosystem-atmosphere feedbacks across a climatic gradient from the Southwest,
through the Great Plains, and into the Northeastern US. The question this
project seeks to answer is, How much influence do these feedbacks have on how
ecosystems work, and at what spatial and temporal scales? This question is
important from the point of view of managing and sustaining healthy ecosystems.
Public participation in scientific research will be achieved through
collaboration with the Harvard Forest Long-Term Ecological Research Project's
Schoolyard program and the Summer Research Program. Through these efforts this
project will contribute to the education and training of traditionally under-
represented groups. This project additionally includes interdisciplinary
training and research opportunities for graduate-level students and three
postdoctoral research associates. Imagery and data from PhenoCam will continue
to be made publicly available, in near-real time, for research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strives to understand the role of
phenology in mediating ecosystem-atmosphere coupling and feedbacks at multiple
spatial and temporal scales. The researchers will apply a macrosystems approach
by integrating simulation models and observational data to investigate cross-
scale interactions and emergent phenomena. First, they will use data from the
PhenoCam network, a continental-scale phenological observatory, to develop
improved models of vegetation phenology. Then, they will conduct a hierarchy of
computer simulation experiments to investigate interactions between terrestrial
ecosystems and the atmosphere/climate system that are controlled by phenology.
Specifically, this project investigates: (1) How does phenology regulate the
strength of ecosystem-atmosphere coupling across a continental-scale ecoclimatic
gradient? (2) How does the seasonality of ecosystem-atmosphere coupling vary
within and across this gradient? and, (3) How do coupled ecosystem-atmosphere
dynamics influence ecosystem function at local to continental spatial scales and
seasonal to interannual timescales? The researchers will derive phenological
metrics by applying image analysis methods to time series of digital camera
images from PhenoCam. Formal model selection criteria will be used to test and
evaluate different model structures for the phenology of key plant functional
types. The researchers will tackle their key science questions using a
sophisticated earth system model with prescribed and prognostic phenology
scenarios. These analyses will be complemented by empirical, data-driven
analyses fusing PhenoCam data, satellite remote sensing, daily meteorological
data and gridded reanalysis products, and micrometeorological measurements of
ecosystem-atmosphere fluxes of CO2, water and energy from AmeriFlux sites.
Camera and flux data from NEON sites will be incorporated as these become
available. Broader impacts from this project will target formal and informal
science education, the development of scientific infrastructure, and training of
the next generation of interdisciplinary earth system scientists.