* 1702441
* Digitization PEN: Partnering the Penn State Herbarium (PAC) to Contextualize the Mid-Atlantic Megalopolis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Robert Brooks, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 143,567.00

This project will generate and make publicly available digital images of 64,000
of plant specimens that are present in the Pennsylvania State University
Herbarium (PAC). The project partners with the Mid-Atlantic Megalopolis (MAM)
TCN, which is focused on generating and making available digital images of
herbarium specimens from the urban corridor of the Mid-Atlantic states. The PAC
collection spans over 100 years, from the early 1800s to the present, largely
representing the flora of forested and agricultural landscapes west of the
Susquehanna River and thus, can serve as a contextual counterpoint to plant
assemblages in the MAM urban corridor. Its richness, both in time and space,
will present a more complete picture of plant communities within the Mid-
Atlantic Region and will contribute to the regional knowledge base. These
records will, in turn, contribute to active research initiatives in biology,
horticulture and environmental management at Penn State and within the larger
regional botanical community. This project will fill critical gaps in knowledge
of plant communities in urban environments of the Mid-Atlantic Region by
providing key information on plant diversity in non-urban landscapes. It also
serves to train the next generation of botanists through experiential learning
in state-of-the-art digitization and databasing techniques, make important
components of the collection accessible to a broad array of researchers within
the region and beyond, and engage both students and faculty as well as the local
community in herbarium programs and activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to generate and distribute, through partnering with the ongoing
Mid-Atlantic Megalopolis TCN, high-resolution digital images of the collection
of vascular plant specimens at the PAC Herbarium. The project will perform high
resolution photographic imaging, transcription, georeferencing, and web
publishing of approximately 64,000 vascular plant herbarium specimens of
Pennsylvania, filling an important gap in digital data that is currently lacking
from online databases. Detailed information on plant communities across
different landscapes, which will be enriched by the contributions from the PAC
collection, will inform research on the factors that determine plant
establishment, sustainability and invasibility in urban environments
characterized by the MAM urban corridor. This project will also contribute to
the wealth of vascular plant data currently available to botanists across the
country and abroad through the iDigBio and UrBioNet portals. We will recruit and
train undergraduate students and local volunteers in digitization protocols,
transcription of herbarium labels, and georeferencing through a series of
Digithons. PAC staff and interns will also participate in the mini urban
research symposium hosted by the MAM TCN and held at Rutgers University. Interns
will be encouraged to attend the mini symposium to interact with scientists in
the field of urban research and gain valuable experience in research protocols.
All of these efforts will also contribute to shared discovery of regional floras
and the forging of alliances among herbaria within the Mid-Atlantic Region.