* 1702955
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Anger, Self, and Society Following Brain Injury
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Allan Horwitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2019
* USD 9,561.00

The project will investigate the effects of brain injury on social
relationships, role performances, and identity. Recent developments in
neuroscience have improved detection of brain injuries and drawn public and
scholarly attention to the extent of brain injury in the United States. The
millions of people affected include veterans coping with the invisible
disability of blast injury, women victimized by domestic violence, and athletes
and children injured on playing fields. To improve care for injured people and
their families, a better understanding of the experience of brain injury is
needed. In its focus on the profoundly disruptive psychosocial aftermath of
brain injury, the project offers a window into this experience. The project also
offers a new angle on the debates over what it means to be human in a time when
neurology dominates the human sciences: Have we come to see our personhood as
fully dependent on our brains, and if not, on what do we found our identity and
our claim to the rights of a person? Has the dominance of neuroscience limited
or expanded our view of ourselves as humans, and in what
ways?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enter these debates, the project focuses on anger,
a common and disruptive symptom of brain injury that challenges beliefs about
normalcy, responsibility, and identity, and repeatedly drives injured people and
their families to reassess their understanding of what it means to be a person.
Through qualitative methods-including discursive analysis of the ways in which
injured people and their families conceptualize these anger outbursts in
published writings, in artwork, and in interviews-the project distinguishes the
diverse manifestations and consequences of post-injury anger, identifies the
strategies individuals and families use to manage it, and investigates how
people think about the relationships between brain, mind, self, and society in
the neuroscientific era. Understanding how people talk and think about post-
injury anger can lead to better interventions into disrupted family systems and
better ways of securing adherence to anger-management protocols, which can lead
to better family relationships, a lighter burden on caregivers, and better
adjustment for those who suffer from the effects of brain injury. More
generally, an exposition of the ways in which we think about our brains and our
personhood can inform debates about the rights of the neurologically disabled.
Theoretically, the project will contribute to the sociology of culture and
identity, to the sociology of health and disability, to the sociology of
emotions through its focus on anger?perhaps the least studied emotion?and to the
sociology of science and technology through attention to how people interpret
the relevance of images of their own brains.