* 1702920
* Inter-Hemispheric Climate Teleconnections in response to Massive Iceberg Discharge in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 04/30/2022
* USD 460,716.00

Changes in the climate of one part of the world can often be associated with
changes in another part of the world. For example, on time scales of hundreds of
years, coarse scale proxies indicate that the temperature of the North Atlantic
region of the globe may change while the temperature of the South Atlantic
region changes with the opposite sign. Models of this "bipolar seesaw" invoke
the long-distance transmission (teleconnection) of information through the
atmosphere or the ocean. The proposed work will use ice core records from
Greenland and Antarctica to investigate the relative roles of oceanic and
atmospheric teleconnections in coupling both hemispheres during so-called
"Heinrich events" - massive discharges of icebergs into the North Atlantic that
happed repeatedly during the last ice age. The work will help climate scientists
understand dynamical changes that occur on times scales that are much longer
than observational records from weather stations. The project will also
contribute to development of the STEM workforce. It will provide support for an
early-career scientist during the formative years of his career. It will provide
support for one or more undergraduate laboratory technicians and entrain
undergraduates, supported through other sources, into the research. It will
include STEM outreach to local middle school students and a teacher training
program. It will result in a series of Wikipedia entries concerning
paleoclimate. As an ancillary benefit, it will improve the chronology of the
Greenland ice core to be studied. This will allow greater synchronization of
paleoclimate records between the two poles and facilitate progress in the study
of past climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will generate high-
resolution, high-precision records of Greenland (GISP2) ice core methane,
15N/14N ratio of molecular nitrogen, and air content for the period of 14-51 ka
before present, to investigate a number of important paleoclimatic questions
with a special focus on Heinrich stadials. The proposed work is organized under
four overarching goals: (1) to detect the impact of Heinrich events on Greenland
climate, and use the timing of these events relative to observed rapid Antarctic
warming to investigate whether the mode of interhemispheric climate coupling
during these events is via an atmospheric or an oceanic teleconnection; (2) to
achieve interpolar methane synchronization of the GISP2 and WAIS Divide ice
cores at unprecedented centennial-scale resolution, with applications in
studying interhemispheric climate teleconnections and ice core dating.; (3) to
provide the most accurate Greenland temperature reconstruction to date by
combining nitrogen isotope data with independent delta-age estimates derived
from the methane synchronization; and (4) to improve understanding of air
content as a proxy for ice sheet elevation, and investigate origin of
millennial-scale air content variations during Dansgaard-Oeschger events not
previously described in the literature. This project exploits the unique
scientific possibilities arising from the recent centimeter-scale WAIS Divide
methane record to enhance the interpretation of Greenland ice cores and inter-
polar climate connectivity