* 1702406
* Bridge to the Doctorate: Alabama LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Viola Acoff, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. This
project serves the national interest by developing strategies for attracting,
retaining, educating, and graduating underrepresented graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alabama LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at The
University of Alabama is designed to accomplish the specific goals and
priorities of the Bridge to the Doctorate Program. The objectives are to provide
underrepresented minority students with the necessary academic and research
skills that will enable them to successfully earn STEM doctoral degrees, to
increase the number of underrepresented minority students who successfully
complete STEM doctoral programs, and to prepare BD participants to apply for the
NSF's Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) and similar competitive
fellowships. BD participants will be provided with extensive training and
professional development activities coupled with mentoring and networking to
prepare them to persist in their graduate program and to enable them to
successfully earn their STEM doctoral degree. The evaluation plan will assess
the success of the Alabama LSAMP BD in meeting the objectives. The plan includes
both formative (process) and summative (outcomes) components. The formative
evaluation will track the activities for the BD program. The summative
evaluation will track the success of the program in meeting its overarching
goals for each fellowship recipient. To enhance the rigor of the evaluation,
institutional data regarding the recruitment, fellowship awards, and retention
of underrepresented groups in UA STEM doctoral programs, but who are not part of
the BD program, will be examined for comparison.