* 1702373
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   The Use Of Material Exchange In Long Distance Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Shawn Lambert, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 23,493.00

Shawn Lambert, of the University of Oklahoma, examines prehistoric Native
American Caddo pottery at mound centers in the Arkansas River Basin to
investigate the ritual mode of production and distribution. The goal is to
understand early social interactions between two diverse areas of the Caddo
region. Archaeology is well positioned to research the relationships between
emerging social complexity in small communities and their capacity to develop
long-distance exchange networks that can persist for hundreds of years. In much
of the developing world today small communities are knit into larger regional
entities by exchange of goods which serve to forge social relations. Thus
understanding underlying principles of linkage and how they are reflected in
physical objects provides a valuable tool for discerning social organization.
Recent archaeological studies have emphasized that communities with an emerging
organizational complexity were engaged in large-scale production and
distribution of highly valued pottery. The interaction fostered by communities
who produced and distributed them created new social networks and long-term
relationships, and influenced the historical trajectories of an entire region.
From A.D. 800 - 1150, the inhabitants of the Arkansas River Basin built earthen
mound centers that became important places on the Caddo landscape for ritual and
mortuary activities. Formative Caddo pottery that had powerful symbolic meanings
was brought to these mound centers and used strictly for mortuary purposes.
However, their southern Caddo neighbors produced them in larger numbers and were
used for a variety of domestic and ceremonial purposes. This suggests an
extensive history of centralized production and long distance distribution of
some of the most distinctive pottery known in North America. This study will
have major implications for how we understand the origins and spread of pottery
in prehistoric communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is designed to
identify the geographic locales and intensity of Formative Caddo pottery
production and distribution and whether or not it led to meet the demands for
long-distance exchange and mortuary use at Arkansas Basin mound centers. To
better understand the ritual and social importance of the production and
distribution of this pottery, this project employs two types of analysis. First,
Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) will be conducted at the
University of Missouri Research Reactor laboratory (MURR) to characterize the
chemical makeup of Formative Caddo pottery in the Arkansas River Basin. INAA
will also be used on locally made ceramics from the Arkansas River Basin to
create clay reference groups. Comparing these results with previously generated
INAA data of the southern Caddo region will allow the researchers to determine
the geographic origins of pottery recovered at Arkansas Basin ceremonial sites.
Second, in order to turn this project into a historical narrative, it is
necessary to have better chronological sensitivity through AMS dating
techniques. Annual plants and charcoal samples will be sent to the University of
Arizona AMS Laboratory. These samples will be chosen when their contexts are
directly associated with the pottery that are used for INAA in order to explore
the direct relationships of these communities for historical continuity or
change within the Formative Caddo period.