* 1702606
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nation-Making and the Politics of Difference
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 11,996.00

This project analyses the formation of the British nation state within the
context of racial politics. While current scholarship views this history as a
struggle for rights, British colonial subjects were being excluded from holding
these rights. The formation of civil, political and social rights within Britain
took place at a time when British settlers built a slave-empire in the
Caribbean, implemented forced labor regimes across four continents, and
controlled immigration. The purpose is to understand the politics of racial
exclusion. The study seeks to find the historical roots of the nation state's
hostility towards immigrants and refugees. Analyzing the legacies of empire
involved in the construction of the British nation state aims to shine a light
on the deep-seated racial politics linking Europe and its former colonial
others.

Even though historical sociology has long studied the formation of the modern
nation state, existing explanatory mechanisms are largely endogenous to Europe
and a spatial break between "the nation" and "the empire" has seeped into
sociological analytical frameworks. The project addresses this analytical
shortcoming and examines the making of modern Britain in interaction with the
colonial British West Indies. It asks: How did the British nation state form
amidst a context of colonial empire? Specifically, research focuses on three
historical moments in metropolitan and colonial British politics: The formation
of civil rights amidst settler rights claims and slavery abolition; the
formation of working class political rights amidst indentured labor regimes in
the empire; and the formation of social rights during a time of colonial
immigration. The study draws on government archival documents, colonial office
communications and newspapers, and it has two objectives: First, it seeks to
explain how and why the British metropolitan body politic came to be defined
against colonial populations and created a citizenry that was imagined as white,
normalizing the color line. Second, following the consolidation of the nation
state, it aims to show how immigrating colonial subjects challenged the nation-
building project and how a struggle over difference came to threaten the
isomorphism between people, race and nation.