* 1702513
* Bridge To the Doctorate: Mississippi-LSAMP, Cohort 14
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Glake Hill, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD projects implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." For the
U.S. to remain competitive globally, it must provide exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jackson State University is committed to
increasing the diversity of a highly educated STEM workforce. Through this
project, JSU will provide students with challenging research and academic
experiences to develop academic and collaboration skills. In addition, the
project will improve professional, personal, and networking skills through
conference attendance, peer group meetings and discussions, research
presentations, and exposure to new and challenging environments through national
and international internships. The project will contribute to the national need
of increasing the number of highly qualified STEM doctoral graduates who will
serve as researchers and trainers of future STEM students particularly in the
minority-serving institutions, while enhancing its capacity to provide such
benefits to students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project utilizes a cohort
approach for recruiting qualified students who intend to complete their master's
program and then transition to a doctoral program at a research intensive
institution. The transition of the participating students to doctoral programs
is facilitated through well organized activities, such as strong project
orientation, research mentorship, weekly participation in cohort meetings that
focus on self-improvement through sharing with peers, exposure to role models
through lecture series, and attending national and international research
internships and conferences to facilitate the development of their professional
networks.