* 1702829
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Roots of Implicit Racial Bias
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Sandra Smith, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This project will explore how contact with diverse populations, and feelings of
threat by such populations, influence implicit racial bias (IRB) against African
Americans. IRB is an unconscious preference for one racial group over another.
It influences behavior, even among people who are not aware of holding any such
preference. IRB has been shown to negatively impact interactions between
teachers and students, doctors and patients, and police officers and members of
the public. Yet, one in five White Americans lacks IRB against African
Americans. These individuals are relatively unlikely to contribute to harmful
outcomes when they behave spontaneously. In past research, psychologists have
identified individual level determinants for IRB (for example, personality and
cognitive mechanisms). Scholars of psychology have also identified social
factors that influence IRB (for example, age, level of education, and region of
esidence). Yet, they have rarely, if at all, explored social factors in depth.
Even though psychologists have indicated that IRB is at least partially socially
determined, sociologists have generally stopped short of studying this kind of
bias. For their part, sociologists have researched the determinants of explicit
(that is, conscious and expressed) bias. They have identified a number of causes
for such bias, including lack of contact with African Americans, and feelings of
threat (either direct or symbolic) vis-Ã -vis Black populations. While this
research offers clear insight into the determinants of explicit bias, it does
not identify the determinants of implicit bias as such. Uncovering the social
mechanisms that lead some to develop implicit racial bias, while others do not,
could produce knowledge that ultimately helps to reduce the levels of this bias
across the American public. Such a change would significantly improve the life
chances of African Americans throughout the United States.

This research will fill gaps left by the existing psychology literature (which
has often left the social determinants of IRB unexplored) and sociology
literature (which has focused only on the social determinants of explicit bias).
Specifically, the project will explore how contact with diverse others (by race,
socioeconomic status, and religion) and experiences of threat by such others
influence anti-African American IRB among White Americans. Further bridging the
psychology and sociology literatures on racial attitudes, the researchers will
advance our currently cursory understanding of how implicit bias relates to
contemporary forms of racism theorized that sociologists have theorized
("symbolic," "laissez-faire," and "colorblind" racism). The study will use an
original dataset of Implicit Association Test scores, in depth interviews, and a
survey to further current knowledge about the social determinants of implicit
racial bias. First, 375 diverse White Americans will take the Race Implicit
Association Test (the most common measure of IRB). Then, 30 respondents who hold
anti-Black IRB and 30 who lack it will complete in depth interviews with race
and gender matched interviewers. Finally, 800 new respondents will respond to
the IAT and a survey designed to test hypotheses from the first two phases of
research.