* 1702360
* Digitization PEN:  Incorporation of a Massive New World Invertebrate Collection at the University of Texas at El Paso
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Eli Greenbaum, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 166,288.00

The University of Texas at El Paso Biodiversity Collections (UTEP-BC) currently
contains tens of thousands of invaluable natural history specimens and
associated tissues for DNA studies, including 355,000 invertebrate specimens
from every state in the US and nearly every country in the continental western
hemisphere. Although these collections have a global purview, they are mainly
focused on the Chihuahuan Desert Ecoregion of the southwestern US and northern
Mexico, which is the primary focus of the SCAN (Symbiota Collections of
Arthropods Network) Thematic Collections Network (TCN). This project will
provide training for over 20 undergraduate students, and one graduate student.
These students will participate in a research experience activity to visit the
UTEP Indio Mountains Research Station to follow and understand the process of
collection data capture from field to collection to public accessibility through
SCAN, by observing ants and other ground-dwelling arthropods in the field,
uploading photos to iNaturalist (with research-grade identifications), and by
collecting specimens and associated data. These students and another cadre of
UTEP art students will also collaborate on a public museum exhibit about Ants of
the New World. The majority of the exhibits will feature highly accurate 3D
printer models (about 30 cm long) of actual ant specimens from the collections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the UTEP-BC aims to join the SCAN project
via Northern Arizona University. The primary goal of SCAN is to form a digital
and virtual network of disparate collections in the southwestern US, which can
be captured by the iDigBio infrastructure for large-scale biodiversity science
analyses. The SCAN network has prioritized five arthropod groups: ants
(Formicidae), ground beetles (Carabidae), grasshoppers (Acrididae), darkling
beetles (Tenebrionidae), and spiders (Araneae). The UTEP-BC has substantial
holdings of these arthropods, and as digitized records for these specimens are
migrated to Arctos (the online database in use at UTEP), these data can be
easily captured by into the SCAN network and shared with iDigBio
(www.iDigBio.org). A primary goal of this project is to provide georeferenced
coordinate data (via GEOLocate and other resources) and other quality-control
corrections for 25,725 collection events (representing ca. 232,000 specimens)
that predate modern GPS technology (before 2000) for the five focal arthropod
groups in the UTEP-BC collections. Overall, this will increase the total number
of recently catalogued specimens by SCAN from 253,717 to 485,717, an increase of
90%. The project includes extensive training of students, a population-genetics
project that will utilize ant specimens from the UTEP-BC, and a major public
museum exhibit about Ants of the New World.