* 1702495
* Bridge to the Doctorate: OK-LSAMP Cohort 9 - Building Sustained Communities to Diversify the Graduate STEM Workforce and Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sherri Irvin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,074,999.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2014-2018
Strategic Plan, namely to "integrate education and research to support
development of a diverse STEM workforce with cutting-edge capabilities." The
University of Oklahoma, a member institution of the Oklahoma LSAMP alliance (OK-
AMP), proposes an integrated model of social supports and community networks to
support the graduate education for 12 graduate students from underrepresented
groups as Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Fellows for two
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridge to the Doctorate: OK-LSAMP will integrate
Social Cognitive Career Theory and Social Capital Theory into a research-based
mentoring program for optimizing academic, personal, and professional
development of 12 BD Fellows. The mentoring program focuses on helping Fellows
develop multi-layered communities of support. The project seeks to
institutionalize a culture that enhances the personal and professional
development and improve retention to PhD for all STEM graduate students.