* 1702594
* Quantal Heating in Electron Systems with Discrete Spectra
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Javad Shabani, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Conversion of electrical energy into heat, so
called Joule heating, is one of the major physical processes affecting the
modern economy. Due to Joule heating the overall electrical energy losses
between power plants and consumers is in the range between 8 and 15%. A
reduction of such enormous losses would be highly beneficial for society.
Recently the principal investigator team has discovered that quantum properties
of matter substantially affect Joule heating, that leads to a strong reduction
of the energy losses. One of the main goals of this project is to reveal the
mechanisms of the electrical energy dissipation in quantum electrical
conductors. The proposed study of the temporal evolution of Joule heating may
help realize this goal. The research results are of paramount importance for the
design of novel energy-lossless electrical conductors utilizing the quantum
properties of matter. The research is accomplished via direct participation of
students of the City College of New York, which is a federally recognized
minority serving institution. The activity has great impact on these students,
providing training and education in advanced areas of quantum physics and
material science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Joule
heating is a remarkable physical phenomenon, which transforms electric energy
into heat. Recently it was shown that the quantum properties of matter
significantly affect this heating, giving rise to a thermal stratification
(quantization) of the electron distribution in the energy space. This effect,
called quantal heating, does not exist in classical electron systems. In
contrast to classical Joule heating, quantal heating leads to outstanding
nonlinear transport properties of highly mobile 2D electrons, driving them into
exotic nonlinear states in which voltage does not depend on current and vice
versa. This project is the original study of the dynamics of quantal heating and
the exotic nonlinear states in highly mobile 2D electron systems placed in
quantizing magnetic fields. The research includes investigations of fundamental
mechanisms of the nonlinear response: spectral diffusion, spatial electron
redistribution and inelastic electron relaxation in different regimes including
the dc-driven exotic nonlinear states of 2D electrons and Quantum Hall Effect.
Investigations of nonlinear electron transport at half-integer filling factors
are focused on the search for quantal heating and nonlinear states of composite
fermions in response to dc bias. The project reveals the important role of
quantum effects in the transfer of electric energy into heat. The research is
accomplished via direct participation of students of the City College of New
York, which is a federally recognized minority serving institution. The activity
has great impact on these students, providing training and education in advanced
areas of quantum physics and material science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.