* 1702488
* A Laboratory Study to Investigate Inorganic and Organic Sulfate Formation in Multiphase Processes Involving Mineral Dust and Other Metal-Containing Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Vicki Grassian, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 482,391.00

This project focuses on laboratory studies to better understand particulate
sulfate formation from sulfur dioxide oxidation in the atmosphere. A major focus
of the proposed studies will be to quantify rates and extent of sulfate
formation in multiphase pathways involving mineral dust and other metal-
containing aerosols as a function of pH, temperature and
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms for sulfate formation that will be
investigated in a series of laboratory studies that include the: (1) catalytic
effects of transition metal ions present in mineral and anthropogenic metal-
containing dusts; (2) enhanced sulfate formation in the presence of photoactive
semiconductor oxides; and (3) role of organic compounds in mineral mediated
sulfate processes. In addition, new methods to investigate the chemistry within
individual cloud droplets will be developed, including an optical tweezer with
cavity enhanced Raman spectroscopy to investigate sulfur oxidation chemistry
within micron sized single droplets containing a dust inclusion. The experiments
will be done in the presence and absence of atmospherically important organic
species that can react to yield organosulfates. This project will also assess
the importance of surface reactivity versus bulk reactivity, important for
modeling cloud processes.