* 1702995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   The Transition to College Experience of Low-Income Students
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Mary Waters, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2018
* USD 11,981.00

This study examines the experiences of low-income Americans who enroll in
college, identifying reasons so many of them drop out. Most low-income Americans
now enroll in college, but only 11% earn a bachelor's degree within six years.
The project documents the many challenges low-income college students face and
observes how they deal with these challenges. This research will provide new
insights for sociology on why the American Dream can be so elusive. It will also
identify ways that high schools, colleges, and federally funded financial aid
programs can better support low-income students.

The researcher is spending two years with a small group of students from New
Orleans, following them through their senior year of high school and their
freshman year of college. As an ethnography of attempted upward mobility focused
on the period of the life course when upwardly mobile trajectories are most
often derailed, this study will document the most proximate causes of class
reproduction for low-income Americans. The study asks two questions: First, what
challenges do low-income students face during the transition to college, both in
school and out of school, that affect their academic progress? Second, how do
students cope with these challenges and make sense of them? Answers to these
questions will have important implications for the sociological study of
poverty, higher education, and class reproduction. Previous ethnographic work on
poverty in America focuses primarily on how low-income people survive poverty
and make meaning within it, so this new focus on the experience of trying to
escape poverty could shed light on why so few succeed. Moreover, qualitative
sociology research to date on the experiences of low-income college students has
focused almost exclusively on the small portion of these students who attend
selective residential colleges. By studying the experiences of students who live
at home while attending community colleges and lower-tier public four-year
colleges, this study will provide a needed glimpse of the contexts in which
upward mobility most often falters.