* 1702506
* MSB-ECA: A macrosystems science training program: developing undergraduates' simulation modeling, distributed computing, and collaborative skills
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,992.00

Ecologists are increasingly using computer models, involving extensive
observations obtained through environmental sensor networks, to study lakes and
forests and predict future change. Conducting this modeling, as well as
understanding the model results, requires skills in data analysis, quantitative
reasoning, and computing. However, modeling and computational skills are rarely
taught in undergraduate classrooms, representing a major gap in training
students to tackle complex environmental challenges. This project will develop a
training program that teaches thousands of students across the U.S. the
foundations of macrosystems ecology through simulation modeling. Through the
program, instructors and their students will learn how to quickly and
efficiently run the models by using new resources emerging from computer
science. Thus, students will simultaneously learn the core concepts of
macrosystems science and develop the skills needed to conduct the next
generation of environmental research. These concepts and skills will be embedded
within teaching modules centered on the frontier of macrosystems ecology,
enabling undergraduate students to contribute to high-level macrosystems
research. Engaging undergraduate students in hands-on modeling activities with
real-world applications translates into a workforce with increased data science,
systems thinking, and quantitative skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will create a training program (MacroSystems EDDIE: Environmental Data-Driven
Inquiry &amp; Exploration) that connects undergraduate students with new
computing tools to teach them the foundations of macrosystems science using
simulation modeling. These tools will be embedded in stand-alone teaching
modules that will be widely applicable to a suite of disciplines and
undergraduate student experience levels. The proposed modules represent the
first formalized macrosystems science curriculum for undergraduates, which will
be rigorously assessed, revised, and disseminated broadly for maximum impact
through a partnership with the Science Education Research Center. The modules
will be designed around areas of active research inquiry e.g., interacting local
and regional effects on lake temperatures, carbon cycling, the incidence of
algal blooms, continental-scale water policy and students will be encouraged to
develop novel questions at the frontier of macrosystems science that they will
answer using simulation models. As part of the training program, the students
will share their results with Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON)
scientific working groups to advance ongoing macrosystems research. The proposed
program represents an innovative approach for teaching macrosystems biology to
undergraduates and has the potential to advance undergraduate STEM education
across the U.S. A minimum of 750 students will participate in the MacroSystems
EDDIE modules during this project, with the potential for several thousands more
through dissemination by Science Education Research Center. student
participation in the Macrosystems EDDIE modules will generate scientific
discoveries that will advance our understanding of macrosystems bio