* 1702848
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Testing the Tropical Storm and Tropical Cyclone Masking Hypotheses: Advancing Speleothem Reconstruction of Paleotempestology and Paleohydrology
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Martin Medina-Elizalde, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2021
* USD 144,821.00

This project aims to use speleothems from caves on the Yucatan Peninsula to
reconstruct quantitative precipitation and tropical cyclone (TC) records
affecting the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico regions spanning hundreds of
thousands of years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of such reconstructions
depends on understanding the relationship between local precipitation amount and
precipitation delta 18-Oxygen isotope values (i.e. the amount effect) and how
this relationship is preserved in stalagmite deposits. TC precipitation can
shift the amount effect and it has been hypothesized that TC rain may therefore
bias quantitative stalagmite delta 18-Oxygen isotope precipitation records (i.e.
the TC masking hypothesis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies based on
stalagmite delta 18-Oxygen isotope precipitation records, however, suggest that
TC variability was linked to the collapse of the ancient Maya civilization
(i.e., the tropical storm hypothesis). Available stalagmite delta 18-Oxygen
isotope precipitation records to test this hypothesis have not yet been
replicated and their precipitation estimates may reflect TC masking.
Replication, furthermore, may be hindered by chronological uncertainty, the lack
of equilibrium stalagmite delta 18-Oxygen isotope values and regional climate
variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers therefore will: (i) apply a
promising approach for replication of available stalagmite delta 18-Oxygen
isotope based precipitation records during selected intervals spanning the last
2000 years; (ii) examine quantitatively the TC masking influence on the amount
effect and on stalagmite precipitation records; and (iii) test the tropical
storm hypothesis by applying an ultrahigh resolution sampling approach to detect
the particular isotopic signature from individual TCs in three known stalagmites
(i.e., CH-1, Chaac, Itzamna).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts
include improved understanding of tropical cyclone (TC)-climate relationships
under different climate states and over long timescales. Such understanding is
critical for accurate projections and TC risk assessment and mitigation in a
changing climate. This project supports a female lead investigator at an
undergraduate liberal arts college. It will provide significant research
experience for several undergraduates and the researchers have a strong history
of supporting women and underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the lead researchers is an early-career Hispanic
faculty member and this project would support the work of this researcher and
two female Hispanic PhD students. This work would potentially help further
develop methods for speleothem-based paleotempestology and would highlight the
need to consider TC masking in other tropical speleothem records. Finally, this
work will be of interest to the archaeology research community as it can help
address the role of TCs in societal changes in Latin America.