* 1702561
* Collaborative Research: Spectroscopy of Phonon Scattering Cross-Sections in Nanomaterials from Time-Resolved Surface Wave Fields
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Irena Knezevic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 174,967.00

The transfer of heat from one body to another has a fundamental role in
contemporary technology. Advancements in energy, transportation, manufacturing,
biomedical devices, information processing and communication often rely on
improvements in engineering heat transfer between a system and its environment.
For instance, increasing the energy efficiency of data centers, in part requires
improved heat management of their electronic components. The impact of heat
transfer technology, though not often visible is nevertheless ubiquitous in
modern society. An important new problem arises when the heat flow is between a
(typical) material that exists in three dimensions and a novel material that
spans space in only two dimensions. Recent success in fabricating such two-
dimensional materials paves the way for investigating this important system.
However, current tools for investigating heat transport run into problems when
probing such complex transport phenomena. This project develops specialized
experimental tools in conjunction with simulations to probe such heat transfer
that bridges three- and two-dimensional materials. Further, simplified models of
the transport process aid the design and development of future electronics,
sensors and energy technologies. The project also trains future undergraduate
and graduate engineers, including those underrepresented in the technical
workforce, in advanced metrology and simulations and helps maintain the
technical edge of the US industrial workforce. Data and models developed in the
project are disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, technical
conferences, and specialized online databases. Elementary concepts associated
with the research are demonstrated in outreach efforts to K-12 schools and
through university open houses to the general public.

The scientific goal of the project is to elucidate the microscopic physics of
phonon transport across junctions between materials of dissimilar composition
and dimensionality and develop simplified models to be used in design.
Specifically, the project develops a semi-empirical approach for directly
measuring the phonon scattering cross-section at the junction between a two-
dimensional material such as graphene and a three-dimensional material such as
silicon or silicon oxide, without any requirement for interpreting conductivity
or conductance. This advances the state of art of experimental nanoscale thermal
transport beyond the prevalent thermal conductivity/conductance measurement
approaches.