* 1702289
* Digitization PEN: Paleoniches on the western Cincinnati arch, the Ordovician of Indiana
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jess Miller-Camp, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,387.00

This project will make one of the key Ordovician fossil collections in the
nation digitally accessible for research and public use. The Ordovician Period
was the second greatest period in the history of animal life, about 485 to 444
million years ago. The diversity of life increased remarkably during the
Ordovician Period until the mass extinction event at the end of the Period. The
Indiana University Paleontology Collection has systematically documented fossil
records of 10 million years leading up to the extinction, including a series of
fossils that were collected in the early 1900s when a new railway grade was cut
through Indiana's Ordovician rocks along Tanner's Creek near Cincinnati. The
fossils in the Ordovician collection document the migration of ancient marine
organisms in response to changing sea level, demonstrate evolutionary adaptation
to changing environments, and reveal ecological interactions that help explain
why some groups survived the extinction and others did not. Digitizing the
collections makes this material accessible for large-scale quantitative
scientific studies. Importantly, digitization also makes these incredible
fossils available to students, teachers, and fossil enthusiasts in Indiana,
across the nation, and around the world. This project will involve K-12 teachers
in developing school curriculum exercises based on the fossils and on the
digitization process. It will also engage the region's avocational
paleontological community in the digitization initiative, giving them
unprecedented access to the same fossil research collections used by scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paleontological holdings that will be digitized
through this project include macrofossils and thin sections that were collected
along the entire Ordovician outcrop of the Kope, Dillsboro, and Whitewater
Formations in Indiana. The species are closely tied to a series of well-
documented measured sections that provide stratigraphic and sedimentological
context. The material includes an extensive and unique series of bryozoan thin
sections produced by E.R. Cumings and J.J. Galloway. This material adds
substantially to the PaleoNICHES digitization initiative of the Cincinnati Arch
by filling in its entire western flank. Inter-basin dispersals between the
Cincinnati Arch and western epicontinental seas were mediated by rises and falls
in sea level through the late Ordovician Period that iteratively flooded and
exposed the transcontinental arch. Spatially and temporally resolved digital
occurrences of complete faunas are used to study the timing of dispersal events
and changes in ecological associations that were mediated by these eustatic
changes. This project will utilize the stratigraphic and taxonomic backbone of
the digitized collections from the Cincinnati Arch region to serve as a
launchpad for engaging K-12 students and citizen scientists using the Notes from
Nature transcription portal. This rich, interactive content will be generated
for smartphone apps (including the Digital Atlas of Ancient Life) to expand the
use of biological collections data into regional K-12 classrooms and online, via
curated curricula hosted on iDigPaleo. High-quality specimen data and images
will also be made available through iDigBio (www.idigbio.org).