* 1702835
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-FRA: The future of US forest function under changing environment, disturbance, and forest management
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Michael Binford, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,097.00

Most forests of the world are managed to provide goods and services, such as
wood products, biodiversity protection, and water purification and play an
important role in regulating regional and local weather. Forest management is
one of the most extensive and continual drivers of forest change affecting the
success of associated communities of plants and animals, as well as the patterns
of water capture, movement, and storage for future human consumption. This
project seeks to understand how forest management decisions influence the long-
term health of forests and the services they provide across regional to
continental scales across the United States. Using a mapping and computer
modeling approaches, the project will evaluate national and regional forest
management policies, environmental disturbances, and resulting ecological,
social, and economic consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using satellite
technology, maps of forest management types will be developed for forests across
the entire US at scales relevant for national and regional policy, and for
understanding interactions with the environment. These maps will inform computer
models to generate estimates of carbon sequestration, water, and forest
characteristics under various management and environmental scenarios. Earth
systems models (ESMs), which operate at these very broad scales, will be
improved by incorporating forest management and disturbances, allowing better
predictions of the effects of changing management policy, disturbance regimes,
and environment on forests across the continental US and Alaska. This computer
modeling framework will be used to test the relative importance of forest
management across environmental conditions and assess the strength of these
relationships by region in determining change in forest characteristics (e.g.,
species composition and size structure), and the services they provide across
scales from stands to the continent. A key component of this proposal is
evaluating the impacts of changing forest policies and their relative importance
in comparison to direct changes in forest condition from the environment,
especially in regards to species adaptation and change mitigation strategies.
The socioeconomic understanding developed with this project will permit the
integration of findings into relevant policy and management. This increased
knowledge will assist future decision makers in evaluating potential changes
that are economically and socially important.