* 1702950
* WiFiUS: IoCT-CARE: Internet of Cognitive Things for Personalized Healthcare
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Recent advances in Internet-of-Things (IoT) and cognitive computing promise new
modalities for delivering and improving healthcare solutions, both for in-
hospital and everyday settings. The ubiquitous computing nature of IoT enables
continuous monitoring and management of all healthcare vitals. However, these
real-time mission-critical IoT applications demand both a consistent Quality of
Experience (QoE), as well as personalization for individual health care
contexts. Additionally, there is a need for long-lasting battery-powered
wireless sensors, reliable network connectivity, and cloud services. This
project aims to solve these challenges via personalization and holistic coupling
of the IoT infrastructure and the services provided to end users. The approach
utilizes a novel self-aware cognitive architecture that delivers efficient and
customized services by learning from end user behavior and adapting the IoT
infrastructure to a person's current state, daily life routine, and environment.
The project's exemplar application - efficient early detection of life-
threatening signs - can potentially save lives through better quality of care,
and timely delivery of critical/urgent health indicators. While the project will
be validated in the healthcare domain, the project's framework and services are
applicable to a broad range of other IoT application domains. The international
collaborative nature of this project will enrich the learning experience of
students and researchers by exposing them to the challenges of developing IoT
services for delivering life-critical services in the healthcare
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quality of Experience (QoE) is a key metric for
successful delivery of end-user services for IoT-enabled applications. Achieving
consistent end-user QoE poses tremendous challenges in the face of resource
constraints and dynamic variations at multiple scales of the IoT system stack:
at the application, network, resource, and device levels. Personalization -
through holistic coupling of both the IoT infrastructure, as well as end-user
services - provides a key opportunity to manage and exploit these variations and
deliver customized QoE under resource constraints. This proposal outlines a
self-aware Internet of Cognitive Things (IoCT) architecture that leverages edge
(i.e., Fog) computing architectures to introduce intelligence and adaptability
in integrated multi-scale IoT systems. The objective is to efficiently manage
information acquisition, communication and processing across different scales of
the IoT systems, while synergistically coupling learning of end-user behaviors
to deliver efficient and customized services. The compelling use case of
personalized healthcare will be used as an exemplar for a large class of IoT-
enabled applications that can exploit and benefit from personalization empowered
by a multi-layered, self-aware IoCT architecture.