* 1702618
* Tide gate modulation of wetland function: decision support through engineering best practices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mark Patterson, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 315,314.00

1702618 (Patterson). Tide gates are valves that are designed to protect life and
property but often negatively affect wetlands. This research aims to develop
best practices for their operation to maximize protection of people and
ecosystem health. In the US, thousands of tide gates are maintained and operated
by municipalities and conservation boards. How tide gates are operated affects
risks of flooding and fire, and wetlands health, in competing ways. This project
will develop new decision support tools for tide gate management using coupled
models of water exchange, sediment movement and pollutant loading based on the
EPA model QUAL2K, and objective functions for ecosystem services, water quality,
and flood and fire risk. By coupling measurements and modeling, this research
will move tide gate design and management well beyond prior
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodology includes advanced microbial
sensors for nitrate, passive contaminant samplers for toxins, and autonomous
sensors and vehicles. In cooperation with municipalities in Massachusetts, and a
diverse range of stakeholders, tide gate function will be investigated in a
large urban coastal marsh with a history of toxin exposure, a smaller urban
marsh used recreationally, and a 'pristine' marsh. Decision support tools for
tide gate operators will provide directed advice on when and how much to open
tide gates under various scenarios, improving public safety and ecosystem health
of critical wetlands. Two undergraduates working on 6 month co-ops, and a
graduate student, will be trained. Online visualization of tide gate state,
water chemistry, biota, and toxins at a dedicated web site will be used to
educate managers, the public, and K12 programs. Workshops during years 2-3 will
engage the user community during the development of the decision support tools.
Public policy MS students will participate in capstone projects to investigate
the overlap in regulations among federal, state and local entities to facilitate
implementation of best practices, while Civil Engineering undergrads will be
involved in required capstone projects and will look for opportunities for both
groups to collaborate. This research potentially will increase the
sustainability, resilience, and anti-fragility of coastal communities because
existing tide gates will be better managed, reducing risk of fire and flooding
(and toxin dispersal for some sites), while increasing ecosystem services like
essential fish habitat and storm