* 1702273
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Inferring Spatio-Temporal Variations in the Risk of Extreme Precipitation in the Western United States from Tree Ring Chronologies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Scott Steinschneider, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 320,527.00

This project aims to understand extreme cold-season precipitation dynamics along
the west coast of the United States through an analysis of the moisture
anomalies recorded by tree-ring chronologies across the coast and interior of
the western U.S. Winters with high total precipitation amounts in the coastal
regions are marked by a small number of extreme storms that exhibit distinct
spatial patterns of precipitation across the coast and further inland. Building
from this observation, this research will seek to develop a novel application of
dendroclimatic evidence to explore the following questions: a) how is extreme
precipitation variability expressed in a network of tree-ring chronologies; b)
can this information provide insight on the space-time variability of storm
tracks that cause these extreme events; and c) how can the joint variability of
extreme precipitation and storm tracks be modeled to develop consistent, multi-
centennial reconstructions of both.

The broader impacts include the potential to better understand extreme
precipitation events which exert significant social costs through both loss of
life and substantial damage to property. Society manages this burden using risk
mitigation strategies (e.g., infrastructure, insurance) designed for historic
extreme precipitation variability that is estimated from relatively short
instrumental records and may be changing under anthropogenic climate change.
This project will help determine how the frequency, persistence, recurrence and
geographic pattern of these impacts have varied in the past under natural
climate variability. This will provide important insights into the causes of
these shifts and the potential for predictability in the future. This project
also provides support for graduate and post-doctoral researchers.

Outreach efforts will focus on high-level discussions with the L.A. County Flood
Control District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and related agencies that manage
extreme event risk in the region. This direct engagement will enhance the
application of the research products, as well as provide guidance for their
design. Innovative visualizations of research output will be made available
through the Columbia Water Center for public use.