* 1702752
* WiFiUS: Collaborative Research: Low Overhead Wireless Access Solutions for Massive and Dynamic IoT Connectivity
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 150,000.00

By wirelessly connecting billions of physical devices such as sensors,
appliances, vehicles, machines, and wearable electronics, the ubiquitous
connectivity to IoT (Internet of Things) will fundamentally change the way
humans interact with one another and with the physical world. IoT technologies
are poised to transform many critical sectors including health, energy, and
transportation. On the other hand, the massive connectivity, uneven information
payload, severe cost and power constraints, and diverse service needs of IoT
applications also pose significant challenges to existing design principles of
wireless systems. To address such challenges, this WiFiUS project aims to
develop fundamentally new access protocols and transmission technologies
specifically for the next-generation IoT-centric wireless applications, to
achieve low-overhead and low-cost communications at high efficiency and low-
latency. The success of the project will broadly benefit both wireless operators
and equipment/device developers by addressing the timely and difficult challenge
of effectively connecting massive number of IoT devices. The results of this
project will be widely disseminated through tutorials, publications, exchanges
with industry partners, and be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
education.

Specifically, the project develops new IoT network frameworks, control
algorithms and optimization tools to support high-performance and low-overhead
connectivity for massive number of IoT devices with heterogeneous energy and
latency requirements. Bringing together expertise spanning PHY/MAC-layers and
signal processing as well as network-layer protocol design and optimization, the
US-Finland team leverages two key innovations to unleash the potential of
network-layer and physical-layer advances for IoT applications. First, the
project targets the reduction of overhead and complexity (such as for channel
access, scheduling, and beamforming) as a central investigative issue; and aims
to unlock the vast efficiency gains of large scale multi-antenna coverage for
IoT devices with low-overhead, low-cost, and low-power constraints. Second, the
solutions will seamlessly integrate licensed and unlicensed bands, as well as
stationary and mobile access points, in order to support the largest potential
range of IoT applications with diverse QoS requirements. Integratively, the
project will generate a novel and comprehensive set of solutions to support low-
overhead and low-cost massive IoT connectivity, and to dynamically adapt to
changing load- and traffic-patterns to deliver the required level of coverage
and service quality.