* 1702643
* Dissertation Research: Social Support and physical and cognitive functioning of older adults in assisted living facilities.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Sarah Narendorf, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This project will examine the dynamics of the social networks and health of
residents in an assisted living facility. Findings will enhance the
understanding of social relationships among residents and the ways in which
residents social networks influence their physical and cognitive functioning and
depressive symptoms over time. The research is expected to lead to enhancements
in services that encourage social integration, support assisted physical and
cognitive functioning, and reduce levels of depressive symptoms among assisted
living residents. In addition, findings may provide evidence for theories of
social activity and aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For older adults, social
relationships are associated with better physical health, protection from
cognitive decline, and reduced depression and anxiety. Residents of assisted
living facilities have already experienced declines in their physical or
cognitive functioning and have a high prevalence of depression. Although
assisted living facilities provide opportunities for socializing and forming new
relationships, it is unknown how these opportunities and residents' health
affect the formation and maintenance of relationships between residents, nor the
extent to which their relationships affect their health. This research examines
the social networks and health of residents of a large assisted living facility
in Houston, TX at two points in time six months apart. The project will (1)
describe the structure and change of the residents' social networks; (2)
estimate the effects of residents' relationships on health-related outcomes; and
(3) estimate the effects of residents' physical limitations, cognitive
functioning, and depressive symptoms on their social networks. Data will be
collected in two ways. First, demographic and other data will be collected from
participants resident files. Second, interviews with residents will be conducted
to collect information about the participants social networks and health status.
A comprehensive model of the interconnected social networks within the ALF will
be constructed. Data analysis will be conducted using stochastic actor-oriented
models for network dynamics to determine the effects of factors associated with
the co-evolution of residents relationships and health over time while
controlling for demographic and other related factors (e.g., participation in
ALF activities, external relationships).