* 1702445
* Enhancing biodegradation of quaternary ammonium compounds (QAC)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Bruce Rittmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 379,738.00

PI Name: Bruce E. Rittmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1702445
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs) are widely used as
surfactants and disinfectants in human and animal healthcare, agriculture, and
industry. Discharge of QACs can be harmful to biological wastewater treatment
and aquatic habitats. Most QACs are biodegradable in the presence of oxygen, and
delivery of oxygen is a key to good biodegradation; however, the common practice
of bubbling air does not work because the QACs, being surfactants, cause serious
foaming. The PIs will study and develop a novel biotechnology to efficiently
biodegrade QACs: the oxygen-based membrane biofilm reactor (O2-MBfR). Oxygen is
delivered without bubbling to bacteria that grow on the outer surface of hollow-
fiber membranes. Thus, an O2-MBfR can sustain QAC biodegradation without foaming
and with excellent retention of the QAC-biodegrading bacteria. The PIs will
develop the science and engineering foundations for a new environmental-
biotechnology system able to bring about QAC biodegradation. The educational
component will involve community-college students through a summer internship.
The PIs will initiate a program to disseminate sustainability and green-
chemistry principles in high school science laboratories, and they will
stimulate public interest by participating in the NSF-sponsored website "Ask a
Biologist". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the O2-MBfR, oxygen is delivered by
diffusion to a biofilm accumulating on the outer surface of hollow-fiber
membranes, thereby eliminating the foaming problem and providing excellent
resistance to toxicity. Thus, an O2-MBfR should sustain QAC degradation even at
the high QAC concentrations found in QAC-bearing wastewater from industrial
facilities. The project's over-arching goal is to achieve high-efficiency
biodegradation of QACs without incurring foaming and toxicity problems. This
goal will be attained by (a) understanding the mechanistic principles of QAC
biodegradation in the O2-based MBfR; (b) identifying the conditions leading to
optimized performance of a two-stage O2-based MBfR to optimize QAC
biodegradation; and (c) developing a mathematical model that integrates the
kinetics of QACs biodegradation, mass-transfer kinetics, and biofilm
accumulation and detachment. On the practical side, results of the work will
demonstrate QAC biodegradation by using efficient O2 delivery by bubbleless
diffusion. At the same time, the PIs will develop mechanistic and quantitative
understanding of QAC biodegradation, including the microbial ecology and
physiology of membrane-bound biofilms.