* 1702596
* SHF: Medium: Microbiology on a Programmable Biochip: An Integrated Hardware/Software Digital Microfluidics Platform
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 900,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop miniaturized, low-cost, and smart
microfluidic biochips that can perform "epigenetics in a drop". Such a platform
will revolutionize data acquisition for molecular biology studies. The knowledge
gained from applying molecular biology protocols to microfluidic biochips will
facilitate the understanding of diseases such as cancer, and knowledge about
epigenetic modifications in cells from inheritance will broaden the
understanding of disease development. The results from this research will also
be applicable to quantitative analysis protocols such as gene expression
analysis. This project will foster multi-disciplinary education for engineering
students and it has the potential to pave the way for new high-tech companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been structured as an interdisciplinary
collaboration between investigators with complementary expertise in design
automation and system architecture for microfluidics, digital microfluidics
technology, and molecular biology. It will lead to an integrated 5-layer system
architecture for the seamless on-chip execution of complex biochemical
protocols. Breakthroughs in design automation will enable real-time decision-
making based on prescribed decision criteria; such a design will allow a diverse
collection of protocol paths to be traversed. Research objectives include system
design and optimization methods to support quantitative analysis protocols,
demonstration of biomolecular protocols on microfluidic biochips, and evaluation
of design automation solutions using test cases extracted from benchtop
implementation of biomolecular protocols.