* 1703853
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Scalable Dynamic Access Control for Untrusted Cloud Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Steven Myers, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2022
* USD 274,773.00

When users store their data in the cloud, they take many privacy risks: Will the
cloud storage provider allow others to see that data? If the user sets sharing
rules for the data, will the cloud storage system follow those rules? Recent
news stories of user data exfiltration from cloud storage systems show that
users have reason for concern. Encrypting files before storing them in the cloud
would provide strong protection, but this approach makes it very difficult for
users to share data with others and to change their sharing policies. This
project is exploring techniques to cryptographically protect user files in
cloud-based storage systems, while supporting advanced, dynamic sharing
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While cryptographically protecting data under a
static access control policy is well documented in the literature, existing
constructions either do not efficiently support dynamic policies (e.g., changes
to role/attribute assignments) or make heavy trust assumptions to support this
dynamism. This project is (1) developing an open-source platform for
prototyping, analyzing, and deploying dynamic access control enforcement
solutions for untrusted environments; (2) creating cryptographic constructions
that are capable of securely implementing popular role- and attribute-based
access control models on untrusted storage platforms while supporting dynamic
policy and data updates; (3) designing efficient, trusted hardware-assisted,
cloud-scale implementations of popular access control models supporting dynamic
policy and data updates in a variety of deployment scenarios; and (4) a carrying
out a comprehensive evaluation that explores the trade-offs in trust between
these cryptographically- and hardware-enforced approaches and examines the
cryptographic, computational, and communication costs of the proposed
constructions under a variety of real-world workloads.