* 1703439
* Collaborative Research:   SusChEM:  Mechanistic origins of synergetic effects in plasma catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Peter Bruggeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

1703211 / 1703439&lt;br/&gt;PI: Oehrlein, Gottlieb S. / Bruggeman, Peter J.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland College Park / University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed collaborative research
project aims at using a well-characterized atmospheric-pressure plasma source to
enable well-controlled interactions of the plasma with earth-abundant catalysts.
The activations of catalysts using plasmas holds great promise for increasing
the efficiency of catalytic systems with potential applications in a broad
spectrum industries, including chemical and materials synthesis, environmental
remediation, and energy generation. The overriding goal of the proposed project
is to investigate the underlying mechanisms that are responsible for the
synergistic effects of plasma with catalysts. The plan is to correlate the
magnitude of the plasma catalytic synergistic effect(s) with incident reactive
species fluxes, along with changes in catalyst surface properties, and surface
electronic structure. A careful systematic comparison of the different catalysts
may elucidate the microscopic origins of the synergistic effect and explore
potential plasma activation of thermally inactive catalysts. The project may
lead to better understanding of the requirements for plasma conditions and
catalysts to fully exploit the synergistic potential of plasma-catalyst
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mechanistic study is proposed that is aimed at
providing atomistic insights to unravel the key mechanisms responsible for the
synergistic effect(s) during plasma-catalyst interactions. Iron, nickel, cobalt,
and copper supported catalysts (on alumina and silica supports) will be employed
in this study. These catalysts vary strongly in thermal catalytic activities due
to different electronic structure and surface-catalytic mechanisms. The
investigation will be focused on studying atomistic surface modifications of the
catalysts for the oxygen/methane model system as the plasma-surface interaction
conditions are changed. This will include the impact of these surface changes on
the products formed and their formation rates. Gas phase characterization will
be achieved by molecular beam mass spectrometry and two-photon laser induced
fluorescence. Surface characterization will include ellipsometry, ultra-violet
and x-ray induced photoemission spectroscopy coupled with thermal desorption,
and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The proposed approach has the
potential to make transformative changes to the current state-of-the-art by
enabling a mechanistically informed design of catalysts ideally suited for
plasma-catalyst synergies. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate
students, the investigators plan to develop course material on plasma-catalysis
and an interactive lecture for middle school students.