* 1703229
* Consequential Life Cycle Assessment for Novel Energy Technologies: The Case of Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Paulina Jaramillo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,937.00

1703229 (Jaramillo). This project will advance the field of life cycle
assessment (LCA) by demonstrating a consequential LCA framework that
incorporates the constraints of operating the power system and thus will allow
for more appropriate evaluation of the environmental impacts of novel energy
technologies. While this project will focus on energy storage, the model can be
applied to other technologies like advanced solar systems, carbon capture and
sequestration, electric vehicles, advanced nuclear technology, etc. The focus on
energy storage also provides additional broader impacts. Although energy storage
can have a transformative effect of the power system, the studies about the
benefits of storage have been focused on single services and have suggested that
there are not enough economic incentives to support deployment of such
application of storage technologies. This project will include a comprehensive
analysis of multi-purpose storage deployment and, by identifying the multiple
benefits of such deployment strategies, the results can then be used to inform
the development of market and regulatory frameworks that guarantee storage
providers are properly compensated for all these benefits. Finally, this project
will also include the development of a database of environmental impacts from
raw material extraction, manufacturing, and end-of-life of different energy
storage technologies, which will be available for other researchers to use.
Efforts to disseminate the results of the research will also support the broader
impacts of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
methodological contribution to the life cycle community by demonstrating the
need for a better representation of the unique technical constraints of the
power system. It will also provide a framework that can be applied in future
analyses of the increasingly complex power system. This project draws knowledge
from different fields of engineering: it requires methods developed by the
industrial ecology and life cycle assessment community, but it also makes use of
more complex methods from power systems engineering than have been used by these
communities. Research outcomes include an open source power system model for
life cycle assessment; a model for evaluating multi-purpose operations of energy
storage; a database of energy storage technologies and associated life cycle
impacts; robust set of scenarios for storage deployment to support decision-
making; and a database of end-of-life requirements for energy storage
technologies. .