* 1703543
* Study on Physics and Chemistry of Distributed Combustion for Reducing Pollutants
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* James Driscoll, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 06/30/2021
* USD 280,000.00

This research will provide understanding of new ways to burn low-carbon fuels
(such as natural gas) and zero-carbon fuels (such as hydrogen) in a new
combustion mode called distributed (or flameless) combustion. Previous
experiments have shown that flameless combustion produces ultra-low levels of
pollutants (nitric oxide and carbon monoxide) and is ideal for proposed low-
carbon fuels. However, previous work was trial-and-error; the reasons for the
improvement, the practical limitations and the underlying physics were not
measured. This research will employ the unique laser sheet kilohertz imaging
diagnostics of the PI to take high speed movies of the chemical reaction layers
and local gas temperatures within this new mode of flameless combustion for the
first time. The resulting experimental data base should provide the
understanding needed to optimize the operating conditions and minimize
pollutants. The data base will be disseminated to allow others to develop design
models based on advanced computer codes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A specially-
designed flameless combustor experiment will be operated at large values of
preheat gas temperature, internal gas recirculation, turbulence levels, gas
pressure and air staging. For the first time, the chemistry that occurs within
this mode of combustion will be measured. Fuels will be selected that promote
auto ignition (dimethyl ether, propane and hydrogen-CO synfuel) in addition to
natural gas. The HO2 radical plays an important role in the chemistry, as well
as formaldehyde and hydroxyl. Concentrations of these species will be measured
simultaneously for the first time using the new fluorescence methods of the PI.
Of particular interest is seeing how turbulent eddies enter into the chemical
reaction layers and broaden them, which reduces the temperature gradients and
provides a more uniform combustion with less nitric oxide formation. Gas
velocity field imaging at kilohertz framing rates will be conducted provide high
speed movies and information about the fundamental physical processes. The
boundaries between this new regime of flameless combustion and conventional
flames will be recorded. The relationship between the time scales of flameless
and auto-ignition chemistry will be measured. This research is being conducted
within a highly turbulent and realistic engine environment and should provide a
bridge between these realistic, turbulent conditions and several NSF-funded
chemistry studies of auto ignition that are being conducted in bench top
chemistry labs.