* 1703765
* AF:Medium:Collaborative:RUI:Structure in Motion:Algorithms for Kinematic Design
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Ileana Streinu, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2023
* USD 917,222.00

New technologies and techniques in robotics (miniature fabrication),
computational biology (DNA assembly), material science (nano-technology), and
even origami give rise to new questions in kinematic design ? the design of
moving assemblies. This project addresses the theory and corresponding
algorithms for a number of fundamental problems in kinematic design. The goal is
to design the shape of a (deformable) geometric object, along with one or a
family of its deformation trajectories. In robotics, for instance, one may want
to build a robot arm capable of moving its end-effector from any point in a
source domain to any point in a destination domain (geometric structure design),
in a way that would avoid singularities and collisions (trajectory design). In
manufacturing and CAD, one is interested in designing structures that can be
assembled from standard smaller parts; for example, a polyhedral surface might
be assembled from rigid triangular pieces whose sides are joined together.
Another example is folding a 3D origami shape from a creased piece of (flat)
paper: both the 3D shape and the folding trajectories have to be designed in
advance. The results are anticipated to have an impact on several scientific
fields where geometric modeling and geometric simulations are being used,
including mechanics, robotics, computational biology and materials science
(nano-technology). The project will engage a diverse population of students, at
all levels (post-doc, graduate and undergraduate). The PIs will develop new
educational materials related to emerging multidisciplinary
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New kinematic design principles rely on the
mutual dependence of mobility and structure. Recent results of the PIs on robot-
arm singularities and precise positional workspace determination provide
insights and techniques for an integrated approach, which coordinates structural
parameters and path-planning. For innovative patterns of metamaterials with
auxetic capabilities, a rigorous geometric theory of periodic frameworks will be
combined with efficient algorithms for framework generation and visualization.
Advancing these methods will throw new light on conformational changes in
crystals and biological self-assembly problems.