* 1703013
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Machine Learning Enabled Network-on-Chip Architectures for Optimized Energy, Performance and Reliability
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Avinash Karanth, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 524,000.00

Network-on-Chip (NoC) architectures have emerged as the prevailing on-chip
communication fabric for multicores and Chip Multiprocessors (CMPs). However, as
NoC architectures are scaled, they face serious challenges. A key challenge in
addressing optimized NoC architecture design today is the plethora of
performance enhancing, energy efficient and fault tolerant techniques available
to NoC designers and the large design space that must be navigated to
simultaneously reduce power, improve reliability, increase performance and
maintain QoS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes a new cross-layer,
cross-cutting methodology spanning circuits, architectures, machine learning
algorithms, and applications, aimed at designing energy-efficient, reliable and
scalable NoCs. This research will result in (1) novel cross-layer design
techniques that take a holistic approach of simultaneously reducing power
consumption, while still achieving reliability and performance goals for NoCs,
(2) a fundamental understanding of the use of hardware-amenable ML for NoC
design optimization, (3) software and hardware techniques for monitoring and
collecting critical data and key design parameters during network execution to
optimize NoC design, and (4) modeling and simulation tools that will improve the
architecture community's design methodologies for evaluating scalable NoCs. The
proposed research bridges a very important gap between hardware architects who
design power management and fault tolerant techniques at the circuit and
architecture level and machine learning scientists who develop predictive and
optimization techniques. Due to its cross-cutting nature, the proposed research
has the potential to significantly transform the design of next-generation CMPs
and System-on-Chips (SoCs) where complex decisions have to be made that affect
the power, performance and reliability. The research will also play a major role
in education by integrating discovery with teaching and training. The PIs are
committed and will continue to expand on outreach activities as part of the
proposed project by making the necessary efforts to attract and train minority
students in this field.