* 1703267
* SCH: EXP: Home+, An Intelligent and Interoperable Suite of Robotic Furnishings, Learning and Evolving with Their Users
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Keith Green, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 606,218.00

The number of older persons in the United States is substantially increasing, as
is the cost of health care. Accompanying these trends is a growing scarcity of
caretakers, care deliverers, and care facilities to attend to our growing elder
population. Technology supporting health for older adults tends to be limited to
computerized monitoring systems and, potentially someday in the future, as
assistive 'humanoid' robots that look and function something like us. Our homes
and their many furnishings, meanwhile, remain conventional, low-tech, and
maladaptive to life changes. To promote independent living, this research team
from architectural design, robotics, and human factors explores how our homes
can be outfitted with furnishings of advanced functionality. This project,
home+, is a collection of robotic home furnishings that fits easily into any
conventional home to increase the quality of life of individuals with impaired
mobility and cognitive functioning by enabling routine domestic activities. This
research project will: (1) establish the needs and wants of older people wishing
to age in place, identifying those aspects of the home+ concept that best
promise to support independent living; (2) design robotic furnishings,
accordingly; (3) test these furnishing to determine how well they interact with
each other and with the people that use them; (4) define the choreography by
which these furnishings and their users interact; and (5) evaluate how well
home+ supports typical users performing ten routine home tasks that define a
capacity for independent living. The team will gain insights not only from the
targeted populations and healthcare professions who may benefit most by home+,
but also from a wider audience. This outreach aspect of the home+ project will
culminate in a workshop that seeks marketplace and practice support for
advancing the prototype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of seniors want to
age in place in their homes. To realize this goal, this project will: (1)
conduct a needs assessment of older adults; (2) iteratively co-design and
usability test robotic furnishings that recognize, communicate with, and partly
remember each other in interaction with human users (interoperability); (3)
define the pattern language of interactions for this cyber-human system; and (4)
evaluate the efficacy of home+ by comparing performance on 10 routine home tasks
defining a capacity for independent living for individuals with and without
home+. Drawing on research and formalism in distributed robotics, the team will
focus efforts on implementing and evaluating three software environments for
home+: (1) a centralized architecture, with all sensory information, processing,
command and control at a single source; (2) a distributed architecture, with
localized sensing, processing, and control, and minimal interactions between
elements; and (3), a combination of the first two, with a dedicated interface
layer between the high-level strategies of (1) and the reactive behaviors of
(2). Intellectually, this approach can be viewed as establishing a bridge
between traditional robotics and smart, robotically enhanced, physical built
environments.