* 1703266
* Fundamentals of Anhydrous Proton Transport on the Surface of Functionalized Graphane
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Karl Johnson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 321,260.00

This research project involves studying the transport of charge, in the form of
protons, at interfaces and surfaces. This process is important for a wide range
of technologies, including fuel cells and biological membranes, all of which
contain membranes that transport protons. Currently used membranes for fuel
cells require a high degree of hydration to operate and therefore are limited to
operating at low temperatures. Operation at higher temperatures causes the
membranes to dry out and lose their ability to conduct charge. Thus, it is
important for fuel cell technologies to develop such membranes that can operate
dry and at higher temperatures. In this project, new materials are being
developed that can transport protons while in a dehydrated state. Computational
modeling is being used to design, test and optimize the materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project involves (i) elucidation of proton
hopping mechanisms and barriers on in 1-d chains and on 2-d functionalized
surfaces, (ii) insight into how proton-proton interactions change proton
transport mechanisms, (iii) the development of an efficient but accurate
empirical multi-state, multi-configurational molecular simulation framework for
simulating proton transport in heterogeneous environments, and (iv) development
of high performance computing algorithms for implementing highly-parallel
simulations on core and graphical processing units. The researchers are
developing a multi-state, multi-configurational reactive molecular simulation
framework for studying anhydrous proton exchange membranes and are developing a
novel high performance computing software framework for efficient simulations on
current and as well as emerging computing architectures. The group is also
pursuing outreach activities focused on recruiting underrepresented
undergraduate students from Howard University to participate in summer research
on this project and enrolling the students in the University of Pittsburgh's
Pre-Ph.D. program to prepare them for graduate school and careers in research.