* 1703873
* TOWARDS SELF-ASSEMBLYING ACTIVE MICRO-STRUCTURES
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Angelo Cacciuto, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Chemistry contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical
research and education focused on self-assembly of active nanoparticles into
functional structures. Active matter is an exciting field in soft condensed
matter and materials science that has come into prominence over the last decade.
The synthesis of colloidal particles that can self-propel in solution at speeds
of tens of microns per second played an important role in the emergence of this
field. The propulsion mechanism is obtained by conversion of chemical or, more
generally, environmental energy, into directed motion of the particles. The
interplay between active and thermal forces in these systems gives rise to a
remarkable collective behavior that is reminiscent of phenomena observed in
living systems such as in schooling of fish, flocking of birds, or swarming of
bacteria. One of the most appealing features of these nanoparticles is that,
unlike biological entities, they can be synthesized into arbitrarily complex
shapes and with a wide range of inter-particle interactions. Furthermore, their
active behavior can be triggered and tuned with an external light source.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use a combination of theory
and computer simulations to understand how these propelling forces can be used
to enhance the spontaneous formation of particles into organized structures, a
process known as self-assembly. The PI aims to find ways to greatly speed up
this otherwise lengthy process, and to uncover new strategies to design
materials that not only have targeted static properties, but that can also
perform work at the micro-scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed to
significantly advance the field of nanoparticle self-assembly and materials
engineering by suggesting new pathways of structure formation, with applications
in manufacturing of stimuli-responsive materials and nano-medicine. The project
has also a strong educational component, which includes training of graduate and
undergraduate students, collaboration with on-campus organizations dedicated to
the advancement of women and underrepresented minorities in science, and
development of educational software for mobile
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry contribute funds to this award.
It supports theoretical research and education with the aim of understanding and
controlling self-assembly of active nanoparticles. What makes active systems
very exciting is that they are intrinsically out of equilibrium at the single
particle level, thus generating a much more complex collective behavior than is
possible in equilibrium systems. The research team plans to use theory and
numerical simulations to develop rational design strategies to engineer
functional aggregates of active particles. This will be achieved by studying the
key role played by particle anisotropy, hydrodynamic interactions, and
fluctuating activating fields in the self-assembly dynamics of active
nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the geometry of the
particles, the directionality of their interactions, and how the strength of the
active forces can be exploited to optimize and impart functionality to self-
assembled structures is one of the most important challenges in the field. The
team will also analyze how active nanoparticles and the materials they form
respond to propelling forces that can fluctuate over space and time. This field
in active matter holds promise for potential applications that range from
switchable materials to the development of microscopic actuators. The ultimate
goal of this research is to be able to understand how to manipulate all these
parameters to directly intervene in and dynamically affect the pathway of
structure formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research may have an important
impact in materials science and engineering as it could lead to the development
of better strategies for a bottom-up approach to active structure design. The
fundamental questions addressed in this project will also have important
implications for biological systems that rely on similar physical mechanisms,
and in nano-medicine. This award contributes to the education of undergraduate
and graduate students. The research group will participate in outreach
activities sponsored by on-campus organizations dedicated to the advancement of
women and underrepresented minorities in science, and will develop educational
software for hand-held devices to highlight the results of the research.