* 1703497
* CSR: Medium: Extensible Distributed Systems Solutions for Community Supported Child-Independent Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mohit Tiwari, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,999.00

Child independent mobility (CIM) refers to the freedom of children to move about
their neighborhoods without direct adult supervision. It is widely accepted that
CIM is essential to emotional, social, and physical well-being, yet CIM has
dramatically declined. This project uses the Internet of Things (IoT) to foster
community supported CIM. In the IoT, every "thing" can sense its surroundings
and communicate wirelessly with other nearby things. When all children have a
small digital beacon, adult community members carry mobile devices, and the
neighborhood itself has embedded devices, the community can support safe CIM in
a local and self-organizing way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support
CIM using local community resources, made available using increasingly common
device-to-device wireless links. The project is organized along two primary
research thrusts. First, the project designs novel protocols for continuous
neighbor discovery that enable IoT devices to discover other nearby devices with
minimal energy costs. Second, given the ability to efficiently discover other
nearby devices, the project explores the ability for parents and other
caregivers to define declarative policies for community data. These policies
allow the creation of rules for assessing the state of a child's IoT device to
ensure that desired safety conditions are satisfied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on the application domain of child independent mobility, whose
decline is negatively impacting children's health and well-being. In this
respect, the project has significant and broad impact. The project explores
several novel aspects of privacy and security in infrastructure-less IoT
applications. Finally, the project's contributions are also widely applicable to
many IoT application domains, and the project will additionally explore, for
instance, smart tourism, where keeping track of a cohesive tour group while
ensuring the participants' enjoyment can be economically important. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;All data and code artifacts that result from this project will be
made available in the public domain on a publicly accessible repository
available at http://github.com/UT-MPC. The code will be available and maintained
for at least five years after the end of the project. All results will also be
documented extensively online at http://mpc.ece.utexas.edu/.