* 1703549
* Multi-functional membrane selective layers by interfacial free radical polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Hyunmin Yi, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2022
* USD 364,347.00

1703549 Asatekin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes form a permeable barrier,
allowing select molecules to pass into a product stream while retaining unwanted
compounds. Membrane technology is crucial for purification of many substances,
including water treatment, production of biological products, and food and
beverage processing. Despite this diversity of applications, commercial
membranes are currently made of only a handful of polymer chemistries, leaving
an opportunity for development of materials that may provide greater selectivity
or higher throughput, thereby increasing productivity of the purification. Of
particular interest are hydrogel polymers, which unlike conventional polymers,
are hydrophilic, and this opens up new applications and may increase performance
by decreasing membrane fouling. The aim of this project is to develop a new,
scalable method for forming thin hydrogel membranes that can incorporate a broad
range of chemistries and functional nanomaterials, enabling greater productivity
in purification of water and biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop an approach to form very thin, defect-free hydrophilic selective
layers on membranes by free-radical interfacial polymerization. The interfacial
tension between an aqueous and organic layer creates a uniform and continuous
interface for polymerization. Water-soluble monomers will be polymerized by an
initiator with limited aqueous solubility, which will control the thickness of
the film. A range of multi-functional materials will be used to control
selectivity. Design principles for a robust and scalable process will be
established via variation of monomer concentration, chemistry, and
polymerization conditions. Embedded functional groups will anchor integrated
bio-templated catalytic nanoparticles, which will be for simultaneous
deactivation of contaminants. All resulting materials will be characterized and
tested for selectivity and catalytic deactivation. The project will impact
polymer and membrane science, nanobiotechnology, and catalytically
functionalized materials. The new materials will enable efficient water
treatment and environmental cleanup. The PI and co-PI will mentor graduate
students, incorporate this research in their teaching and into core lab classes,
and design new outreach activities and videos for the general public that
feature key aspects of the research.