* 1703425
* CSR: SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: New Horizons in Deterministic Execution
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jakob Eriksson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 06/30/2021
* USD 473,363.00

If you have ever thought to yourself "huh, my computer didn't do that last
time", you may have experienced what computer scientists call non-determinism.
Today, most computer hardware executes programs in a non-deterministic fashion:
a program may yield different output or behavior in different runs, given the
exact same input, sometimes with disastrous consequences. Recent research
enforces deterministic execution in inherently non-deterministic systems.
Unfortunately, this often comes at a steep performance price. Also, until now
determinism is only available for non-interactive programs. The goal of this
project is to improve the efficiency of deterministic execution of concurrent
programs, and to include a large class of interactive programs in the scope of
deterministic execution. Longer term, the goal is to make deterministic
computing a viable choice, where nondeterminism is the only option today. This
would likely improve both the safety and quality of the vast number of
multithreaded programs running on today's and tomorrow's multicore
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To bring the benefits of deterministic execution
to real-world programs, this project investigates algorithms, runtime systems,
operating systems and hardware support to improve the performance and
applicability of determinism. The project is organized along three major
thrusts: combating the clock skew in deterministic logical clocks that imposes
unnecessary waiting on threads, using speculation to break the serial bottleneck
that current systems impose on synchronization operations, and extending the
scope of determinism to encompass interactive applications. The researchers plan
to openly distribute the systems built for this project to facilitate
examination by other researchers and integration with computer systems
education.