* 1703120
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate Change Denial and the Politics of Coastal Restoration in Southern Louisiana
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Eric Hanley, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

This study will assess perceptions of environmental risk among a vulnerable
population in southeast Louisiana and analyze the connections between these
perceptions and local-level political processes surrounding coastal restoration
issues in the region. The study will focus on Plaquemines and St. Bernard
parishes--the two Louisiana parishes adjacent to the mouth of the Mississippi
River. The study will investigate residents' attitudes on climate change and
assess the relationship between these attitudes and local environmental policy.
This region is of specific interest due to the unique configuration of social
and environmental factors that impact the community, including environmental
risk, economic dependence on extractive industry, high rates of climate change
denial, and high concentration of oil and gas employment. This study will
challenge dominant perspectives on climate skepticism by incorporating economic,
cultural, and emotional factors into the discourse on climate change denial. By
contributing to a more complete and nuanced understanding of climate change
denial, this study will have potentially transformative impacts on the future of
climate discourse and policy by providing new tools for climate advocates to
address climate denial in the political arena.

The study will focus on the central questions of how residents interpret the
relationship between environmental security and economic prosperity in their
community, and how the negotiation of these two social priorities plays out in
local political processes. Residents of southeast Louisiana regularly experience
environmental harm yet remain bound economically to industries that exploit the
local environment. While environmental awareness is common, climate change
denial is persistent in the community. The theory of socially organized denial,
which explores social dimensions of climate change denial, will be applied to
investigate the origins of these attitudes and factors that perpetuate
widespread climate skepticism in the region. This study will utilize content
analysis and semi-structured interviews to better understand local
interpretations of the relationship between economy and environment. The content
analysis phase of the study will utilize local print media to establish a
discursive field within which attitudes form on environmental issues. The
interview phase of the project will utilize responses from a broad sample of
respondents in the community. The interviews will focus on several themes
including news acquisition, political attitudes, attitudes toward local economic
issues, attitudes toward environmental issues such as coastal restoration and
climate change, and attitudes regarding the political processes around these
issues in the community. The combination of these methods will allow the
researchers to contextualize respondents' testimony within public environmental
discourse, yielding rich data that will facilitate a deep exploration of local
environmental attitudes and politics.