* 1703076
* P2C2: Evaluating the Causes and Consequences of Extreme Holocene Paleo-Droughts in North America
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Amy Clement, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 332,863.00

This project aims to understand the causes of persistent and severe drought in
the continental United States (US) at particular periods in the past using
climate model simulations and paleo records. Warming of the subtropical North
Atlantic and local dust feedbacks have been shown to cause drought conditions in
North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize that during the
Early to Mid-Holocene and in the Medieval Warm Period (MWP), these effects
combined to create severe droughts that are far larger than observed during the
modern historical period. In the Early Holocene, North American proglacial lakes
began to drain, leading to a pulse of freshwater into the North Atlantic around
8.2 ka. Enhanced dust emissions from the desiccated glacial lake beds are found
in proxy records in the northcentral US, but the role of enhanced North American
dust deposition on climate change has not been assessed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will explore the role of sea surface
temperature perturbations and local and remote dust-climate feedbacks on extreme
Holocene paleo-droughts in North America as well as the impact of drought and
dust on ice sheet extent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support an early
career female scientist to develop skills in model design and development, as
well as enhance her participation in the NCAR paleoclimate modeling group. The
researchers will participate in the University of Miami SEEDS (Scientists and
Engineers Expanding Diversity and Success) program, which has career workshops,
networking, and distinguished lectureships, and the annual Women in Science Day
that brings middle school girls to campus to meet with female scientists to
learn about their research and potential career paths. In addition, the project
will entrain undergraduate students as part of their undergraduate student
thesis.