* 1703274
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Unlocking the fundamental mechanisms that underlie selectivity in oleochemical producing enzymes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Engineering, mathematics, biochemistry, and biology are combined to develop
strategies for converting renewable resources into higher-value chemicals and
materials. Some of these products have never been produced biologically, so
organisms need to be modified to make this possible. There is also a great need
for computational tools that can predict beneficial modifications to cellular
proteins, thereby guiding these efforts. This research project is developing
novel proteins that are active in the sustainable production of fats and oils.
If successful, this work has the potential to displace unsustainable and
environmentally unfriendly processes that contribute to the deforestation of
tropical regions. Research experiences for undergraduate students and outreach
efforts directed at K-12 students and the public through the SCIENCountErs
program are being provided and serve to enhance the development of a highly
knowledgeable STEM workforce. The efforts are enhancing our understanding of the
techniques, capabilities, and limitations of protein design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative research project, researchers are
integrating computational and experimental methods to develop software that will
be used to design novel enzymes involved in oleochemical metabolism. This
protein-design infrastructure is integrating recent developments in molecular
modeling and machine learning and developing design rules for tailoring chain
length specificity for three oleochemical-synthesizing enzymes. These novel
enzymes are being deployed in microbial biocatalysts and evaluated for their
ability to produce oleochemicals from renewable resources. Upon conclusion, this
work will generate a deeper understanding of selectivity in oleochemical
metabolism, novel enzymes and microbial biocatalysts for producing specialty
oleochemicals, and enzyme-design capabilities that could be widely applied in
synthetic biology applications.