* 1703835
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Theory and Practice of Dependent Types in Haskell
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Stephanie Weirich, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2022
* USD 638,662.00

This project's overarching goal is to prevent bugs in software by extending the
Haskell programming language to support dependent types. Haskell is used by
researchers and programmers in industry to build a variety of software systems,
such as financial analysis tools, interactive websites, data visualizations, and
automated vehicle software. Dependent types are an up-and-coming technology that
allows programmers to avoid bugs in their software, allowing them to include
mathematical proofs of correctness in their code. These proofs are checked
before the software ever runs, ruling out the possibility of failures, such as a
crashed website. The intellectual merits are insights into the integration of
advanced mathematical theories with an industrial-strength development tool
(Haskell) and a deeper understanding of the mathematical principles that
underlie the creation of correct software. The project's broader significance
and importance are to give the technology industry access to dependent types for
the first time, while creating opportunities for students (including those at
one principal investigator's undergraduate women's college) to engage with this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes both practical and
foundational components. The Haskell type system, as implemented in the Glasgow
Haskell Compiler (GHC) version 8.0, is able to simulate dependent types through
the use of many language extensions. However, this use requires awkward
encodings, and the extensions that support them complicate the language. In
contrast, the Haskell type system envisioned by this project is based on a
uniform approach to dependently typed programming that subsumes prior
extensions. Part of this project involves replacing the core language of GHC
with one based on dependent type theory, using relevance annotations to ensure
that these extensions are backwards compatible. Furthermore, the project also
introduces matchable functions, a qualifier that determines whether function
applications can be analyzed via pattern matching, enabling the integration of
dependent types with GHC's current type inference algorithm. Finally, this
project includes an examination of the semantics of dependently typed
programming languages with partiality.