* 1703394
* Unlocking the Promise of Bacterial Electrogenicity
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Seokheun Choi, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 315,000.00

Microbial electron transfer capability, or 'electrogenicity' creates a plethora
of concepts and potential applications that offer environmentally sustainable
advances in the fields of biofuels, wastewater treatment, bioremediation,
desalination, and biosensing. Despite its vast potential and remarkable research
efforts, bacterial electrogenicity is arguably the most underdeveloped
technology used for those applications. Severe limitations are placed on the
intrinsic energy and electron transfer processes of naturally occurring
microorganisms. Significant boosts in this technology can be achieved with the
growth of synthetic biology that manipulates microbial electron transfer
pathways and improves their electrogenic potential. What is needed is a high-
throughput, rapid and highly sensitive test array for investigating the
electrogenicity of hundreds of newly discovered, genetically engineered
bacterial species. This is by no means a simple challenge, as accurate and
parallel quantitative measurements of bacterial electrogenicity require a long
measurement time (10's of days), continuous introduction of organic fuels (10's
of milliliters), complex device architectures, and labor-intensive operation.
The overall objective of this NSF proposal is to create the ability to achieve
rapid (&lt;5 min.), sensitive (&gt;10-fold improvement), and high-throughput
(&gt;384 wells) characterization of bacterial electrogenicity from a single drop
of culture (&lt;1 microliter). Findings will first be disseminated within the
discipline through local and international conferences and journal publications;
then they will be distributed through educational venues maximizing the
project's reach and impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is
to investigate an exciting range of possibilities which support the goal of
fusing microbial fuel cell technology with 'papertronics' the emerging field of
paper-based electronics. An optimized combination can create a new kind of
scalable, high-throughput sensing array for simple, sensitive, and rapid
quantification of microbial electrogenicity. This research will use paper as a
device substrate that inherently produces favorable conditions for easy, rapid,
and sensitive control of a microbial liquid sample. The high-throughput array
will be batch-fabricated through printing-only processes of 3-D capillary-driven
sensors on a single sheet of paper. Full integration of a high-performance
microbial fuel cell on paper can be achieved by improving the microbial electron
exchange with the electrodes in an engineered conductive paper reservoir and
reducing cathodic overpotential using a solid electron acceptor on paper.
Furthermore, the intrinsic capillary force of the paper and the increased
capacity from the engineered reservoir will allow for rapid adsorption of the
bacterial sample and promote immediate microbial cell attachment to the
electrode, leading to instant power generation with only a small amount of the
liquid. The immediate potential benefits of the proposed research are that (i)
it will create the first paper-based approach for large-scale biosensing
applications, incorporating fluidic and electronic components, which will
augment early work in papertronics, (ii) it will provide a high-throughput
parallel analysis of hundreds of types of bacterial electrogenicity with in-
depth understanding of extracellular electron transfer pathways that are
relevant to their genetic engineering, and (iii) it will catalyze energy and
environment-related research, helping to expand scientists' understanding of,
and ability to, harness sustainable renewable energy sources that scale, thus
inspiring the next generation's scientific minds.