* 1703519
* Fabrication and fundamental understanding of cellulase-mimetic bifunctional solid acids for hydrolyzing cellulose
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Xuejun Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2022
* USD 325,130.00

The first step in converting lignocellulosic biomass resources to fuels using
the carbohydrate/sugar platform is to form sugars from the cellulose in the
biomass. However, efficiently producing sugars from biomass remains a
significant challenge. Chemical conversion of the cellulose in the biomass uses
enzymes (cellulases) and homogenous acids (e.g. sulfuric acid) to produce
glucose, usually in a 2-step process. The required enzymes are currently
expensive; and they need restrictive operating conditions (temperature and pH)
and take longer time (days) to achieve satisfactory conversion of the cellulose.
Homogenous acids have issues such as equipment corrosion, recycling, and
wastewater treatment. This project aims to design a novel biomimetic polymeric
solid acid catalyst that combines the functions served by the enzymes and
inorganic acids currently used in sequence. By mimicking the cellulase/enzyme,
the research project will involve fundamental research to design and fabricate
bifunctional biomimetic solid acid catalysts for hydrolyzing cellulose to
produce the required simple sugars. The integrated education plan of the project
will target different levels of students, including high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students. Special attention will be paid to high school students
and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in STEM (minorities and
women). New concepts, research findings, acquired knowledge, and innovative
technologies will be disseminated to academia, industry, students, and the
Public through publications, presentations, and classroom teaching/learning. All
these will directly and/or indirectly benefit research, production, education,
and policy-making in the area of bioenergy and
bioproducts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will involve fundamental
research of efficient, robust, and low-cost cellulase-mimetic solid acid
catalysts for producing sugars from cellulose, one of the major components of
biomass. The success of the project would promote the production of biofuels
from biomass sugars. Using molecular and structural design, the solid acid
catalysts will contain two types of functional groups. The first group, the
acidic function, such as sulfonic acid, is responsible for hydrolyzing
cellulose. The second group, the binding function, will use functional groups
such as hydroxyl, carboxylic, halogen, and boronic acid groups. The role of this
binding function on the solid acid catalyst is to bring the acidic function of
the catalyst to cellulose to enhance the solid acid-cellulose interaction. The
two functions of the new catalyst mimic the cellulose-hydrolytic domain and the
cellulose-binding domain of cellulose-hydrolytic enzymes (cellulases),
respectively. It is expected that the biomimetic functionalization of the solid
acids would significantly improve their performance in cellulose hydrolysis.
Specifically, the bifunctional and cellulase-mimetic solid acids will be
fabricated via a two-step approach. In the first step, a polymer is synthesized
from carefully selected aromatic monomer containing the desired cellulose-
binding group(s) by Friedel-Crafts polymerization, which will lead to a backbone
polymer with porous structure (larger surface area) and cellulose-binding
groups. In the second step, the resultant polymer is sulfonated to introduce
sulfonic acid as the cellulose-hydrolytic group. The performance of the
resultant cellulase-mimetic solid acids in hydrolyzing cellulose will be
evaluated. The research focus is to fundamentally understand the relationships
between the structural properties (e.g., surface area, porous structure, and
functional groups) of the cellulase-mimetic solid acids and their performance in
cellulose hydrolysis. Special attention will be paid to the interactions
(affinity, adsorption or attraction) between the cellulase-mimetic solid acids
and cellulose and the mechanisms and kinetics of the solid acids in cellulose
hydrolysis.