* 1703670
* Ultrasonic Enhancement of Heat and Mass Transfer in Sorption Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Liping Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2021
* USD 321,369.00

One way to improve the performance of waste-heat activated cooling systems, such
as adsorption systems, is by targeted application of ultrasonic energy, which
may make possible the use of abundant low-temperature heat sources to provide
cooling. This project explores how ultrasonic energy, combined with low-
temperature heat sources, can realize higher-efficiency adsorption cooling by
increasing the rate at which refrigerant vapor is released from the surface of a
solid adsorbent. This in effect creates a thermal compressor that replaces the
conventional electric-powered compressor. At this point, however, the mechanisms
by which ultrasound interacts with adsorbed liquid refrigerant are not clear,
and these are examined through both experiments and theoretical modeling. This
project also involves significant educational and outreach activities. To date
there has been no central, online, open-source resource for thermally activated
heat pump technologies. In addition to assembling and making available open-
source simulation codes and performance data that make it easier to design
improved systems, online educational modules are developed for enhancing the
understanding of students and practitioners in this field and thus promote wider
development and adoption of environmentally friendly heat pump
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although prior work clearly indicates the
potential to improve desorption by applying ultrasonic energy, in general this
prior work focused on system-level effects rather than local detailed
measurements that would enable improved fundamental understanding. For example,
how much of the improved desorption is due to localized heating, and how much is
due to other effects such as mechanical compression/decompression, acoustic
softening, etc.? Our work, rather than emphasizing such system-level
performance, instead focuses on detailed, localized measurements and analysis to
improve fundamental understanding of these coupled heat and mass transport
processes that are crucial not only for adsorption cooling, but also for
desiccant drying, food drying, etc. We also explore a much wider range of
adsorbents/refrigerants, in addition to the silica gel/water system studied
earlier. Interestingly, the application of ultrasound may enable new adsorbent
materials to be utilized, such as superabsorbent polymers (commonly used in
disposable diapers) that can absorb up to 2000 times their own weight in water.
Without ultrasound, the use of polymers is limited or even prohibited because of
the high temperatures needed for regeneration. By examining alternative
materials like superabsorbent polymers we are able to greatly expand the variety
of adsorbent/refrigerant pairs that can be considered for application in
adsorption cooling.