* 1703827
* INFEWS N/P/H2O: SusChEM: Collaborative: Controlling Spatial Composition of Nonprecious Metal-based Heteronanostructures for Enhanced Electrocatalytic Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Lauren Greenlee, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2021
* USD 548,790.00

The project addresses catalytic electrochemical processes related to the
production of ammonia (NH3) from water and nitrogen, and the oxygen evolution
reaction (OER) needed to split water to produce hydrogen for energy storage and
fuel and chemical production. Both processes offer alternatives to conventional
processes that rely on hydrocarbon resources for the needed hydrogen. Thus the
project will support NSF's initiatives in the areas of sustainable energy
generation and Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water (INFEWS), the
latter via the importance of NH3 as the world's primary raw material for
nitrogen-based fertilizer production. In particular, the research is aimed at
discovering efficient, nonprecious metal nanocatalysts for the targeted
electrochemical processes that can operate at ambient temperature conditions
rather than the high-temperature conditions required for hydrocarbon-based
technologies. The electrocatalytic nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) has the
potential to generate NH3 at lower net energy consumption than the traditional
Haber-Bosch thermal catalytic process which accounts for between 1 and 2% of
world energy consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project seeks
advances in catalytic electrolyzers for both NRR and OER. The work will focus
exclusively on nonprecious metal bimetallic catalysts operating in alkaline
electrochemical environments, thus enabling low-cost, technology-enabling
alternatives to the precious metals. The project is built on preliminary data
suggesting that specific control of the spatial composition and morphology of
heterostructured nanoparticles will enable enhanced catalytic activity and also
establish fundamental understanding of composition-activity relationships for
key bimetallic systems in nanoparticle form. The specific research objectives
are: (1) to synthesize and characterize novel heteronanostructures of
nonprecious Fe-Ni bimetals composed of a hetero-core with/without an alloyed
shell, (2) to evaluate the reactivity and selectivity of the catalysts for
electrochemical NRR and OER in alkaline systems, and (3) to develop in operando
methods to correlate the structure and composition with electrocatalytic
activity using x-ray absorption spectroscopy. Beyond the targeted reactions,
introduction of low-cost, nonprecious nanoparticle catalysts are of increasing
interest for a broad range of catalytic applications, including
electrocatalysis. Validation of the proposed novel nonprecious nanostructures,
where specific spatial composition is correlated with the performance metrics
and in operando characterization, will enable an approach to catalyst design
that could be widely applied to enable cost- and performance-competitive
catalysts for commercialization. Furthermore, controlling catalyst selectivity
through structural design would enable key advances for important reactions
related to water treatment, energy conversion, and agriculture. To support this
objective, an integrated approach of research and education will be established
to increase student participation in STEM research, to pursue STEM majors, and
to train next-generation leaders in the interdisciplinary field of
nanocatalysts. The investigators will actively recruit students, especially
unrepresented student groups, to their research programs. The research findings
will be integrated into teaching for undergraduate and graduate curriculum
development in both Chemistry and Chemical Engineering departments. In addition,
the investigators will strengthen the current summer programs by involving K-12
teachers through American Chemical Society Science Coaches and the University of
Arkansas Engineering Academy Programs, as well as organizing an annual workshop
for students and K-12 teachers on Nanocatalyst Discovery.