* 1703170
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Data Science Applications In Cyberphysical Systems for Health
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Clifford Dacso, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 146,058.00

A cyberphysical system (CPS) in biology requires sensor input that represents,
as closely as possible, cell activity. Much work is expended on the development
of wearable sensors that detect the expression of cell activity filtered through
many processes. Recent work discloses that gene transcription can be thought of
as a signal, with periodic oscillations over time. The well-known 24 hour light-
dark cycle has protean effects however shorter and longer cycles not only exist
but have important roles to play in health and disease. Detection of these
signals and their perturbation is likely to be of great use in a robust health
focused CPS. The exact nature of these signals and the mathematical structure
underlying them will form the basis of this proposal. The societal impacts go
beyond the new sensors to include the development of open source methods
allowing the dissemination of new mathematical models and insights. into
measurement of cellular processes.

This proposal addresses the critical problem of generating cell-level
physiologic data as a substrate for an effective CPS in health. Applying new,
unbiased signal processing techniques, the team has recently identified new
periodicity in RNA over time. This signal provides a robust insight into cell
function and its changes. The team will address the ability of the new
techniques in specific situations to uncover signals to be used as inputs for a
human health CPS sensor. This signal processing technique will be used to
identify oscillations in genes associated with defined chronic metabolic
diseases of humans such as diabetes, inflammation, and cancer). These candidate
genes will be used to construct a precision signature for input into a CPS
sensor. The concepts and data will be used to construct mathematical equations
describing the longitudinal DNA transcripts previously identified. Taken
together, these two activities will provide an integrated mathematical picture
of periodic gene transcription that then sets the stage for novel sensor design
that will provide prediction and control in a human-based CPS. The project will
develop a new platform for understanding the cell that will be made widely
available via a Web-based open source platform.