* 1703560
* CSR: Medium: Next-Generation Cloud Federation via a Geo-Distributed Datastore
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Divyakant Agrawal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,183,545.00

Today's cloud computing systems offer users inexpensive and scalable access to a
wide range of software services and resources that expedite development,
deployment, and management of software and data. Different cloud vendors compete
for these users via pricing, service capability and availability, scale, and
ease of use, among other features. Despite their advantages, using any single
cloud vendor alone limits user choice, results in vendor lock-in and "data
gravity" (i.e., the storing of data with the vendor at which the user has
previously stored data), and exposes users to greater risk of failures and
privacy violations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these
limitations with new systems technologies that enable users to leverage multiple
cloud infrastructures at once, safely and easily. In particular, it defines a
new software abstraction for the scalable data management (datastore) layer,
called DatGeo, that bridges geographically distributed cloud federations. The
research will use DatGeo to develop new approaches for efficient transactions,
partitioning and replication of data, and policy enforcement and mediation,
across clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result, DatGeo will shield user
applications from the complexities associated with low-level federation of
individual cloud services, while facilitating location and privacy control,
increased reliability, and transparent cross-cloud use and portability. To
enable wide spread use, the project will make its research artifacts and systems
prototypes available as open source. In addition, the project will result in new
course materials and activities that engage diverse students, new to computer
science from local high-school and teaching-focused colleges, to introduce them
to computer science as a potential career path.