* 1703494
* SusChEM: Sustainably derived high performance nanofiltration membranes with vertically aligned nanopores for organic contaminant removal and water purification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Chinedum Osuji, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2020
* USD 368,910.00

PI Name: Chinedum Osuji&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET
1703494&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to clean water is a prerequisite for
improving or maintaining the quality of human life and boosting economic
productivity. Nanofiltration is critically important as a cost-effective method
for removing multivalent ions and organic contaminants from water. It is
increasingly utilized for pre-discharge treatment and reclamation of industrial
wastewaters and to address problems regarding the isolation of contaminants such
as pesticides, pharmaceuticals and personal care products. This project
addresses the need to improve the performance of current state-of-the-art
nanofiltration membranes using sustainable materials. The overarching goal is to
fabricate highly-ordered, aligned nanoporous membranes from plant-derived
materials using scalable methods and to characterize the performance of these
membranes. The industrial relevance and potential utility of the membranes
developed here represent broader impacts with significant societal relevance.
The project involves a range of additional broader impacts including K-12
outreach, curriculum development focused on environmental remediation, and
student training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential of self-assembled
nanostructured materials to serve as high performance nanofiltration membranes
has contributed significantly to interest in understanding and controlling
structure-property relationships in such systems. The realization of
deliberately nanostructured membranes using sustainable materials requires the
development of materials and methods to guide self-assembly of applicable
molecular species in membrane-relevant form factors. This project is centered on
such efforts. The overarching objective is the scalable fabrication and
characterization of high performance nanofiltration membranes for water
purification using sustainable materials. Precisely-engineered molecular
templates will be used to guide the self-assembly of plant-derived monomers to
form ordered systems. Suitably confined, these ordered systems yield aligned
nanoporous polymer films upon UV-induced crosslinking of the monomers and
subsequent removal of the molecular template. The PI will examine structure-
property relationships in self-assembled systems based on plant-derived
materials and will systematically characterize the rejection properties of
fabricated membranes. New methods will be developed to control the thickness of
selective layers in the sub-micron regime and to provide thickness control in
the presence of mechanical support layers. The specific objectives are: (1)
formation and characterization of self-assembled nanoporous materials using
unsaturated fatty acids from vegetable oils as renewable feedstocks; (2)
optimization of alignment processes and assembly of nanofiltration membranes;
and (3) Systematic performance characterization of nanofiltration membranes.