* 1703638
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and computational methods to study chemical transformations of solid xylose into useful compounds
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2021
* W. James Pfaendtner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 11/30/2021
* USD 236,000.00

The long-term security of our economy requires a portfolio of domestic
feedstocks to produce fuels and chemicals. Biomass is a promising choice;
however, conversion technologies that are reliable, reproducible and economical
have yet to come to market. Because of its low cost and versatility, biomass
fast pyrolysis technology is an ideal choice for producing a renewable stream of
fuels and chemicals. One issue with this technology that limits its
implementation is that the underlying physical and chemical properties of the
biomass transformations remain largely unknown. This project is a collaborative
research study involving engineering groups at the Universities of Minnesota and
Washington. In parallel, the teams are carrying out a detailed fundamental
investigation using experimental (Minnesota) and computational (Washington)
methods. The research has the overall goal of determining the mechanism of the
chemical transformation of xylan, a major constituent of renewable biomass, into
small molecule compounds that are precursors for fuels and chemicals. The
research will also benefit other high temperature conversions of similar
feedstocks to form a wide product slate. The educational benefits of this
project are impacting graduate and undergraduate researchers. The collaborative
project mechanism is an ideal way to enrich the training of students who
specialize in experimental or theoretical methods through regular interactions
and joint publication of research. The outcomes of this research project will
also enrich chemical engineering coursework by the addition of real world
problems and mini-projects stemming from the research results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this fundamental research project is to
elucidate all of the key pyrolysis reaction pathways in the evolution of xylan,
a biopolymer, to products. The experimental effort is based a new technique
called PHASR (Pulsed heated analysis of solid reactions), that is capable of
measuring rates of conversion in a regime totally free from transport
limitations. The simulations and modeling combine graph theory, ab initio
dynamics with the metadynamics method, and kinetic Monte Carlo modeling. The
team is first investigating the physics of forming a liquid intermediate phase
and the properties of the liquid intermediate with experiments and simulations.
After determining the structure and dynamics of the transient intermediate, the
project will focus on the kinetics and mechanism of biomass conversion. Detailed
PHASR analysis is combined with graph theory to determine suggestions for how
intermediate and final small molecule products are formed. Building on this, ab
initio molecular dynamics (MD) and cutting edge methods developed by the
researchers are used to discover individual reaction pathways and characterize
their rates. The final step combines the experiments and new mechanistic
insights to build a detailed overall model capable of describing both the
overall physics and chemistry of this process.