* 1703340
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Experimental and Robotics Investigations of Multi-Scale Spatial Memory Consolidation in Complex Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Jean-Marc Fellous, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 531,716.00

Navigation technologies are an increasingly important component of everyday life
in an ever more dynamic and complex world. One limitation of these technologies
is that they are optimized for a specific spatial scale. Another limitation is
that they do not use the knowledge of previous navigation to compute new paths,
essentially starting from scratch every time they are invoked. Recent evidence
shows, however, that the mammalian brain has evolved to use multiple spatial
navigation scales in parallel, and to use spatial memory to improve path
planning. How these scales are used and what advantages such uses provide are
still unknown. This project hypothesizes that multiscale spatial navigation is
crucial in large and cluttered environments. Experiments recording from the
neurons of the "brain GPS" system of the rodent (an excellent and efficient
spatial navigator) seek to elucidate the basic principles of memory-based
multiscale spatial navigation. These experiments will inform new algorithms that
will be implemented on a computer to simulate complex multiscale spatial
navigation, mimicking the neural computations of the brain. The simulations will
then be tested and improved on actual autonomous mobile robots navigating in
challenging complex environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use
wireless high density neural recording technologies allowing for parallel
recording of large populations of individual neurons. Optogenetic techniques
will be used to manipulate the activity of these neurons and study their impact
on the behavior and spatial memory of the animal. The multiscale pattern of
neural activity will be used in the development of a mechanistic computational
model, which will be tested in new and arbitrary simulated environments, and
generate predictions as to how the neural system might succeed or fail. Finally,
the simulations will be ported onto a mobile robot, where the algorithms can be
tested and improved when the robot is faced with real sensor noise and
unreliable world features.