* 1703052
* Experimental Studies and Computational Calculations to Advance our Understanding of Biochar Surface Chemical Functionalities Responsible for Pollutants Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Manuel Garcia-Perez, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2020
* USD 341,949.00

Proposal: 1703052 PI: Manuel Garcia-Perez

The high-temperature processing of plant-based (lignocellulosic) feedstocks is
used to produce carbon-based materials (biochars) that are used to remove
environmental pollutants such as pesticides and herbicides. Various parameters
have been found to affect biochar quality, including feedstock composition,
production conditions (e. g., temperature and reaction environment), and
contaminants. The focus of this project is to increase our fundamental
understanding of biochars, especially the nature of the active sites associated
with different removal mechanisms and how these active sites are formed. In this
project the PIs will integrate experimentation and modeling to gain an insight
into biochar chemical structures (active sites) associated with several
pollutant removal mechanisms. Results of this project may be used to guide
optimization of the production of biochars for removing environmental
contaminants.

The capacity to remove organic (pesticides and herbicides, pharmaceutical and
personal care products, plasticizers, dyes and polyaromatic compounds) inorganic
(phosphates, nitrates, ammonium and heavy metals) and gaseous (H2S, CH4, and
N2O) pollutants is an important attribute of biochars. The PIs plan to perform
fundamental research to better understand biochar adsorption rates and
mechanisms and the relationships of these factors to feedstock composition,
carbonization, and post-carbonization conditions. They will study the mechanism
of carbonaceous solids formation from cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin and
the role of different surface functionalities as active sites for the adsorption
of pollutants. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations will be used to
inform new deconvolution strategies for the analysis of Raman, XPS, and 13C-NMR
spectra of biochars. The capacity of these materials to remove gaseous, organic,
inorganic, and heavy metal pollutants will be evaluated, and the results will be
correlated with biochar chemical composition results. The resulting correlations
will permit the identification of relevant active sites in biochars. DFT
calculations will be used to further explore the adsorption mechanisms
associated with these active sites. This research will impact the field by
providing details of mechanisms responsible for the formation of carbonaceous
structures (polyaromatic deficiencies, oxygen and nitrogen containing functional
groups) that are relevant for pollutant removal. Results of this study may guide
the efficient production of inexpensive carbonaceous adsorbents as a powerful
environmental tool.