* 1703422
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Particle-specific DNA sequencing to directly observe ecological mechanisms of the biological pump
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Margaret Estapa, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2018
* USD 76,915.00

Carbon is fixed into organic matter by phytoplankton growing in the surface
ocean, and is naturally sequestered in the ocean interior when particles and
organisms sink: a process called the "biological pump." Because of its
recognized influence on the global carbon cycle, ocean scientists have studied
the biological pump for decades. However, we still do not have a sufficient
understanding of the underlying processes to accurately quantify and predict
carbon cycling. Much of this uncertainty stems from an inability to directly
link specific plankton in the surface ocean with the types of particles sinking
out of the surface ocean. To address this missing link in biological pump
research, this work will directly observe how plankton are transported out of
the surface ocean using novel, particle-specific observational approaches
embedded within an interdisciplinary field program that will finely resolve
upper ocean plankton groups and the resulting amount of sinking carbon across
space and in time. The genetic identity of organisms within different types of
sinking particles will be determined by sequencing the genetic contents of
individually collected particles. This new application of a molecular method
will definitively link surface plankton with sinking particles at five locations
across the Pacific Ocean. This work has the potential to transform our
understanding of the biological pump by identifying previously unknown links
between surface ecosystems and sinking carbon particles. Because this work is
embedded within an interdisciplinary field program, including biogeochemical
modelers and remote sensing scientists, these data will feed directly into new
models of the biological pump, improving our ability to quantify and predict
carbon uptake by the ocean. This project will train 1 graduate student and at
least 2 undergraduate researchers. Findings will be communicated to the non-
scientific public through blogs, videos, and the public communication channels
of participating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate prediction of the
global carbon cycle requires an understanding of the specific processes that
link surface plankton communities and sinking particulate carbon flux (export)
out of the surface ocean, but current methodological paradigms in biological
pump research do not directly observe these processes. This project will
comprehensively determine who is exported from the surface ocean and how using
new, particle-resolving optical and molecular techniques embedded within a
sampling scheme that characterizes export events at high time and space
resolution. The investigation suggests that different plankton types in the
surface waters are transported out of the surface ocean by distinct export
pathways, and that an understanding of these connections is critical knowledge
for global carbon cycle modeling. If successful, this work has the potential to
transform our conceptual understanding of the biological pump by directly
identifying mechanisms that link surface plankton with particle export, without
relying on bulk sampling schemes and large-scale correlation analysis. Particle
export environments will be studied at five open ocean locations during a cruise
from Hawaii to Seattle in January-February 2017. The surface plankton
communities will be characterized by a combination of satellite observations,
sensors attached to a free-drifting, continuously profiling WireWalker, an in
situ holographic camera, microscopy, and by sequencing 18S and 16S rRNA gene
fragments. Exported particles will simultaneously be captured by various
specialized sediment traps and their characteristics will be directly related to
their sources in the surface community by identifying the genetic contents of
individual particle types. Individual particles will be isolated from gel layers
and the 16S and 18S rRNA gene fragments will be amplified and sequenced. This
work would, for the first time, combine molecular approaches with particle-
specific observations to enable simultaneous identification of both which
organisms are exported and the processes responsible for their export.