* 1703435
* Alkaline earth metal enabled scalar imaging for high-pressure combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Volker Sick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2020
* USD 306,636.00

This project will develop a new research tool to enable improvements in the
design process for combustors and engines. Exploiting the same principle that
creates the bright colors of fireworks, this method uses light emission from hot
metal atoms and their combustion products to measure the temperature and other
combustion parameters. This method is simpler and cheaper than existing optical
techniques and will advance both research and development applications. This
project will study exactly how the brightness of the light emission at a range
of colors is linked to the temperature and the composition of the fuel-and-air
mixture. This knowledge then allows the use of digital photographs of the light
emission for the desired measurements, even with three-dimensional resolution.
This project will also create a platform for the engineering participants to
integrate the research work with several efforts that aim to increase diversity,
equity, and inclusion. For example, a project that develops new guidelines for
introducing engineering concepts at the high school level is underway in
collaboration with the School of Education. In addition, students involved with
the research can benefit from an affiliated translational research program that
supports the adaptation of university research results to commercially viable
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the spontaneous light
emission from thermally-excited combustion products of an alkaline earth metal,
specifically those of strontium, to develop a diagnostic tool for measuring
temperature and equivalence ratio in high-temperature, high-pressure
environments. Applications of this technique will enable advances in three-
dimensional imaging diagnostics, enhance the fundamental understanding of
combustion, and support the development of advanced combustion technologies by
lowering the complexity and the cost of experiments. The physical processes that
control the light emission depend on a range of factors and the influence of
these factors will be studied to enable the quantitative analysis of the light
emissions from the flames. The fundamental studies will be carried out in
laboratory burners and optically accessible research engines. This effort will
result in a model that can quantitatively describe the light emission under
combustion conditions. Then, experimental applications for measurements will be
demonstrated in modern direct-injection engines. These experiments will make use
of borescopes as well as multiple high-speed cameras or light-field cameras,
which can facilitate novel three-dimensional imaging.