* 1703919
* NANO-BLOOD: Modeling of BLOOD Flow and Vascular Wall Adhesion of Functionalized Non-Axisymmetric NANOcarriers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Joao Maia, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2020
* USD 354,231.00

Cancer and cardiovascular diseases are leading causes of death in the United
States. Understanding how to design nanoparticles, small particles with
diameters of tens of nanometers, to effectively deliver drugs through the blood
stream would have a dramatic impact on the development of the next generation of
pharmaceuticals. However, few nanoparticle-based products have advanced into
clinical use, so a fundamental understanding of how the nanoparticle size,
shape, and flexibility affect its biological fate is important. For example,
some studies indicate that longer, thinner particles show enhanced uptake by
cells, while other studies report the opposite observation. Therefore, there is
a critical need for both theory development and experiments performed on how
nanoparticles are transported in the blood stream and how their properties
affect delivery to their intended target. In this research project,
nanoparticles of varying properties are being produced in the laboratory and
then used in experiments in micrometer-scale channels. Complementary
computational modeling analysis is being performed. The results are providing
important insights into the behavior of particles flowing in the blood stream,
their adhesion to the walls of blood vessels, and their uptake by cells. A post-
doctoral scientist, two graduate students, and several undergraduate researchers
and high school students are being trained through this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research projects aims to develop a computational
particle-based, mesoscale modeling capability for predicting how size, aspect
ratio, and flexibility affect nanocarrier transport in the blood stream and
subsequent adhesion to vascular walls. This computational tool enables the
prediction of biological outcomes for nanoparticles and, in the future, may aid
researchers and pharmaceutical companies with rational nanoparticle design for
applications such as contrast agents and drug delivery vehicles. The research
project has a substantial experimental component, including the synthesis of a
library of nanoparticles with varying sizes, aspect ratios, and rigidities, and
tests of their margination and wall adhesion in microfluidic straight and
bifurcating channels. Data obtained from this research will impact science
across scientific disciplines, including mathematical modeling, polymer and
nanoparticle chemistry, and the field of nanomedicine.