* 1703931
* SHF: Medium: Optimistic Static Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Satish Narayanasamy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,079,989.00

Programs running on computers have become essential to today's society. They
enable commerce, operate machinery, control transportation, enhance social
interaction, and perform innumerable other important tasks. This research
project examines how to ensure that programs run correctly and securely as they
carry out their mission by monitoring their execution efficiently. The
intellectual merits are developing a new way to monitor programs as they
execute, which incurs far less overhead than prior methods. The project's
broader significance and importance are in helping programs programs run more
correctly and securely as they perform essential functions in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Static program analysis is a powerful technique
for understanding, verifying, optimizing, and transforming programs.
Unfortunately, usefulness of those static analyses is greatly hindered by the
need to prove their soundness, as soundness requires analysis of all possible
executions and sound over-approximations of a program. This research is
designing and using optimistic static analyses. They make optimistic assumptions
about a program, and are sound only when those assumptions hold true in an
execution. The optimistic assumptions, called likely variants, are typically
learnt by observing a representative set of executions. At runtime, these
assumptions are checked, and if they fail, remedial actions are taken. As
optimistic static analysis can prune a large fraction of the state space from
consideration, its scalability and precision can be one to two orders of
magnitude higher than conventional sound analysis. This project is exploring
several applications of optimistic static analysis ranging from security to
concurrency to hardware synthesis.