* 1703322
* Photocatalytic Active Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* John Gibbs, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2020
* USD 132,900.00

Active matter is matter composed of particles that can convert energy into
motion. Examples of active matter are schools of fish, flocks of birds, and
bacteria. Most examples of active matter are biological in origin, but presently
there is a significant amount of research into synthetic systems. This concept
is of interest because of the potential for controllable and reversible assembly
of larger structures, for the triggered capture, delivery, and release of cargo
such as drugs, and for using it as a tool for understanding biological processes
that are out of equilibrium. This proposal aims to identify and develop methods
for moving and manipulating nanometer-to-micron sized active particles in
fluids. For example, active spherical particles can be produced by coating one
hemisphere with a chemical that can react with another compound dissolved in the
fluid. Since the uncoated hemisphere is inert, the particle has a preferred
direction of motion related to the varying concentration of the dissolved
chemical. However, systems such as this cannot easily be switched on and off; if
the fuel is present, the particles remain active and moving. This research
project is exploring a novel system that can be switched on and off through
illumination by light. Special fabrication methods are being used to produce
light-activated particles with complex shapes in order to identify the role
shape has in how active particles move and assemble into larger structures.
Significant features of this research project are that both graduate and
undergraduate students are deeply involved in the research and that aspects of
the research are being incorporated into an undergraduate laboratory class. The
researchers involved in this project are bringing project-related demonstrations
to Hopi High School on the Hopi Reservation in Northern Arizona in an effort to
engage students in science who are underrepresented in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active colloids have received considerable attention
recently, but a number of questions remain unanswered regarding the mechanisms
of motion and particle self-assembly. In addition, the realization of functional
nanomachines, for example for cargo delivery, is still in its infancy. This
research project aims to study a photocatalytically active system, in which the
activity may be easily switched on and off. Specialized fabrication techniques,
based on glancing angle deposition (GLAD), are being used to produce active
colloidal particles with complex shapes and material compositions. These
anisotropic particles are being used to gain insight into how to control
particle motion and to investigate the role of shape in self-assembly of the
particles. This system of photocatalytic active particles of various shapes may
make possible new applications and a deeper understanding of propulsion at the
nanoscale. Ultimately, the researchers intend to control the pick-up and release
of cargo at the mesoscale using the self-assembly of these active particles. The
research project also includes a significant educational and outreach component,
including the development of a nanoscience based course, a new experimental
module for an undergraduate lab course, and the involvement of Native American
students from Northern Arizona.