* 1703890
* RUI: Development of novel surface-modified cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) for biomedical application as vaccine adjuvants: a descriptive study
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Karina Ckless, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2022
* USD 329,997.00

Cellulose nanocrystals have emerged as a new class of renewable materials for
various applications due to their remarkable properties and commercialization
prospects. Cellulose nanocrystals are also being explored for biomedical
applications, including drug carriers and vaccine adjuvants. Vaccine adjuvants
are substances or molecules that activate our immunological system, causing the
vaccines to be more effective. For example, aluminum hydroxide, a particulate
inorganic material, is the most commonly used vaccine adjuvant, because it has a
record of safety and efficacy. However, in some types of vaccines, aluminum
hydroxide is not always the most effective choice. Therefore, developing new
organic nanomaterials with potential vaccine adjuvant properties will broaden
the available number of systems so they can be selected to give the best results
for a given vaccine. This research project involves designing, developing, and
characterizing a range of cellulose nanocrystals and then determining their
safety and immune responses. Additionally, this research project is impacting
undergraduate student education, since they will be directly involved in
original research activities. Students are being trained on experimental
planning and data collection, as well as data interpretation and research
presentation skills. The experiential learning provided through this research
project would make SUNY-Plattsburgh students better prepared when seeking
employment or graduate school opportunities following graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers will develop a library of
modified cationic cellulose nanocrystals, by adding positively charged polymers
to their surfaces. These modified cellulose nanocrystals will be characterized
using spectroscopic, analytical and microscopic techniques. The toxicity and
potential immunogenicity of these nanoparticles will be assessed using mammalian
cells as a biological tool. The data generated form cell culture studies will
provide a solid basis for future animal studies to develop further vaccine
adjuvants. Also, these in vitro studies can form a foundation for evaluating the
in vivo safety and biological activities of new biomedical cellulose-based
nanomaterials. Undergraduate students are being thoroughly integrated into all
aspects of the research, from synthesis and characterization of modified
cationic cellulose nanocrystals to cell culture techniques and immunogenicity
and toxicity assays, as well as gene expression, protein isolation and
identification methods.