* 1703062
* MSB-ECA: Leveraging NEON data to investigate remote sensing of biodiversity variables and scaling implications
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Jessica Mitchell, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2019
* USD 288,851.00

Periods in Earth's history can be divided into geological epochs that correspond
to major changes in the evolution of life, such as the mass extinction of
dinosaurs in the Cretaceous Period. A mass extinction event is currently
underway that is many magnitudes greater than previous events recorded in the
fossil record. Humanity is widely considered to be in a new period coined the
Anthropocene Epoch on account of both extinction rates and the footprints our
societies are recording on Earth?s surface. It is not surprising then that
species numbers and biodiversity patterns are becoming increasingly relevant to
human survival and a rising priority across the world. Biodiversity provides
humanity with food, energy, and materials. The biodiversity of plant species can
be measured on the ground using calculations such as the total number of species
in an area, or the number of species weighted by the portion of area covered by
each species. Global biodiversity trends can be collected from satellites but
finer scale processes cannot be studied without an expanded network of ground
and airborne observations of the same species over short-term intervals (every 1
to 5 years). Remotely sensed and ground based measurements from the National
Ecological Observatory Network are well suited to complete this knowledge gap.
This award will combine measurements collected simultaneously from the ground
and the Network's Aerial Observation Platform, which has cutting edge optical
imaging and three dimensional laser scanning systems onboard, to test the direct
mapping of biodiversity variables. A method for measuring biodiversity will be
demonstrated at eight Network sites located along a latitudinal gradient in
eastern US temperate, broadleaf and mixed forest. Project activities will be
conducted over two years at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution. Two workshops
will be hosted that are designed to involve faculty and students across a
network of Primarily Undergraduate Institutions through collaboration with
Ecological Research as Education Network participants. Curriculum will be
developed that focus on interdisciplinary training of students in field data
analysis training, large dataset handling, macroecology theory and remote
sensing. Value added remote sensing map products, educational material and the
biodiversity processing framework generated from this project will be made
available to National Ecological Observatory Network data users for testing
other sites located in additional eco-climatic domains across the Continental
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documenting and understanding patterns of biodiversity
is a central issue in macroecology. To date, continental to global scale plant
diversity mapping has been based on occurrence data, biased by uneven sampling
and narrowly focused only on species richness. Vegetation diversity or
phytodiversity occurs along a range of temporal, biological, and spatial scales,
from genes to species, ecosystems and global biodiversity. Patches or corridors
of biodiversity across a local landscape can reflect areas where fine scale
patterns of species diversity are mechanistically related to broad scale
dynamics as represented by environmental variables. The first component of this
project explores an emerging concept in imaging spectroscopy where spatial
patterns of reflectance correlate with species diversity (the spectral variation
hypothesis). The second component of this project addresses cross-scale
interactions and will directly benefit macrosystems biology by enhancing theory
on scaling challenges related to spatial heterogeneity and interactions between
fine scale species diversity and broader environmental variables across
macroscale gradients such as latitude and time since glaciation. The project
investigates the following three questions: 1) what are the spatial and spectral
detection limits for species diversity mapping with Network Aerial Observation
Platform datasets and by extension, how limited is simple species diversity
upscaling, 2) what coarser scale natural and human variables are driving species
diversity patterns at the site level and where are local diversity hotspots
predicted to occur, and 3) how do patterns of and controls on species diversity
change along macroscale gradients and how is spatial heterogeneity expected to
influence macrosystem mapping and modeling? The value added optical and
structural diversity map products that are generated under this award will be
useful to larger remote sensing and ecology communities and help provide a basis
for new and synoptic exploration of relationships between functional and
taxonomic diversity in the US. The optical diversity products can also be used
to run simulations that evaluate the role of future satellite-based spectroscopy
missions in mapping Essential Biodiversity Variables. Overall processing flows
developed through this project will create new methods for identifying potential
landscape and genetic diversity hotspots and results can be used to test global
biodiversity theories related to latitudinal and elevational distributions.