* 1703925
* AF: Medium: New Frontiers in Equilibrium Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Xi Chen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,199,528.00

Concepts and methodologies from economics and social sciences have found
numerous applications in the study of the Internet and e-commerce. At the core
of many such applications lies the notion of equilibria, which has been widely
studied by game theorists and economists to model and predict the strategic
behavior of selfish yet rational agents. During the past decade, the computation
of equilibria in both games and markets has been studied intensively and many of
the exciting developments have brought new insights towards a much better
understanding of equilibria. At the same time, they opened up a window to many
new research challenges. The goal of the project is to explore some of the
important directions and problems that have emerged in the new frontiers of
equilibrium computation. Research along directions pursued in the project will
complement the already extensive literature in economics and social sciences on
equilibria, by offering new perspectives through the lens of algorithms,
approximation, and computational complexity. In addition to curriculum
development, mentoring PhD students, and involving undergraduate students in
accessible projects, the PIs will actively pursue outreach activities and
broadly disseminate results obtained in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some
of the research directions that the PIs plan to explore include the following:
1) Deepen our understanding of the new exponential-time hypothesis for fixed-
point computation employed by Rubinstein in his recent breakthrough, by
exploring its connections with other natural conjectures on the exact complexity
of fundamental equilibrium computation problems. 2) Explore connections between
two problems that have been studied intensively in the literature, the problem
of finding an approximate Nash equilibrium in an anonymous game with a
polynomial precision and that in a two-player game with a constant precision. 3)
Study the computation of equilibria in games and markets with a unique
equilibrium. Equilibrium as a prediction tool is more meaningful when a unique
equilibrium exists. 4) Work towards a dichotomy theorem for Arrow-Debreu market
equilibria that aims to classify every family of utilities into those that are
easy to solve and those that are intractable.