* 1703412
* Impact of Oil &amp; Gas Wastewater Disposal on Lake and River Sediments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* William Burgos, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

PI Name: William D. Burgos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1703412&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, unconventional Oil &amp; Gas (O&amp;G)
wells accounted for more than 1/2 of the oil and 2/3 of the natural gas produced
in the US. Unconventional O&amp;G wells typically produce 50 - 60 times more
wastewater compared with conventionally drilled O&amp;G wells. The growth in
unconventional O&amp;G development has raised concerns about possible risks
associated with wastewater management. Some facilities accept O&amp;G wastewater
for treatment and then discharge the treated water to streams; however, these
facilities may not adequately remove all of the contaminants of concern. This
study will provide evidence on potential adverse health and environmental
impacts resulting from inadequate O&amp;G wastewater management. The results are
expected to help regulators and industry improve O&amp;G wastewater management
strategies and prevent chemicals from entering the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to
determine if chemical signatures in the sediment record can be used to quantify
the historical impacts of O&amp;G wastewater disposal, and to evaluate the
potential biological toxicity of sediments contaminated by O&amp;G wastewater
disposal. A series of tasks will be completed to accomplish these objectives.
Watersheds with significant amounts of O&amp;G wastewater disposal and
hydrodynamic conditions for sediment retention will be identified. For these
reservoirs, sediment deposition models will be developed to reconstruct the
sediment stratigraphy and identify sediment sampling locations that retain a
coherent temporal record. Field sampling campaigns will be organized to collect
intact sediment cores from these locations. Core processing will yield paired
samples of sediments and porewaters as a function of depth. Sediment age will be
determined based on 210-Pb and 7-Be profiles. The physical, chemical, and
toxicological properties of the sediment layers in these cores will be
characterized to identify sediment intervals with distinct O&amp;G chemical
signatures. Contaminants of concern associated with O&amp;G wastewater include
salts, alkaline earth metals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, and
specialty organic additives. Porewater samples will be analyzed for indicators
of contamination, including anions (Cl, Br, SO4), cations (Na, Ca, Ba, Sr, Mg),
and trace metals (e.g., Cd, Cr, As, Pb). Sediments will be dried and analyzed
for these same elements. While major element concentrations can indicate
potential impacts from O&amp;G wastewater, isotopic ratios (226-Ra/228-Ra and
87-Sr/86-Sr) that can distinguish possible contaminant sources (e.g.,
conventional versus unconventional O&amp;G formation waters) will also be
measured. Organic contaminants in the sediments and porewaters will be
characterized by non-targeted analyses. The toxicity of the sediments will be
evaluated using a suite of human cell-based bioanalytical assays. Specific
receptors will be used to detect toxic responses such as DNA damage, induction
of xenobiotic metabolisms, adaptive stress responses, and hormone-mediated
activity. Outreach activities are planned to discuss results and implications of
the research with policymakers through the American Chemical Society's (ACS)
Science &amp; the Congress program, the scientific community through technical
sessions at ACS National Meetings, local schools with Creek Connections -- a
K-12 teaching training program at Allegheny College, and citizens in local
watershed groups.