* 1703663
* Managing Forests for Snow, Water, and Sustainable Ecosystems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jessica Lundquist, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

In western North America, forest management strategies have led to young, dense
forests that are more susceptible to drought, insect infestation, and other
stressors. Forests cover 30% of the earth's land area and almost 100% of many
U.S. mountainous regions. Thus, a change in forest structure has broad
ecological impacts, beyond those normally attributed to climate change. The PI
has shown forest cover may either increase or decrease the date of the first
snowmelt by up to two weeks. As mountainous snowpacks are a natural water
storage reservoir, the date of the first snowmelt affects summer river flow.
Summer river flow has wide ranging impacts on human, ecosystem, and agricultural
water demands. The effect of forest cover may be managed by increasing forest
retention and/or opening gaps in the canopy. This research project is developing
and testing hydrologic models for mountainous watersheds to determine how forest
change relates to the human-ecologic-hydrologic system. Additionally, the
researchers on this project are working with stakeholders to help students
understand the goals and concerns related to forest-water management and
educating undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art spatial data
analysis and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest managers would like to know
what site-specific actions to take for both sustainable water and forest
management. Light Detection and Ranging (Lidar) is a remote sensing method that
uses light in the form of a pulsed laser to measure distances to the Earth.
Lidar imaging, combined with spatially-explicit modeling, represent a break-
through in forest structure characterization and its relation to forest-snow
interactions. This research project is utilizing and adapting an existing
distributed hydrologic model to be used as a tool to assist forest management
decisions. Specifically, the project involves modifying the model to better
represent complex forest-snow interactions; using high resolution aerial photos
combined with forest and snow lidar datasets to extract meaningful model
parameters and to check simulated fields; testing model reliability over varying
winter weather regimes; testing model transferability between sites with
different forests and climate regimes, and working with an advisory team to
distribute the model and tools so that they can be applied to any watershed.