* 1703438
* Combined molecular simulation and experimental study to discover, predict and control enzyme immobilization in polymeric nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* W. James Pfaendtner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2022
* USD 395,688.00

Enzymes, protein-based biological catalysts, have enormous potential to
revolutionize the way we transform chemicals to useful products, treat disease,
or detoxify environmental contaminants. However, the use of enzymes in practice
is limited by their tendency to lose their activity through a variety of
mechanisms. One common strategy to improve enzyme robustness is to immobilize
and encapsulate it in a polymer, a large molecule composed of many repeated
subunits. This strategy holds great promise, but the polymer properties,
encapsulation technique, and enzyme/polymer interactions all play important
roles in determining the success of a particular encapsulation strategy. This
research project aims to compare and contrast computer simulations with
experimental results to help develop an efficient means of predicting beneficial
encapsulation strategies. Working with students through the UW College of
Engineering Math Academy, the researchers are providing many opportunities for
enriching the training of graduate students, improving education, and engaging
undergraduates from a local community college (Bellevue College) in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, successful enzyme encapsulations have been
discovered largely via extensive trial and error experimentation and
serendipity. This project, a combined study of molecular scale simulations and
experimental measurement of enzyme activity and release in various matrices,
seeks to build a rational design framework to discover, predict, and control the
essential governing driving forces at the enzyme/polymer interface.
Specifically, this project is demonstrating a comprehensive strategy, using fast
molecular dynamics simulations paired with statistical machine learning, to
identify sequence level descriptors of strong and weak binding of enzymes
encapsulated in polymer nanoparticles. Complementary experiments are being
performed that study enzyme loading, release and activity under a wide range of
conditions. The ability to rationally design such interactions would be a
transformative advance that could be applied to hydrogels, inorganic surfaces,
or other types of enzyme/polymer systems. The strong interplay between the
experiments and simulations will ensure that the results are accurate and
potentially help to identify areas of improvement for molecular dynamics force
fields and high throughput experimental design.