* 1703489
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Sequential and Parallel Algorithms for Approximate Sequence Matching with Applications to Computational Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Sharma Thankachan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 346,000.00

Sequence matching problems are central to the field of genomics, both in
analyzing naturally occurring sequences such as genomes and in analyzing data
from sequencing instruments. Often, methods that can accommodate a small number
of differences within the matching regions suffice in practice. Such methods,
described as alignment-free or approximate sequence matching methods, have
typically relied on heuristics. This project work is advancing the field by
creating a mathematical framework and solving multiple approximate sequence
matching problems with provably efficient run-time guarantees. Project work is
also supporting the development of practical heuristics inspired and supported
by the mathematical framework, development of parallel methods for solving
large-scale problems on high performance parallel computers, and studying the
impact of these methods on important applications. Project results are made
available through open source software for use by practitioners. Results from
this research will be incorporated into courses taught by the PIs, and
disseminated more broadly through book chapters and tutorials and accompanying
slides. The project will support research scientist and Ph.D. students in
interdisciplinary training for launching them into productive careers focused on
important problems of current relevance. Undergraduate participation is planned
through course projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project work builds upon recent
progress in alignment-free genome comparison methods, and exploits the
controlled error characteristics of data generated by high-throughput
sequencers, and the many bioinformatics applications enabled by them. Project
objectives include developing a robust algorithmic framework for designing newer
alignment-free methods based on approximate substring composition, and
developing sequential and parallel algorithms for pairwise approximate sequence
matching among large sequence data sets. The goal is to develop algorithms that
are asymptotically superior to quadratic alignment-based approaches, and achieve
good practical performance either directly or through further development of
practical heuristic that rely on the underlying theory. The developed techniques
will be further investigated in the context of important applications such as
read error correction, genome mapping, and assembly. Though conducted in the
context of computational biology, some of the methods are potentially applicable
to other areas such as text processing and information retrieval. Broader
research community will be impacted through release of software modules and
project work in important application areas.