* 1703662
* Efficient and Durable Solar Water Splitting by a Hybrid Nitride System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Dunwei Wang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2021
* USD 282,763.00

This project relates to artificial photosynthesis (AP) - the process by which
solar energy is directly harvested and stored in chemicals such as hydrogen. AP
is a critical emerging technology for ensuring the Nation's future needs for
sustainable energy and chemicals. Presently, AP photoelectrode materials lack
the ability to sustain stable high efficiency. The project will address this
challenge by studying the mechanisms behind photoelectrode degradation, along
with efforts to improve the stability of tantalum nitride (an efficient AP
photoelectrode) by integrating it with a nitride-based organic coating and
catalyst material. The results will contribute significantly to the eventual
goal of employing artificial photosynthesis as a large-scale solar energy
storage solution. The experimental efforts will be complemented by educational
efforts designed to develop novel curricula aimed at educating non-science
majors on the importance of renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
is inspired by the principal investigator's recent success in understanding the
factors that limit the performance of tantalum nitride (Ta3N5). The previous
results suggest that surface passivation by a non-oxide material, together with
a catalyst, is needed to actualize the full potential of Ta3N5 for high-
efficiency solar water splitting. Graphitic C3N4 (g-C3N4) represents a rare
material choice that meets the requirement. The project is also conceived within
the context that g-C3N4 has been shown effective in promoting a 2-electron
pathway for water oxidation. Together, the system presents a unique opportunity
to study material-related issues at the photoelectrode/water interface for solar
energy applications. The experiments will generate important insight into
photoelectrode destabilization mechanisms. They are also expected to yield
practically useful strategies to address critical issues such as low
photovoltage and poor stability. The most significant outcome will be the first
demonstration of water splitting at efficiencies &gt;10% by a
photoelectrode/water junction. Specific aims will be directed at 1)
demonstrating conformal and uniform g-C3N4 coverage on the surface of Ta3N5,
with carbon nanodots (CDots) deposited on the g-C3N4 as a co-catalyst to
disproportionate the hydrogen peroxide formed during water oxidation; 2)
characterizing the structure of the hybrid material; 3) conducting
electrochemical and spectroscopic characterization to probe whether the
introduction of g-C3N4 mitigates the Fermi level pinning effect that is typical
to Ta3N5; and 4) measuring the charge transfer kinetics at the
photoelectrode/water interface on Ta3N5 with and without g-C3N4 to understand
how g-C3N4 influences the charge transfer rates. Beyond the technical
objectives, the project will provide an opportunity to expand the sustainable-
energy workforce through graduate and undergraduate student education, and build
upon previous successes by the principal investigator's team in educational
outreach. A new collaboration with educational experts will be formed to
quantitatively assess the effectiveness of these efforts.