* 1703140
* Workshop: - Integrating Environment and Health:  2017 National Conference and Global Forum on Science, Policy and the Environment; Arlington, VA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* David Blockstein, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2018
* USD 49,998.00

1703140 Blockstein

The National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) will hold the 17th
National Conference and Global Forum on Science, Policy and the Environment,
January 24-26, 2017 in Arlington, VA. The conference theme is Integrating
Environment and Health. It will be an opportunity for STEM researchers,
educators, and students in higher education, K-12, and informal education to
gather with leaders from business, industry, government, and civil society
working in the fields of environment and health to develop a common vision,
share best practices, and develop new partnerships in order to advance the
convergence of environmental and health sciences and engineering.

The health of people and the health of the planet are intrinsically,
intricately, and intimately interconnected, but separate disciplines and
professions have developed each with their own programs and terminology that
even use similar terms such as environmental health or environmental health
sciences differently. The 2017 conference seeks to advance convergence towards
an approach to prepare scientists, educators, and practitioners to explore and
understand the connections and apply them in their professional activities. The
conference will be: 1. A forum for scholars, educators, students, professionals
and policymakers to share new science, best practices, and develop new
partnerships. 2. An opportunity for academics to gather with leaders from
business, industry, government, and civil society to raise the profile and
expand the effectiveness of scholarship that connects health and environment. 3.
An arena to help scientists and policymakers consider how research can inform
and be translated into policy and practices. 4. A platform designed to catalyze
new initiatives and partnerships. One of the conference's primary purposes is to
help build a convergent interdisciplinary field of environment and health.
Desired outcomes include: 1. Helping to build communities of practice in
environment and health utilizing collaborative approaches to identify critical
scientific and technological needs, learning outcomes, and effective practices
in key areas. 2. An avenue for enhanced STEM literacy for students in all
disciplines based on critical thinking about health and its relationships with
various environmental issues (climate change, pollution, international security,
environmental capital and the value (cost) of nature as it relates to health
impacts, and other challenges of modern society). 3. New pathways for teaching
about environment and health. 4. Stronger research programs that more
effectively take innovations in science and technology to the demonstration and
deployment stages. The project will help advance a broadly-defined,
interdisciplinary field of environment and health that includes elements of
science, technology, policy, ethics, environmental, health and biomedical
sciences. A broader integration of environment and health science will serve
society helping to elucidate the health benefits of environmental protection,
extend the relevance and practicality of STEM education, and forge critical
connections with research on health and the environment. The impacts of the
project will be evaluated through electronic surveys during and at the
conclusion of the conference and a follow-up survey six months after the
conference as well as a post-conference discussion with the conference planning
committee.