* 1703735
* A High Degree-of-Freedom Body-Machine Interface for Children with Severe Motor Impairments
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Ranjan Mukherjee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2023
* USD 379,925.00

Children with severe movement impairments often depend on assistive devices such
as wheelchairs, robotic arms, or communication aids for activities of their
daily lives. However, learning to control these complex devices can be
challenging for children. In this project, the investigators explore the
development of a general purpose body-machine interface that allows children to
control several devices using movements of the body. A key advantage of this
type of interface is that it is non-invasive, easy to wear, and can "grow" with
the child. The project will enhance basic understanding of how body movements
can be exploited to control external devices, especially in children. The
project will have an impact on the independence and quality of life for children
with severe movement impairments. A key challenge of this research is to
translate the body movements of the user into commands that can control the
robotic arm for performing an intended task. The traditional approach to this
translation problem has been based on principal components analysis (PCA);
however, this is not well suited for complex tasks requiring the control of many
degrees of freedom. In this project, the investigators will develop alternative,
novel methods that can take full advantage of the movement repertoire of the
user and can also yield intuitive control. In addition to the significant impact
of this research on the quality of life of individuals with disabilities, the
project includes outreach to K12 students and teachers to interest them in STEM
and improve their understanding of disabilities and motor
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current work will be carried out through
three aims. These are: 1) utilize a principal component analysis-based approach
for control of high degree of freedom movements within the robot; 2) develop a
virtual body model approach; and 3) determine learning characteristics of high-
degree of freedom body machine interfaces in children. Each aspect of the
research will be assessed through rigorous performance metrics. Specifically,
the objectives of this project are to: capture a wide range of motion patterns
using sensors on the head and upper body; and to map anatomically distinct
motion patterns to commands for controlling the robot arm using a virtual model
of the user's body. Based on the sensor data from the user, algorithms will be
used to calculate how the virtual model bends, twists, and turns; and these
deformations will then be translated into commands that control the robotic arm.
In addition to developing these methods, the investigators will also evaluate
the intuitiveness of these new methods by testing how quickly children can learn
to control a robotic arm using these methods.