* 1703655
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Engineering Charge Transport through Directed Orientation of Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Dunwei Wang, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 134,688.00

The project will investigate new materials and catalyst structures for the
efficient photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis of chemical reactions of
importance for the production of clean energy from the sun and other renewable
or sustainable resources. The research will also have applicability to a number
of technologies of importance to the Nation's economic competitiveness and
resource utilization, including energy storage, photovoltaics, and
optoelectronics. In addition, educational and outreach activities will be
incorporated, including both graduate and undergraduate student training, a K-12
workshop on interactive photocatalytic energy conversion, and summer research
opportunities for high-school students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) catalyst tungsten
disulfide (WS2) for the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction and the
photocatalytic reduction of water to produce hydrogen as a renewable component
of fuels and chemicals. Specifically, a unique edge-on orientation of the
nanoscale WS2 catalyst particles with respect to their supporting charge
transfer material will be investigated to achieve dramatically higher reaction
rates than obtainable with conventional flat particle oriented catalysts. The
dichalcogenides are known to be active due to the high catalytic activity of
their edge sites when supported on a semiconductor, metal, or carbon material.
Maximization of performance in these applications requires rapid charge transfer
across the TMDC/support interface. However, for the typical orientations of
TMDCs in most electro- and photocatalysts, the interfacial charge transfer is
especially slow, since it must occur across the inert TMDC basal plane. The
research will test the hypothesis that the rates of charge transfer across the
WS2-support interface will be increased by an edge-on orientation of the WS2
layers due to interfacial bonding, and that this rate can be tuned by
controlling the edge termination of the WS2 layers. The study will build upon
the investigators' preliminary results showing promising photocatalytic activity
of WS2 nanotube-arrays, in which the WS2 layers are in an edge-on orientation.
These WS2 nanotubes will be used as a platform to design and synthesize novel
Janus-type photoelectrodes and photocatalyst particles containing tailored
interfaces. To gain fundamental understanding of these interfaces and guide
their design, the investigators have prepared model systems consisting of WS2
single-crystals in either a basal plane or edge-on orientation. They will create
WS2-semiconductor, metal or carbon interfaces by depositing these materials on
top of the model WS2 systems and will measure the influence of WS2 orientation,
defects, and edge termination on charge transfer and recombination rates at the
interface. They will also perform measurements and modeling to understand these
rates in terms of underlying factors including interfacial bonding and
separation distance, interfacial dangling bonds and their electronic energies,
and step changes in electrical potential energy and local electric field at the
interface.