* 1703796
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Environmental Fate and Effects of Dichloroacetamide Safeners: An Overlooked Class of Emerging Contaminants?
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* John Sivey, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 135,231.00

PI Names: John Sivey&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1703796
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the herbicide formulations applied to crop fields
include a safener. Safeners are so-called "inert" ingredients, which are added
to protect crops (but not weeds) from possible damage caused by herbicides.
Safeners have application rates on par with many herbicide active ingredients;
however, unlike most herbicide active ingredients, the environmental fate and
effects of safeners are poorly understood. The purpose of this project is to
address the extensive knowledge gaps associated with the environmental fate and
ecological effects of a major class of safeners. This collaborative project
unites a multidisciplinary team of experts and students from a primarily
undergraduate institution (Towson University) and a doctoral-granting
institution (University of Iowa) with the goal of promoting sustainable
agricultural practices related to the use of safeners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance our understanding of the
environmental persistence and ecotoxicological risks of dichloroacetamide
safeners and their transformation products. Despite being classified as "inert",
safeners are biologically active and their bioactivity is anticipated to
increase via selected environmental transformations (including photolysis and
reductive dechlorination). Due to their extensive use, safeners likely represent
an overlooked class of emerging contaminants. Using commercial safeners and
their herbicidal co-formulants, this project will (1) determine their rates and
mechanisms of photochemical transformation in surface waters; (2) quantify their
extent of removal and/or transformation during simulated drinking water
treatment; (3) establish timescales associated with their biotransformation; (4)
identify products of these transformations, including how reactions alter
enantiomeric signatures of chiral safeners; and (5) evaluate ecotoxicological
risks of safeners and their transformation products toward non-target aquatic
organisms. Commercial formulations can include enantiomerically-enriched
herbicides co-formulated with racemic mixtures of safeners. As such, experiments
will include individual safener enantiomers, safener racemates, and safener +
herbicide binary mixtures representative of commercial formulations. As safener
use is projected to increase in the future, there is urgent need to obtain
reliable environmental assessment data for this chemical class. This project
will provide some of the first non-industrial data necessary to assess
persistence and risk associated with safeners in natural and engineered aquatic
systems. Moreover, as dichloroacetamide safeners are applied extensively to corn
used for food, animal feed, and biofuel production, this work confronts
challenges to sustainable development at the food-energy-water nexus. As society
grows increasingly reliant on agrochemical advances to feed a swelling
population, this work promotes sustainable agriculture by guiding the design of
environmentally-benign safener formulations. Central to this project is a
research partnership between a PUI (Towson University) and an R1 (University of
Iowa). A signature effort of this partnership is the participation of
undergraduates in the Summer Research Opportunities Program (SROP) at the
University of Iowa. SROP provides promising underrepresented students with
research experience, in addition to workshops and seminars designed to enhance
academic success and promote graduate education in STEM. In total, two graduate
and several undergraduate students will receive training at the interface of
environmental engineering, analytical chemistry, and toxicology, which will help
to better prepare tomorrow's research leaders and technical workforce to
confront the multi-faceted challenges at the food-energy-water nexus.