* 1703791
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Formal Analysis and Synthesis of Multiagent Systems with Incentives
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Rajeev Alur, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The project develops automated methods for the tool-aided design and analysis of
multi-agent systems with incentives. These systems are natural models for real-
world situations in which collections of actors interact with one another in an
autonomous and self-interested manner. For example, such a system can model a
set of software agents that participate in an internet-based protocol, such as
an advertisement auction or crypto currency; a collection of robots that share
physical or digital infrastructure; or a set of cells that participate in an
evolutionary process. The project combines game-theoretic and logical methods to
develop techniques for formal modeling, analysis, verification, and synthesis of
such systems. The end objectives of the project include reliable engineering of
protocols that govern interactions among autonomous agents, and computer-aided
understanding of naturally occurring game-theoretic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach of the project has
three dimensions. The first is the development of new formal models, correctness
requirements, and abstraction and reasoning principles for multi-agent systems
with incentives. Research directions include richer notions of equilibria in
multi-agent systems, and effects of interaction and randomization on equilibria.
Second, the project studies algorithmic tools for analysis and verification of
multi-agent systems with incentives with respect to desired requirements
regarding system behaviors and equilibria. The third direction is to
automatically synthesize mechanisms so as to guarantee desired properties.
Applications from a range of areas, including financial protocols, robotics, and
biology, are used to guide and evaluate the research.