* 1703389
* NeTS: SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integrated Design and Optimization of Millimeter-Wave Multi-Beam MIMO Networks for Gigabit Mobile Access
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Parameswaran Ramanathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 05/31/2023
* USD 660,901.00

Wireless technology is heading for a spectrum crunch with the proliferation of
data-hungry devices and applications. Millimeter-wave (mmW) technology,
operating between 30GHz to 300GHz, is a promising emerging solution that offers
orders-of-magnitude larger bandwidth than current systems and efficient spectrum
usage through beamforming. While recent research shows the tremendous potential
of mmW wireless in realizing unprecedented spectral efficiency, Gigabit rates
and low latency, it is tempered by significant theoretical and technological
challenges. In particular, the hardware complexity of the antennas and mmW
circuits, and the computational complexity of digital processing challenge the
current paradigms and require a fresh cross-disciplinary approach for addressing
tradeoffs in performance, complexity, and energy consumption. This project is
investigating fundamental tradeoffs in the design of wideband mmW wireless
networks through an integrated framework spanning communication and signal
processing techniques, hardware design, and networking protocols. The four-
investigator research team is uniquely qualified to undertake this research due
to their complementary expertise. The project is supporting six graduate
students, and broadening participation in cutting-edge research to
undergraduates and underrepresented groups through curriculum development and
outreach efforts. Industrial relationships are informing research, providing
opportunities for students, and facilitating technology transfer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new cross-domain framework is being developed for
integrated design of scalable mmW multiple-input, multiple-output (MIMO)
networks that employ multi-antenna arrays for multi-beam multiuser
communication. The research spans communication theory and signal processing,
mmW hardware and data converter design, networking protocols, and experimental
validation with a state-of-the-art testbed. The research is anchored on four
goals: 1) Development of a multi-beam MIMO network architecture and
communication/signal processing techniques for mobile access; 2) Investigation
of a scalable and reconfigurable slice-based mmW transceiver design for multi-
beam MIMO; 3) Investigation of medium access control and higher layer protocols
to address mmW propagation challenges and to fully exploit the advanced physical
layer capabilities; and 4) Integrated system modeling and assessment for
performance-complexity-energy optimization and experimental validation. Several
key operational requirements are being investigated, including multi-beam
forming and data multiplexing, dynamic beam-frequency allocation and carrier
aggregation, dynamic hardware reconfigurability, and flexible networking
protocols for diverse use cases. The research results are expected to: i)
advance the state-of-the-art of basic theory and design strategies for mmW
wireless; ii) act as a catalyst for cross-disciplinary design and analysis of
mmW wireless networks, and iii) lead to a deeper fundamental understanding and
design methodologies which could impact other applications including imaging,
sensing and radar.