* 1703825
* Understanding the Causes of Liquid Jet Atomization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Mario Trujillo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 348,280.00

In spite of the accelerated development of electrification, particularly for
automobiles, the global reliance on liquid fuels (bio-derived or petroleum
based) continues to be strong. With the ongoing use of these fuels, a need
exists for sustained improvements in pollutant reduction and fuel economy. A key
place to look these advancements is directly in the process of fuel injection
and spray formation. This area of investigation is not new, but unfortunately it
has faced daunting experimental challenges originating from the presence of a
dense cloud of minuscule droplets surrounding the liquid fuel core in the early
stages of spray formation. It is precisely this early stage of fuel injection
that is critical in the resulting spray characteristics and is ultimately linked
to issues related to fuel economy and pollutant formation. An attractive
alternative being pursued in the proposed work is the use of highly-detailed
computer simulations that can adequately interrogate all stages of spray
formation with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution. With these tools,
long-standing questions concerning the dynamics of spray formation and their
sensitivity to fuel properties and injection strategies will be addressed. A key
question targeted in the proposed work concerns recently observed patterns of
liquid fuel breakup, which seem to hint at some universal behavior of early-
stage spray development. If these patterns can be understood, there is potential
for controlling and optimizing them for maximum reduction of pollutant emissions
and improvements in fuel economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work aims
to uncover the underlying causes of liquid jet breakup and provide a newer
perspective to this relatively old problem by employing computer simulations.
Preliminary simulation results have shown the emergence of a large-scale sinuous
mode that is responsible for the atomization of the intact liquid core and is
associated with the largest production of interfacial area and interphase
momentum exchange. Hence, the main part of the proposed work begins with a
quantitative examination of this large-scale mode. Explanation of the growth of
this mode and other interfacial disturbances will then be pursued with a general
instability theory and with a mathematical description based on potential flow
theory (the intact liquid core is largely irrotational). To provide a more
comprehensive analysis of the breakup phenomena, the simulation of the flow
upstream of the injector nozzle will also be included. This upstream
conditioning of the flow has been established as being a key feature in the
development of interfacial instabilities and the breakup of the jet. Due to the
challenges involved in the simulation of liquid sprays with interface capturing
methods, new validation exercises will be undertaken, along with an automated
means of evaluating the appropriateness of the numerical resolution employed.