* 1703635
* CIF:Medium:Collaborative Research:Low Resolution Sampling with Generalized Thresholds
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2022
* USD 399,888.00

CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research:&lt;br/&gt;Low-Resolution Sampling with
Generalized Thresholds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jian Li, Lee Swindlehurst, and
Mojtaba Soltanalian
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantization of signals of
interest is a necessary first step in digital signal processing applications.
When signals across a wide frequency band are of interest, a fundamental
tradeoff between sampling rate, amplitude quantization precision, cost, and
power consumption is encountered. The investigators study low resolution
sampling techniques with general thresholds, which are affordable, technically
feasible, easy to apply, energy-efficient, and consistent with technological
trends. The enormous gains in capacity and spectral efficiency, for example,
that could be provided by a successful millimeter wave (mm-wave) massive
multiple-input multiple output implementation could have a revolutionary effect
on the performance of wireless systems nearly everywhere we use them: at home,
at work, at school, commuting via public transportation or by plane, shopping,
at restaurants, recreational venues, sporting events, and so on. Besides
consumer applications, there are many military- and security-related scenarios
where our systems could be used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
advancing fundamental knowledge in developing dynamic energy-efficient and cost-
effective sampling techniques and applies engineering principles to address the
critical needs of several important and related applications. Specifically, this
project involves addressing significant open questions, including deterministic
identifiability, performance bounds, and impact of thresholding pattern on
spectrum sensing and array processing, radio frequency interference mitigation,
and mm-wave communications to gain fundamental insights into the novel paradigm
of low resolution sampling with general thresholds, devising novel signal
processing algorithms, including effective and efficient sparse signal recovery
techniques and parametric maximum likelihood methods for enhanced performance,
and evaluating and demonstrating the performance using measured data. This
project also involves preparing students for engineering in the 21st century
through the incorporation of practical design and problem-solving techniques
into both the education curriculum.