* 1703263
* A Novel Fuel Cell Catalyst and Support Architecture Based on Edge-site Pyridinic Nitrogen-Doping on Vertically Aligned Conical Carbon Nanofibers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jun Li, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 430,349.00

The project will explore the effectiveness and working mechanism of a new
electrocatalyst design for low-temperature fuel cells. A pyridinic, nitrogen-
doped vertically aligned carbon nanofiber (VACNF) structure is used both as the
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) electrocatalyst and as the support for the noble
metal catalyst component. The hybrid design will potentially increase the
effectiveness of the noble metal catalyst, thereby opening the door to ultra-low
platinum-based fuel cell catalysts and improving the economic viability of fuel
cells for a broad range of energy applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is motivated by a recent study, by another group, of the ORR on a model
system consisting of well-defined graphitic edges at microgrooves ion-etched in
graphite crystals, which suggested that the active ORR sites are carbon atoms
next to the pyridinic N formed at these edges. The present project will advance
the current knowledge by focusing on creating a 3-D nanostructured carbon
architecture version of the 2-D model system in the form of well-defined
nitrogen-doped VACNF arrays that can be implemented in full fuel cells. Specific
technical objectives of the project include (1) understanding and controlling
the edge-site pyridinic nitrogen on the sidewall of conically stacked VACNFs as
a metal-free catalyst for ORR, the key rate-limiting step in fuel cells; (2)
exploring the pyridinic edge-doped VACNFs as highly stable hierarchical catalyst
supports for ultra-low Pt loading in both cathodic and anodic reactions; and (3)
interfacing the nitrogen-doped VACNF catalyst/support architecture with Nafion
ionomer to form a novel membrane electrode assembly (MEA) for integrated fuel
cell studies. The unique conically stacked graphitic structure of VACNFs is
employed to generate precisely controlled edge-site pyridinic N-doping at the
VACNF sidewall, while maintaining the ideal pi-bond conjugation of the internal
graphitic layers. In such VACNF arrays, the open space between the vertically
aligned nanofibers allows uniform Pt deposition and effective Nafion ionomer
infiltration to form novel interpenetrating bicontinuous MEAs. This will improve
mass transport and suppress the flooding issues common in fuel cells. To assist
experimental design and optimization, first-principles modeling will be
performed to establish the guideline for the physical and chemical behaviors of
N-doped VACNF based on the geometric location and configuration of the N
dopants, and the interactions with noble metals. These results will provide
critical scientific understanding that will facilitate the development of
sustainable catalysts for fuel cell technologies. In addition to the technical
objectives, the project will include a number of educational and outreach
components directed primarily at graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students. The
outreach programs will emphasize participation by middle- and high-school girls
and will also feature collaboration with Xavier University of Louisiana, a
historically black university.