* 1703645
* Polymerized Ionic Liquid Multiblock Polymers as Anion Exchange Membranes for Alkaline Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Yossef Elabd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Widespread commercialization of low cost, energy efficient, zero-emission
automobiles will have a significant impact on society. Increased use of battery
powered electric vehicles has reduced smog and decreased gasoline consumption,
yet these vehicles remain ill-suited for long distance travel due to lengthy
battery recharging times. Fuel cell vehicles also have zero-emissions and
decreased fuel consumption, yet require refilling of a fuel tank rather than
slow recharging. Replacement of a heavy and bulky battery with a fuel cell
decreases the weight and fuel consumption of the vehicle while freeing cargo
space. However, commercially available fuel cell designs are cost prohibitive,
due in part to high cost platinum catalysts that are necessary to extract
electrons from the fuel. Elimination of platinum will significantly reduce cost,
and is possible with a solid-state anion exchange membrane, or AEM, fuel cell
design. To be commercialized, the chemical and mechanical stability,
performance, and processibility of the AEM must be improved. To realize these
goals, this project will develop a new platform for molecular design of polymers
which impart multiple segments, or "blocks", that impart different
functionalities that enable optimization for the AEM fuel
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of triblock terpolymers from polymerized
ionic liquids allows simultaneous integration of functionalities that increase
stability, ionic conductivity, and processibility. Using this new chemical
platform, membrane synthesis will be optimized with the aid of predictive
modeling. Resulting membranes will be fully characterized and then incorporated
into fuel cells for testing. Fuel cell performance will be correlated to
membrane morphology to provide a feedback loop to optimize molecular design. The
project will train one graduate student and multiple underrepresented
undergraduate students. A new portable fuel cell demonstration module will be
built to educate K-12 students.