* 1703276
* CAREER: A General Framework for Methodical and Interpretable Anomaly Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Leman Akoglu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 04/30/2022
* USD 503,498.00

Anomaly mining is the task of finding irregularities in the data. It finds
applications in a plethora of domains, such as security, finance, astronomy, and
medicine. Despite its immense popularity, however, it remains an extremely
challenging task for many real world applications. For many practitioners, the
task is poorly defined and under-specified as existing definitions and solutions
are often too simplistic and do not directly correspond to the needs of modern
applications. This project takes the essential steps to bridge the gap between
research and practice to dramatically improve the usability, effectiveness, and
interpretability of anomaly mining techniques, and to ultimately mature the
field into a more valuable contributor to the larger world. It promises
significant impact on many concrete problems, such as insider threat, tax
evasion, and health-care fraud detection, important for the government,
industry, and the society. Collaborations with industry and hospital partners
aim to shepherd innovations into deployed technology, with tangible impact on
security and healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary agenda to achieve
these goals involves developing a new framework for anomaly mining that utilizes
multiple heterogeneous data sources and techniques in a corroborative fashion to
fundamentally reframe our understanding and ability to define, detect, and
describe real-world anomalies. The project formalizes novel definitions of
complex anomalies that fuse multiple data sources, and invents complex anomaly
detection algorithms that further present descriptions that provide rationale
for the detected anomalies. Research also explores and models anomaly ensembles
that systematically harness evidences from multiple detection techniques.
Ultimately, this project strives to push the boundaries of anomaly mining as a
field through this quest for principled foundations and practices.