* 1703219
* A Robust Human Blood-Brain Barrier Model Generated from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Eric Shusta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Shusta, Eric V. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1703219 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millions
of Americans are afflicted with neurological illnesses such as Alzheimer's
disease, Parkinson's disease, and cerebral AIDS. However, very few new
treatments have resulted, despite significant advances in the development of
both small molecule pharmaceuticals and biopharmaceuticals (gene and protein
medicines). In large part, the paucity of new therapies is due to a failure to
overcome the impermeable brain vasculature, also known as the blood-brain
barrier (BBB). Thus, accurate prediction of human BBB permeability prior to
clinical trials is one of the most significant challenges in neuropharmaceutical
development. A potential solution is the engineering of a cell-based, in vitro
model that can be used prior to clinical drug administration to mimic human BBB
permeability characteristics observed in vivo. To this end, the research team
recently created a BBB model based on brain endothelial cells differentiated
from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The resultant BBB endothelial
cells possess characteristics that potentially have the transformative capacity
for predicting brain drug uptake. The iPSC differentiation process would need to
be facile, scalable and robust for broad dissemination to industrial and
academic researchers. A major challenge to the ability to scale up is the need
for flow-based shear stress, which is not possible at large scale. To address
this challenge, this project hypothesizes that the effects of shear stress can
be mimicked by employing small molecules that can trigger key shear-induced
mechanotransduction pathways, thereby enabling large-scale BBB differentiation.
Finally, the fully mature BBB cells will be cryopreserved, scaled-out and
benchmarked using a panel of chemotherapeutics with known in vivo BBB
permeability. The project is designed to train one full-time graduate student
and one undergraduate researcher in this interdisciplinary space of stem cell
engineering to prepare them for careers in industry and academia. Stem cell-
based BBB modeling will also be disseminated to rural Wisconsin high school
students through hands-on experimental modules as part of the UW-Madison
Morgridge Research Institute Summer Science Camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on developing an in vitro model of the blood brain barrier (BBB)
that is scalable, chemically defined, and improves upon existing alternatives
for in vitro BBB models based on functionally-relevant metrics, including
transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) measurements and the expression of
drug transporters. To this end, the project builds on the research team's
recently created BBB model based on brain endothelial cells differentiated from
human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The resultant BBB endothelial
cells possess well-developed tight junctions, characteristic transporter
expression, and could ultimately possess the transformative capacity for a
priori prediction of brain drug uptake. The iPSC differentiation process would
need to be facile, scalable and robust for broad dissemination to industrial and
academic researchers. In its current embodiment, the BBB model requires a fairly
complex combination of undefined medium and matrix, in addition to multi-
cellular differentiation that requires BBB cell purification prior to use. To
address these challenges, the project plans to completely define the BBB
differentiation protocol using an innovative combination of temporal signaling
pathway activation and a defined matrix, resulting in a pure population of BBB
endothelial cells. Importantly, flow-based shear stress will be applied to
further mature the iPSC-derived BBB endothelial cells towards an in vivo-like
BBB phenotype that may be therefore more predictive of in vivo drug transport
properties; but it is difficult, if not impossible, to apply shear stress at
large scale. As a paradigm shift, it is hypothesized that the effects of shear
stress can be mimicked by instead employing small molecules that can agonize key
shear-induced mechanotransduction pathways, thereby enabling large-scale BBB
differentiation. Such proof-of-principle demonstration would motivate using
small molecules to substitute for mechanical forces in the differentiation
protocols of other stem cell products, such as heart cells, bone cells and
cartilage cells, and facilitate their practical large-scale production. Finally,
the fully mature BBB cells will be cryopreserved, scaled-out and benchmarked
using a panel of chemotherapeutics with known in vivo BBB permeability. In
summary, the team proposes to: 1) develop a fully defined protocol for the
differentiation of iPSCs to BMECs capitalizing on the sequential induction of
Wnt and retinoic acid (RA) signaling; 2) use BMECs to develop BBB-mimics in
transwell plates and enhance the BBB phenotype through delivery of small
molecules mimicking shear stress effects; and 3) validate the BBB model by
measuring the permeability of a panel of chemotherapeutics and comparing these
values against known in vivo permeabilities.