* 1703003
* RUI-TAILORING LOW-DIMENSIONAL QUANTUM MAGNETS TO EXPLORE PHASE DIAGRAMS AND CRITICAL POINTS
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jamie Manson, Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Quantum magnets constitute a major
research area in chemistry, physics and materials science. The phase diagrams of
such materials can be derived for a range of parameters, each of which tells us
something about how electrons interact with each other and their environment. An
ability to tune the parameter space is crucial to developing new materials of
potential benefit to society. This project, funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program in the
Division of Materials Research, targets the creation of architectures with
varying spatial dimensionality (i.e., 1D, 2D, or 3D) to place targeted materials
near these critical regions. Therein, strange things can happen to electrons;
for example, theory predicts that superconductivity and other states of matter
may emerge as a result of these peculiarities. To manipulate the magnetic
properties of our materials, the researchers employ chemical means, high-
pressure, and high magnetic fields. The highly collaborative project involves
several national and international user facilities. This provides unique
opportunities for undergraduate students to travel with the principal
investigator to partake in many of the planned experiments as well as to attend
professional conferences. Student involvement in every aspect of the project
stimulates their growth and enthusiasm as young scientists as well as provide
the impetus to begin graduate work in the future or to go on to careers in the
chemical and physical sciences. Mentorship and training of undergraduate
students is a high priority of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The solid state provides many examples of model quantum
systems however, the role of disorder and the details of atomic-scale chemistry
hinder our ability to control crucial parameters in any systematic way. This
project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program and the
Condensed Matter Physics Program in the Division of Materials Research,
hypothesizes that the key to developing a tunable quantum simulator is to
identify appropriate molecular systems. Indeed, metal-organic magnets are
materials whose primary structural building blocks embody a quantum component (a
transition metal ion with S = 1/2, 1 or 3/2 ground state) coupled through a
flexible and highly tunable organic framework. Therefore, studies are carried
out to tune these systems via chemical design so that (a) they form structures
able to promote magnetic exchange in well-defined topologies; and (b) the
single-ion anisotropy and strength of interactions between the chosen magnetic
units is modified. Systematic exploration of phase diagrams by tuning real
materials toward phase boundaries and quantum critical points (QCP) using
chemical means, hydrostatic pressure, and high magnetic fields is at the core of
this project. Undergraduate students, from all backgrounds, carry out the
syntheses and assist with data analysis and characterization of samples, travel
to state-of-the-art research facilities, and attend/present their work at
professional conferences. Student involvement in every aspect of the project
stimulates their growth and enthusiasm as young scientists as well as provide
the impetus to begin graduate work in the future or to go on to careers in the
chemical and physical sciences. Mentorship and training of undergraduates is a
high priority of this project.