* 1703548
* Quantifying dense gas dispersion in urban areas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Nigel Kaye, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 329,988.00

Proposal: 1703548&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nigel Kaye&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban canopies
can reduce pollution dispersion, leading to increased local concentrations of
pollutants. The physics of dense gas dispersion in urban areas is poorly
understood because of the health risks, cost, and measurement resolution
limitations of large-scale field studies. One goal of this research is to
develop a new laboratory method for safely studying dense gas dispersion in
urban areas at a spatial resolution not previously achieved, and use this method
to undertake high resolution, statistically rigorous validation of computational
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will study the influence of
topography-generated turbulence on building-scale mixing of dense gasses trapped
in urban canopies. The experimental technique will use simultaneous particle
tracking and light-induced fluorescence measurements of salt water being
dispersed by a freshwater flow. The simultaneous measurements of the time-
varying velocity and density fields will enable the calculation of the turbulent
pollutant flux along with all other mean and turbulent properties of the flow.
Experimental and published data will be used in a detailed statistical
validation study of computational fluid dynamics sub-grid-scale models to assess
their ability to model dense gas dispersion. The technique has significant
advantages over full-scale testing as it is cheaper, offers greater parameter
and boundary condition control and hence greater repeatability, has
significantly improved measurement spatial resolution, and does not require
releasing dangerous chemicals into the environment. In terms of the broader
impacts, the experimental technique developed will transform the study of dense
gas dispersion in urban areas through improved spatial and temporal resolution.
The measurements will enable the quantification of local mixing processes that
are particularly important in geometrically complex regions like urban canopies.
The primary societal benefit will be as a tool for responding to emergency dense
gas releases in urban areas. The PI has a good track record of recruiting
graduate students from underrepresented groups and will work through university
programs to recruit minority students for the research team. The research team
will work with the PI on educational outreach through the development of
physical demonstrations to be used at school outreach events and written up for
use by teachers in STEM classes.