* 1703056
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Organizational Emergence in the Era of Racial Risk:  The Black Guerilla Family and the Aryan Brotherhood in California
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,11/30/2018
* John Hagan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 11,145.00

Organizational Emergence in the Era of Racial Risk: the Rise of the Black
Guerilla Family and Aryan Brotherhood in California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance our understanding of the prison social system and its
affect on prison gang development by focusing on inter-organizational relations
and racial coercion within the prison environment. Using the development of the
Black Guerilla Family and the Aryan Brotherhood in the California prison system
as comparative case studies, the project will answer four interrelated
questions: (1) How does social control in the prison organizational field
coercively influence prison gang development? (2) What coercive processes propel
conflict or cohesion between racial groups in prison and how does this impact
prison gang development? (3) How does an organization?s relationship to prison
staff affect their development? and (4) How do social, political, and economic
changes in society affect the prison organizational field and its influence on
prison gang development? Understanding the prison organizational field and its
connections with prison gang development will provide support for improving
prison conditions and reducing the discriminate use of extreme punishment
techniques such as indeterminate solitary confinement. Study results will also
contribute to our understanding of the consequences of deprivation and racial
coercion on staff-prisoner and prisoner-prisoner relations, revealing how
prisoner and staff efforts to mitigate risk and manage threats can actually lead
to cyclical, racialized violence and fuel prison gang
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a comparative historical
approach and uses 42 interviews and approximately 600 archival documents about
the prison environment and prison gangs in Northern California, social and
political movements in California, and the California Department of Corrections
and Rehabilitation. The investigator will conduct 28 interviews to expand a
preliminary dataset that consists of (A) 14 interviews with Black Guerilla
Family founders and early members, formerly incarcerated men in Northern
California, and social and political activists from the Bay Area and (B)
archival documents and surveys collected from 8 archives: California State
Archives, UC-Berkeley?s Bancroft Library, Stanford University?s Green Library,
Golden State University School of Law Digital Archive, the Freedom Archives,
Michigan State University Black Panther Archive, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation Vault, and the It?s About Time Black Panther Archive. These
documents include federal investigations, internal CDCR investigations and
memos, California legislative hearings, prison incident reports, prisoner
letters and private correspondence, prisoner newsletters, reports from social
and political organizations, prisoner and prison staff memoirs, federal court
case transcripts, and state court case transcripts. The additional 28 interviews
will be conducted with members of the Black Guerilla Family, the Aryan
Brotherhood, correctional officers, and formerly incarcerated men. The project
is divided into three time periods to ascertain how these processes affect
prison gang development over time. The time periods examined are 1961-1971,
1971-1990, and 1990-2000, which allow the study to measure organizational
development across the turbulent social and political change of the 1960s, the
war on drugs and the massive influx of prisoners in California in the 1970s and
1980s, and the effects of mass incarceration as seen in the 1990s.