* 1703978
* Hydrodynamic considerations for multiple fin interactions in rapid maneuvers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alexandra Techet, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Jumping by any organism requires high bursts of power and muscular coordination.
Aquatic water-to-air jumpers must produce enough thrust to account for the
drastic drop in fluid density, and thus force-producing ability, when exiting
the water. Jumps represent short burst maneuvers in a restricted space (a single
body length) with finite duration (until the body has exited the water). This
work will investigate multi-fin interactions during short distance, confined
space, rapid jumping and swimming maneuvers in archer fish. The archer fish is a
unique fish species that uses multiple fins in concert to rapidly jump out of
the water from a stationary aiming position. The analysis of jumping behaviors,
in a controlled laboratory environment, and comparison with in-water maneuvers,
can yield valuable hydrodynamic insight into multi-fin interactions for a range
of rapid swimming behaviors. Coordinated fin motions are thought to enhance
thrust, increase stability and aid in aiming during rapid maneuvers.
Understanding complex multi-fin swimming strategies can help inform bio-inspired
swimming robot designs ? where multiple fins could be employed to increase
vehicle maneuverability in tight spaces or allow for controlled water-exit
maneuvers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Synergistic multi-propulsor relationships
identified herein could be paradigm-shifting for the design of future
bioinspired aquatic and aerial-aquatic vehicles. Several key hypotheses will be
considered: (1) tail kinematics during archer fish jumping are tuned for
specific jump heights; (2) secondary fins significantly enhance jump thrust and
body stability during rapid maneuvers; (3) jumping is an energetically viable
prey capture strategy in competitive environments. High-speed imaging of fin
motions and fluid flows will be used to develop a hydrodynamic model for the
relationship between thrust production during a jump and maximum animal jump
height, which is a controllable performance variable in the laboratory.
Synthetic aperture particle image velocimetry, a quantitative three-dimensional
imaging technique for flow field velocimetry, will measure the near body
velocity fields. Archer fish are a model fish species to investigate, as they
use multiple fins in concert to rapidly jump out of the water without any
upwards velocity at jump initiation. The archer fish jump allows us to look at
propulsive forces and momentum generated by the fish, as well as the
hydrodynamic energetics ? specifically the kinetic energy required to reach the
final jump height (i.e. potential energy) ? to better understand the unexplored
paradigm of sea-to-air exit. The unique morphology of the archer fish, with
larger aft fins (dorsal and anal fins) just in front of the caudal tail,
potentially adds both to the overall propulsive efficiency and thrust
production. Jump maneuvers and in-water maneuvers can be compared for further
understanding of the overarching role of multiple fin wake interactions in rapid
and unsteady swimming behaviors. The characterization of fin-fin interactions
during rapid burst jumping helps the organismal and evolutionary biology
communities better understand multi-fin function in fish swimming. The proposed
STEM outreach activities engage students in fluid physics and bioinspired
design, through programming and hands-on experimental data processing; these
activities are scalable and portable to the larger K-12 STEM community. Results
of the project will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and at conferences
in both the fluid dynamic and organismal biology communities.