* 1703493
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Network Configuration Synthesis: A Path to Practical Deployment
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* David Walker, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2022
* USD 582,240.00

All sectors of society depend on properly functioning computer networks. For
example, every day, millions of citizens order prescription drug refills, pay
their electricity bills, book hotels, shop for groceries, and participate in
thousands more activities online, through the cloud. But none of these services
will work if the networks that deliver information are down. Moreover, modern
business, healthcare, the military and the government are just as dependent on
reliable networks as everyday citizens. Many network outages are caused by
operators manually (and incorrectly) programming the 'configuration files' that
manage the ways that network devices forward information. While the flexibility
allowed by configuration files is essential, network outages are often caused by
operators using hundreds of low-level directives at each network device to
create network-wide policy. Because the global consequences of making even small
configuration changes is so drastic, many organizations take several weeks to
audit even small changes, limiting their ability to respond effectively to
traffic fluctuations, business opportunities, security threats and hardware
failures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A natural solution to these problems --
analogous to the trend in programming languages for software development over
the last several decades as programmers have moved from machine code to Java --
is to define more robust, higher-level programming languages for implementing
network policies. However, there are technical and pragmatic hurdles to surmount
before it will be possible to deploy new languages in industrial settings on a
large scale. In particular, existing network-wide policy languages are not
expressive enough for many desired network policies and often require wholesale
migration to new networking platforms. Hence, the overarching goal of this
project is to surmount the technical challenges that impede practical deployment
of high-level network programming languages. The project is developing the core
technology necessary to efficiently support and incrementally deploy high-level
network policies. The project leverages connections to two major cloud providers
as a means to test the resulting languages and systems on real industrial
networks, identify pragmatic barriers to adoption, and ultimately deploy the
technology where possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the PIs'
recent work on Propane, a new network programming language that allows users to
describe end-to-end paths for intra- and inter-domain routing, along with a
compiler that produces configurations for the industry-standard BGP protocol.
The results of this project will extend Propane in several ways to support
practical deployment: First, users will be able to declare device roles (e.g.,
top-of-rack switch) and the connectivity invariants related to them to enable
concise specifications. A new compiler will verify safety properties of policies
in the presence of such declarations and generate parameterized templates that
make compiler outputs more intelligible for operators. Second, users will
specify financial contracts that govern transit costs using a new declarative
language and the compiler will optimize routes automatically by generating
refined policies that meet objectives. Third, the Butane compiler will target
and exploit the benefits of heterogeneous back-end protocols and platforms.
Fourth, tools will help network operators infer new high-level configurations
from existing low-level configurations and to verify that new configurations are
equivalent to old ones. Finally, Butane will support mixed mode (legacy- and
high-level network operations) so engineers can migrate their networks slowly
over time and test partial deployment on small fractions of their live traffic.