* 1703310
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Oceanic Forcing on the Melting of West Antarctic Peninsula Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Carlos Moffat, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2021
* USD 211,861.00

The Western Antarctic Peninsula is the fastest-warming region in the Southern
Hemisphere and observations show widespread retreat of glaciers and ice sheets
in this region over the 20th century. The Antarctic Peninsula is an area of
growing importance internationally for scientific research, species and
ecosystem conservation, tourism, shipping, and US national interests in
Antarctica. The future melting of ice along the West Antarctic Peninsula is of
importance to the regional freshwater budget, ocean circulation, and ecosystems
in this biologically active region. Regional and global projections of sea level
rise indicate the West Antarctic Peninsula must be included in decadal scale
projections as the contribution to global sea level is at present equal in
magnitude to the West Antarctic Ice Sheet component. This study will examine the
role that the ocean is playing presently?and what role it might play in the
future?in the melting of ice along the West Antarctic
Peninsula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to understand the impact of
the ocean structure and dynamics on the melting of West Antarctic Peninsula
glaciers using a combination of high-resolution models and historic data. The
project focuses on (i) the importance that shelf circulation processes - driven
for example by wind and buoyancy forcing and by the exchange with the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current, and modulated by the complex bottom topography - have on
the melting of glaciers, relative to that circulation driven by the melting
glacier itself, (ii) the impact of the distinct differences in ocean properties
and circulation dynamics along the coast, with particular emphasis in
differences between Bransfield Strait and the shelf to the south, and (iii) the
competition of wind- and buoyancy-modulated exchange between the open ocean and
the shelf and the transport and mixing processes on the shelf in determining the
vertical structure of the nearshore thermal forcing, and its impact on glacier
melting.