* 1703634
* Partial Support for the Ninth International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences (ICASS IX)
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2023
* USD 166,220.00

This award constitutes partial support for the Ninth International Congress of
Arctic Social Science (ICASS IX), which will be held in June 2017 at Umea
University, Umea, Sweden. Since 1992 ICASS has brought together scholars from
around the world to share Arctic social science and humanities research. The
Congress provides an opportunity to share research methodologies, strategies and
results, and promotes international collaboration, not only among scholars, but
also between scholars and practitioners. ICASS IX will address Arctic issues,
and particularly issues of sustainability and sustainable development in the
Arctic, from numerous multi and interdisciplinary standpoints, within the social
sciences and humanities, between the social and natural sciences, and including
Indigenous knowledge. All of these approaches will advance new ways of
understanding the Arctic, a key region of our changing planet, both in the
academic community and among the public. The requested funding will support the
participation of early career researchers, Indigenous scholars, as well as
northern Indigenous community members. The Congress will foster expanded
collaborations between U.S. scholars and social scientists from other Arctic
counties and strengthen the leading U.S. role in advancing Arctic social
sciences. NSF support will also ensure that Alaska receives a prominent place at
the Congress, thus benefitting Alaska scholars, residents and Alaska Native
communities in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICASS brings together scholars
and other researchers interested in issues of the North. The focus of this
Congress will be on "People and Place" and the requested funding will be used to
support the participation of early career researchers, Indigenous scholars,
northern Indigenous community members, and participants from remote,
underrepresented regions. Arctic researchers in the social sciences and
humanities have a great responsibility to address the challenges of sustainable
development in the Arctic, with a specific focus on the people that live there,
including Alaska. ICASS IX will address a broad array of Arctic issues, in
particular the issues of sustainability and sustainable development in the
Arctic. Like previous ICASS meetings, this Congress will include a strong focus
on Indigenous knowledge and perspectives. The organizers, Andrey Petrov, Diane
Hirshberg (members of the organizing committee), and Peter Skold (President of
the International Arctic Social Sciences Association) will help build
interdisciplinary capacity and scholarship by supporting an increased
participation in the Congress scholars representing a broad spectrum of
disciplines. This in turn will provide new insights into key areas of concern
both from scientists and the public on the long term sustainability of northern
development and community well-being.