* 1703087
* Collaborative Research: DIAGNOSING THE TIMING AND DRIVERS OF NORTHEASTERN CARIBBEAN HOLOCENE DROUGHTS WITH SINKHOLE LAKE RECORDS
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Peter Van Hengstum, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 319,177.00

This century, 80% of the world could face insufficient water necessary for food
production, energy and national security, human health, and ecosystems. The
United Nations estimates that Caribbean losses related to climate change by 2080
will be $11.2B, with $3.8B from drought. Rainfall in the Caribbean and American
southeast is linked to similar ocean and atmospheric factors. However, geologic
records of rainfall document extreme Caribbean megadroughts lasting tens to
hundreds of years over the last several millennia. This project aims to identify
and communicate the causes and drivers of these megadroughts through research
and teaching American students at 3 institutions. It will help the United
States, developing nations, and small island nations mitigate future water
security risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate model forecasts of rainfall
changes in the American southeast and Caribbean for this century are currently
equivocal, and available paleoclimate archives from the Caribbean document
extreme megadroughts with a severity not observed in the instrumental era. These
droughts were apparently not uniform across the Caribbean, and their causes
remain poorly understood. Here, the investigators propose to develop a network
of long-term rainfall records from key portions of the northern Caribbean using
established geologic techniques and state-of-the-art climate modeling to
diagnose the climatic drivers of Caribbean droughts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is cofunded by the Paleo Perspectives on Climate Change Program and the
Office of International Science and Engineering.