* 1703089
* Deciphering the role of comammox bacteria in nitrogen removal systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ameet Pinto, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 374,196.00

Nitrification is a chemical reaction process that plays an important role in the
removal of organic nitrogen from municipal wastewater. Nitrification is also an
energy intensive process. The recent discovery of a single organism (the
comammox bacterium: COMplete AMMonia OXidiser) that can perform nitrification,
has led to research into whether this bacterium may be useful for creating a
less energy intensive process for nitrogen removal from wastewater. The ability
to manage comammox impact on nitrogen removal is critically dependent on a
fundamental understanding of its ecology, physiology, and engineering relevance.
This research project advances our understanding of the comammox bacterium by
developing novel, scalable, and quantitative methods for its characterization.
The project goals are being accomplished by coupling state-of-the-art molecular,
bioinformatics, and statistical methods with laboratory and field experiments.
This project is yielding fundamental insights into comammox bacterial
importance, ecology, and physiology and informing process strategies to exploit
this novel organism for sustainable nitrogen removal in wastewater treatment
plants. The research plan is integrated with a comprehensive suite of
educational outreach activities involving undergraduate, graduate, and K-12
students. The activities include a blend of bioinformatics training for
undergraduate and graduate students, mentoring of researchers from
underrepresented minority groups, and modules for K-12 students on wastewater
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring the effectiveness and sustainability of
nitrogen removal from wastewater requires a detailed understanding of its
biotransformation pathways. The recent discovery of comammox bacterium
represents a paradigm shift in the understanding of aerobic nitrification, the
first key step in nitrogen removal. The research team is investigating the
ecology, physiology, and engineering relevance of the comammox bacterium in four
key nitrogen removal process configurations. A primary objective of the project
is to develop novel methods to characterize the abundance, diversity, and
activity of comammox bacteria in complex microbial communities. A deeper
understanding of the impact of process and environmental conditions on comammox
bacteria will lead to improved strategies to manage and manipulate their
contribution in nitrogen removal. Results of this project are advancing our
understanding of the role and relevance of novel comammox bacteria within
complex nitrifying communities.