* 1703403
* CIF:Medium:Collaborative Research:An Information-theoretic approach to nanopore sequencing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Jens Gundlach, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Fast and inexpensive DNA sequencing technology is beginning to impact society
through applications ranging from personalized medicine to understanding of
ecological systems enabled by second generation sequencers. Wider applicability
of second-generation sequencing technology is limited, however, by the short
length of the DNA fragments that can be read. Nanopore sequencing has the
potential to overcome several shortcomings of state-of-the art short-read
sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create new
foundational theory and algorithms enabling several applications of nanopore
sequencing. This research will support nanopore technology to become a leading
next-generation sequencing approach. This project also contains a unique inter-
university education and research program, which will include joint and
collaborative student advising and curricular
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the advantages of nanopore
sequencing, methods for reducing and combating sequencing errors need to be
developed. In a nanopore sequencer, DNA is transmigrated through a nanopore, and
the ion current variations through the pore are measured to infer the DNA
sequence. The mapping from the DNA sequence to the observed current trace, has
several impairments (causing errors) including multiple nucleotides affecting
each observation, random variations in nanopore response, dwelling time
variations, synchronization errors, and noise. This project develops a holistic
approach using tools from information theory and bio-informatics based on
multiple interacting thrusts: (1) developing mathematical models and (2)
information theory for nanopore sequencing, (3) decoding algorithms exploiting
the structure of the nanopore channel, and (4) the theory and methodology for
applications in DNA forensics, DNA phasing and DNA information storage. We
couple this with an existing experimental nanopore sequencing research program,
guiding models and the theory/algorithms with specific data as well as
validating these ideas.