* 1703487
* SHF: Medium: Scalable Holistic Autotuning for Software Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Timothy Menzies, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 898,349.00

Software analytics distills large quantities of low-value data down to smaller
sets of higher value data that shed important insights for software quality
enhancement. It is essential for software effort estimation, risk management,
defect prediction, project resource management and many other tasks.  Software
analytics is a  complex, time-consuming process.  Recent research has tried to
alleviate the issue through intelligent optimizers  that make better use of
existing computational resources. The space of possible options for optimization
is very large, and spans over multiple layers: all possible settings for
algorithms, compilers, and execution time options. To complicate matters, there
are many competing goals that could be used to guide that tuning; e.g. reducing
CPU usage while increasing the predictive power of the learned model. Existing
research has mainly focused on limited optimizers that explore just a few
options at mostly one level while trying to improve on just one or two goals,
leaving the large potential of optimizations untapped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research proposes to advance the state of the art to holistic scalable
intelligent optimization for software analytics (SHASA). SHASA tunes all levels
of options for multiple optimization objectives at the same time. It achieves
this ambitious goal through the development of a set of novel techniques that
efficiently handle the tremendous tuning space. These techniques take advantage
of the synergies between all those options and goals by exploiting relevancy
filtering (to quickly dispose of unhelpful options), locality of inference (that
enables faster updates to outdated tunings) and redundancy reduction (that
reduces the search space for better tunings).  This research will produce
algorithms and tools that are demonstrably more useful and efficient for
software analytics research. Those techniques are generalizable beyond software
analytics for use in computational science and engineering at large.  An
important broader impact is minimizing CPU and memory usage, ultimately reducing
energy consumption in data centers, as data analytics computations grown
significantly in scale and become computationally more demanding.