* 1703307
* Nanobipolar junction interfaces for ion-exchange membrane and resin materials for electrochemical systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Christopher Arges, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2022
* USD 313,818.00

1703307 Arges&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing integration of renewable
energy sources that provide emission-free electrical power, electrochemical
technologies may soon extend beyond electric automobiles to also impact water
treatment and chemical production. A familiar example of an electrochemical cell
is the battery, in which electrons are released from a chemical species that has
stored electrochemical energy. The electrons travel via a controlled pathway to
complete the electrical circuit and provide electricity. As the electrons are
negatively charged, positively charged ions (for example, battery acid) must
simultaneously converse a physical barrier to maintain charge neutrality. A
solid-state polymer electrolyte separator provides these controlled and separate
pathways that simultaneously channel electrons and ions. In an environment that
is often quite corrosive and reactive, this separator must be chemically,
electrochemically, thermally, and mechanically stable. To minimize unwanted
energy and power losses, resistances to the transfer of electrons must also be
minimized, which can be accomplished via molecular-level design of the
separator. This project focuses on molecular design and optimization of a
relatively unexplored class of polymer electrolyte separators, called bipolar
membranes. A bipolar membrane incorporates a junction of positively and
negatively charged molecules at a shared interface for water splitting
electrochemical reactions. Electrochemical water splitting enables conversion of
transient renewable power to chemical energy for long term storage. This project
will engineer the bipolar junction on a molecular-level scale to minimize energy
losses, with potential impact to a number of electrochemical
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to overcome some of the
current limitations of bipolar membranes by correlating interfacial area in the
bipolar junction to water-splitting kinetics and mass transport related
resistances of water and ion species. Uncovering this correlation is anticipated
to yield lower resistant bipolar membranes that translate to lower energy
footprint electrochemical reactor-separator processes. The central hypothesis of
the project posits that an inverse, commensurate relationship exists between
cell overpotential for water dissociation and bipolar junction interfacial area.
Testing the central hypothesis will be accomplished by fabricating precisely
defined bipolar junction interfaces via two approaches: i.) constructing 2D
bipolar junctions on substrate surfaces through block copolymer lithography and
ii.) nanopatterning bulk membrane surfaces through nanostructured molds afforded
from block copolymer templates. The expected outcomes will reveal how the
salient structural features of bipolar junction interfaces govern
electrochemical cell performance when splitting water. Finally, the project will
contribute to the training of a future STEM workforce prepared to address future
challenges in the water-energy nexus, and it will spark 8th and 9th grade
students' interest in math with outreach activities that illustrate the utility
of algebra principles to materials design.