* 1703402
* Understanding Molecular Driving Forces to Tailor Macromolecular Materials with Dual-Thermoresponsive Behavior
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Kristi Kiick, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 396,763.00

1703402&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jayaraman, Arthi &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoresponsive molecules find important
applications in sensors, electronics, actuators, drug delivery devices, and
matrices for tissue engineering. Synthetic thermoresponsive polymers, such as
poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide (PNIPAAM)), and biological thermoresponsive
macromolecules, such as elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs), have been extensively
studied. Various molecular-level design aspects of these thermoresponsive
polymers, e.g., molecular composition, sequence, molecular weights,
concentration, etc., provide ways to tune the phase transition (e.g. lower
critical solution temperature or LCST) underlying their thermoresponsive
behavior. Furthermore, conjugation of these thermoresponsive polymers to other
polymers or substrates not only alters their LCST phase transition in a non-
trivial manner but also facilitates ways to manipulate assembly and disassembly
of nanostructures, by virtue of the dual thermal transitions associated with the
two polymers. As of yet, however, there lacks a set of universal guidelines to
predict how the molecular design of these polymers and their conjugates affect
molecular-level interactions or physicochemical properties driving the
thermodynamic phase transitions. The overarching goal of the proposed research
is to capture the molecular interactions governing LCST transitions in an
important class of thermoresponsive polymers, and to use the fundamental
understanding to design thermoresponsive conjugates with two separately tunable
thermal transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ ELPs as the
model system owing to the finely tuned control of hydrophobicity and molecular
weight (and consequently transition temperatures) that is possible with these
molecules versus other thermoresponsive materials. A key innovation is the
introduction of associating peptide domains to the ELPs (ELP-CXPs) so that pre-
association of short ELPs (that are computationally tractable) in the ELP-CXP
drives the ELP LCST-like transition into an experimentally accessible
temperature range. The collapse of the thermoresponsive ELP block subsequently
drives phase separation of the pre-associated ELP-CXPs in aqueous solution. The
resulting structures will also undergo an additional disassembly transition at
even higher temperatures owing to the unfolding of the associating block (CXP).
Both the lengths and compositions of the CXP and ELP blocks can be altered to
yield tailored transitions and assembly/disassembly; specific design features
will be informed by the development of the computational methods. The modular
design and precise composition of the ELP-CXP conjugates offers strategies not
only to modulate the transition temperature of the ELP domain via unreported
methods, but also to manipulate assembly and disassembly of nanostructures,
which has multiple applications in nanocomposites, nanoscale templating, and
drug delivery. Importantly, owing to the presence of the CXP domain, these
materials will be competent for further elaboration with peptide-modified
molecules and nanoparticles, expanding the versatility of the conjugates in
nanotechnology applications. The interdisciplinary nature of the research will
enrich the training of graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach activities
are proposed aimed at recruitment and retention of female and underrepresented
minority researchers in science and engineering careers.