* 1703331
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: A Unified and Declarative Approach to Causal Analysis for Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lise Getoor, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Observational data is available today in multi-relational form, often extracted
from various sources, and stored in multiple flat and interrelated tables.
Standard statistical methods for conducting causal inference on observational
data assume a very simple data model: a single table with independent units.
This research has the potential to significantly impact application domains
where differentiating causality from correlation is essential, e.g., education
policy and cancer genomics. The HUME project develops techniques for efficient
causal analysis using a declarative approach, over complex views, and over large
datasets that are integrated from disparate data sources. HUME uses a SQL-like
language and is integrated with a relational database system.

The project develops techniques for defining arbitrarily complex units,
treatments, outcomes, and covariates, by combining joins, data mapping, and
aggregates across multiple tables, and uses a causal network to choose a good
set of covariates for causal inference. The first part of the project develops
scalable techniques for sub-classification and matching for large data sets
obtained by declaratively integrating multiple data sources. The second part of
the project develops scalable methods for discovering causal relationships among
the attributes in the views by constraint-based, search-based, and hybrid
discovery processes. Finally, the third part of the project investigates
interferences among units arising from the complex views by designing normal
forms and automatic inference of underlying assumptions exploiting techniques
from database theory.