* 1703466
* Collaborative Research: 3D-Biofabrication of hASC-based Biomimetic Osteochondral Tissue and the Role of Extracellular Calcium Receptor
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Rohan Shirwaiker, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 203,641.00

PIs: Loboa, Elizabeth/Shirwaiker, Rohan&lt;br/&gt;Proposals:
1702841/1703466&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Osteoarthritis (OA)is a degenerative joint
disease that limits mobility of the affected joint due to gradual degradation of
the cartilage. It currently affects over 25 million people in the US, and these
numbers are only expected to rise. Current clinical approaches to cartilage and
osteochondral tissue repair are limited by donor site morbidity, tissue
scarcity, and poor long term functional outcomes. Engineered tissues can
potentially serve as more effective alternatives if they can be designed to
mimic native tissue characteristics. This project investigates a new
osteochondral tissue engineering strategy using human adipose-derived (fat-
derived) stem cells (hASCs) and 3D biofabrication techniques. A 3D construct
will be engineered to mimic the structural and biological characteristics of
native osteochondral tissue. This construct will be 3D-bioprinted with
physiologically-inspired materials that will produce site-specific
chondrogenesis and osteogenesis of hASCs. The mechanistic role of the
extracellular calcium sensing receptor in regulating hASC differentiation,
control that is critical for such an engineered construct, will be also be
studied. The characteristics of the engineered construct will be assessed using
in vitro methods as well as a proof-of-concept study using a miniature pig
model. The ability to create such a hASC-based biomimetic tissue transplant can
lead to a paramount clinical advancement for osteoarthritis treatment. The
knowledge about how the calcium sensing receptor(CaR)influences stem cell
differentiation can be utilized to develop engineered tissue alternatives for
other musculoskeletal tissues and regenerative medicine applications. This
project will also directly support the multidisciplinary education of a post-
doctoral scholar, and graduate and undergraduate students at the partnering
institutions. The PIs will continue their focus and efforts in recruiting
students from groups underrepresented in STEM. The learnings and outcomes from
the studies will be incorporated in multiple undergraduate and graduate courses,
and used during outreach activities including university open houses and summer
camps. Important findings will be disseminated through scholarly journal
publications and at local, national and international
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on investigating a new 3D
tissue engineering approach with possible translation to OA treatment.
Specifically, a novel 3D bioprinted quadriphasic construct will be engineered
using physiologically inspired chemical cues to induce site-specific
differentiation of human adipose-derived stem cells in a manner that
recapitulates the depth dependent compositional and architectural heterogeneity
of osteochondral tissue varying from the depth dependent compositional and
architectural heterogeneity of osteochondral tissue varying from the dense
surface layer of cartilage to the porous subchondral one, which is crucial to
its function during load bearing. The mechanistic role of the extracellular
calcium sensing receptor in regulating the osteogenic and chondrogenic lineage
specification of hASC, controlling of which is critical for this engineered
construct is also being investigated. To enable the advancement of fundamental
science while ensuring future clinical relevance, a synergistic approach
utilizing in vitro methods and an in vivo model will be used to achieve project
goals. The primary hypothesis is that gradients of the bioprinted beta
tricalcium phosphate (TCP) and decellularized articular cartilage extracellular
matrix (dECM) hydrogel with optimized stand-pore architecture will induce site-
specific hASC osteogenesis and chondrogenisis, with the CaR playing a central
role in this lineage specification. This hypothesis will be tested by completing
the following specific aims: 1) Investigate and characterize the effects of TCP
and cartilage dECM hydrogel gradients (in polycaprolactone (PCL) based
composites) and their 3D-bioplotted strand-pore geometries on site specific
osteogenesis and chondrogenesis, respectively, of hASC, 2) Determine the effects
of inactivation (siRNA and MPS2143, calcilytic) and activation (Cinacalcet,
calcimimetic) of the CaR on hASC response to extracellular Ca2+. In particular,
evaluate the ability of the CaR to regulate hASC osteogenesis as well as
chondrogenesis, 3) Assess in vivo site-specific hASC osteo- and chondrogenic
differentiation and integration of the optimized full-thickness quadriphasic
construct using a porcine osteochondral defect model and surgical approaches and
tools used in human surgeries (proof-of-concept pilot study). The planned
approach overcomes many of the limitations of current clinical approaches that
fail to mimic native tissue heterogeneity. The project uses multidisciplinary
methods from manufacturing, biomedical engineering and clinical sciences to
develop an understanding of the role of extracellular Ca2+ and the CaR in the
differentiation of hASC, and represents a new approach to creating a multiphasic
biomimetic tissue with the potential for clinical translation. From a tissue
design and manufacturing perspective, the project will provide new knowledge
about the material-process-structure interactions in the 3D bioplottig of PCL-
TCP/dECM composite constructs. From a clinical science perspective,
understanding and elucidating the role of the CaR in regulation of the effects
of extracellular Ca2+ on hASC lineage specification will lead to new
understanding of how pharmacological inhibition of activation of the CaR could
be used to optimize hASC based approaches to engineer bone and/or cartilage
gradients at desired tissue interfaces (e.g. cartilage, ligament.). Successful
osteochondral TE using hASC will allow for autologous tissue transplantation
using a patient's abundant ASC. The ability to place an hASC-induced transplant
that replicates full thickness osteochondral tissue will be a paramount clinical
advancement for chondral and osteochondral defect repair. Understanding the
mechanistic role of the CaR in hASC lineage specification will provide critical
knowledge for utilization of hASC in other musculoskeletal TE and regenerative
medicine applications.