* 1703883
* CHS: Medium: Data Driven Biomechanically Accurate Modeling of Human Gait on Unconstrained Terrain
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,182,466.00

Modeling human gait parametrically, efficiently and accurately is an open and
challenging problem with many applications such as ergonomics, animation,
biomechanics, rehabilitation, physical therapy, virtual reality and
entertainment. Gait is a complex process, because numerous human joint degrees-
of-freedom have to be simultaneously coordinated and adapted to varying types of
terrain, types of gait and related kinematics and dynamics. As a consequence, no
general-purpose models of gait kinematics on unconstrained complex terrain
exist, and even basic kinematic gait databases and related ground forces that
can form the basis for developing such models do not provide accurate
information. Most gait data are collected by the commonly used surface marker
systems, which suffer from soft tissue artifacts and are not sufficient for a
full understanding of gait kinematics. Developing a parameterized human gait for
unconstrained terrain will have broad impact on the fields of virtual reality,
next generation shoe design, computer animation, workplace safety, ergonomics,
sports medicine, biomedical and clinical research to aid people with gait
abnormalities. Project outcomes, including algorithms and datasets, will
ultimately be incorporated in the curricula of many fields including computer
science and biomedical engineering, and will result in a better informed
community of people working on gait modeling and its
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using recently purchased novel all-terrain
gait treadmills, motion capture, video cameras, ground reaction forces based on
force plates, and high speed ultrasonic images of knee and ankle joints, the PI
and his team have collected gait data from multiple people. The first goal of
this project is to integrate all of this data by exploiting novel computer
vision and multimodal optimization algorithms to produce an anatomically correct
human skeleton with human specific joints, human shape, ground reaction forces
and kinematic data. The second goal is to develop an efficient, accurate, and
general purpose parameterized model of human gait kinematics and biomechanics
capable of reproducing the data, and more importantly, predicting and
generalizing human specific gait for new types of terrain. The gait variations
to be modeled range from very slow shuffling to normal walking on a variety of
terrain conditions such as inclined and declined slope, left and right cross-
slope, and up and down stairs.