* 1703109
* Few-Body Dynamics in Simple Atomic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Schulz, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,030.00

Understanding how objects large and small move and interact with each other is
essential in our knowledge of nature and in developing technologies. The
interactions of even a small number of objects can be challenging to understand.
The "few body problem" (FBP) of physics refers to scenarios where three or more
objects mutually affect each other's trajectories. These scenarios arise in the
gravitational interactions of planets and stars and in the electromagnetic
interactions of atoms, ions, and electrons. At the microscopic scale, the laws
of quantum mechanics also affect particle motions. The resulting dynamics are
challenging to predict, but can be important for understanding atomic collisions
and basic reactions. This project will study atom-electron-ion scattering to
test new theories about the FBP in atomic systems. In particular, when the
particles in the FBP obey the laws of quantum mechanics, then the wave-particle
duality is important. This project will investigate how the nonlocal spatial
extent, or coherence length, of the quantum mechanical waves that represent the
particles can affect the way particles scatter from one another. This will lead
to improved understanding of reaction cross sections and scattering theory. Many
areas of science well beyond atomic physics are also concerned with the quantum
mechanical FBP. Therefore, this research is relevant to a broad range of
disciplines in science including nuclear physics, chemical physics, plasma
science, and accelerator physics. Students working on this project will gain
research experience with a broad range of experimental atomic physics
technologies and theoretical analysis methods.

Kinematically complete experiments will be performed that address two major
themes. First, the reaction dynamics will be investigated for collisions under a
broad range of conditions including some regimes with electron speeds close to
the projectile speed. Second, projectile coherence effects, which concern a
fundamental aspect of quantum mechanics, will be studied. Such experiments
simultaneously determine the momentum vectors of all involved particles, i.e.
the scattered projectiles, any ejected electron, and the recoiling residual
target ions. From the data, reaction probabilities (cross sections) will be
extracted as a function of numerous parameters. The data will provide sensitive
tests of sophisticated theoretical models that depend on the transverse
coherence length of the projectile beams. To better test these models the
divergence of the beams, and hence the de Broglie wave coherence for the
projectiles, will be manipulated in the experiment. In this way the impact of
the projectile wave properties on the few-body dynamics in charged-particle
interactions with atoms will be studied.