* 1703009
* Collaborative Resesarch: P2C2--The Flavors of Southwest Hydroclimatic Extremes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Timothy Shanahan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,594.00

This project aims to investigate hydroclimatic variability in the American
Southwest (SW) in a comprehensive manner by building on the long-established
tree-ring record of SW drought as well as new pilot data. This will be
accomplished by (a) integrating the use of both widely-used and newly emerging
tree-ring, cave and lake proxies; (b) using an interannual- to-decadal-
resolution focus on the last 2,000 years, and a coarser examination of the
earlier Holocene and its apparent longer and more severe dry extremes; (c)
deploying a broad mix of monitoring, calibration and cross-comparison of
proxies; (d) specifically focusing on multiple temperature proxies, in addition
to moisture sensitive proxies; (e) emphasizing seasonality, particularly the
disentangling of cool-season and warm-season (monsoon) variability; and (f)
integrating proxy records, climate modeling, and proxy forward modeling to
increase understanding of regional climate feedbacks, causes of SW hydroclimatic
variability, and model realism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
address six primary science questions: (1) How do moisture and temperature
anomalies combine to produce the droughts and pluvials of the past? (2) How can
a multiproxy approach best be used to investigate the various flavors of extreme
hydroclimatic events over a range of time scales, interannual to centennial? (3)
Are local temperature anomalies associated with hydroclimate extremes linked to
large-scale temperatures, or are they more regional and related to hydroclimatic
feedbacks? (4) What are the relative contributions of winter versus summer
monsoon variations to SW megadrought and pluvial periods? (5) How well are
hydroclimatic extremes and their drivers represented in state-of-the-art Earth
System Models? (6) How can a refined understanding of drought and its drivers
improve estimates of future drought risk?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include supporting the training of graduate and undergraduate students;
outreach to K-12 and general public education on climate variability via the
Biosphere2 in Arizona; and stakeholder engagement with farmers, ranchers, public
health, water managers, and urban managers with special emphasis on Colorado
River water managers and users via regular outreach efforts of the multi-
university Colorado River Research Group.