* 1703936
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Diagnosing Datacenter Networks with Quantitative Provenance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Andreas Haeberlen, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 856,480.00

The increasing complexity of data center networks has made it considerably more
difficult to identify the source of a networking problem when something goes
wrong. However, a set of new diagnostic tools can help diagnose subtle bugs that
would be difficult to find with existing tools.&lt;br/&gt;One promising approach
is based on data provenance, a concept that was originally developed by the
database community but is now increasingly being applied in the networking
domain. In this approach, the network keeps track of causality as data flows
through the system -- for instance, by noting a router's configuration state
that contributed to a particular forwarding decision. This information can then
be used later to determine a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive explanation of an observed
networking problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
quantitative equivalent of provenance for data networking that can be used to
reason about properties such as time or probability. The key idea is to use this
provenance to improve root-cause analysis of network events. The proposed effort
will develop the scientific foundations of quantitative provenance, as well as
practical techniques for capturing, storing, and reasoning about it. The
investigators will add several quantitative metrics to provenance: temporal,
probabilistic and influence; three research thrusts will be considered, one
corresponding to each of these metrics. The project will explore efficient and
reusable implementations of new diagnostic tools, which will be applied to
several concrete case studies.