* 1703846
* RI: Medium: Computation, Language, and Games
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Joseph Halpern, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,176,580.00

While game theory has been able to make useful predictions in many situations of
interest, it is well known that, in many games of interest, the predictions of
game theory are simply incorrect. This project focuses on one potential
explanation: players' computational limitations. Game theory has assumed that
all players are rational. In the literature, "rational" is taken to mean, among
other things, that players can compute their beliefs and a best response to what
they believe other players are doing. But such computations may not be so easy
to perform. The project will still assume that players are rational, but will
try to model explicitly the fact that people are computationally bounded and are
affected by how games are framed/described in terms of language. It will then
consider the consequences of assuming that people are playing rationally in the
sense of doing the best that they can, subject to their computational
limitations and how they describe their world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the project will focus on three inter-related topics. 1) Taking
computation into account in human behavior: The project will investigate how the
formal models introduced in the PI's earlier work on games with computationally
bounded players can be used to explain human behavior such as rational
inattention, where people seem to ignore variables that seem relevant, and
anomalies in human behavior in real-world deployments of game theory to
applications such as security of wildlife and fisheries, forest protection, and
drug interdiction. 2) Computational and language issues in dynamic games:
Intuitively, as an agent does computation, his understanding of the game
improves, his judgments of uncertainty becomes sharper, he may become aware of
more options, and his utility function may change. The project will investigate
approaches to modeling this process, including issues such as procrastination
effects ("I'd rather start my diet tomorrow and eat the chocolate cake today
than start my diet today"; if this reasoning is applied every day, the agent
will never start his diet). 3) Cryptography and game theory: Modern cryptography
can usefully be viewed as a game between resource-bounded agents. The project
will investigate these connections, with the hope of being able to design better
cryptographic protocols. One concrete outcome of the work will be better
mechanisms for achieving desired outcomes. For example, understanding the effect
of computational limitations on people's behavior may enable better mechanisms
for preventing poaching. A particular focus area will be Bitcoin, which can be
viewed as a game between resource-bounded miners.