* 1703029
* P2C2:   Decomposition and Reconstruction of Drought Variability Across the Continental United States and Northern Mexico
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alton Williams, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 501,014.00

The western United States (U.S.) and northern Mexico have experienced intense
and prolonged droughts over the past two decades that have reduced water
resources, enhanced wildfire activity, and raised concerns regarding whether
water policies are designed for a sufficiently wide range of future
possibilities. Concurrently, much of the eastern U.S. experienced a centennial
wetting trend, minimal warming, and repeated floods, but paleo evidence
indicates that this region is nonetheless prone to devastating decade-scale
droughts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is unclear if these contrasting trends are
dynamically related and whether they have been aided by anthropogenic forcing.
The observed low-frequency hydroclimate events that motivate this research are
abnormal in the observational record, but paleoclimate reconstructions indicate
that extreme, prolonged swings in hydroclimate often occur naturally. The aim of
the project is to extend a range of spatially continuous drought metrics for at
least 1,200 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use new gridded
reconstructions of annual hydroclimatic variability over the past millennium to
better understand the drivers of low frequency, decadal scale hydroclimate
variability across the US and northern Mexico using three research approaches:
(1) determine the degree to which anthropogenic warming has altered the
millennial standing of observed soil-moisture in recent decades; (2) reconstruct
the leading modes of interannual to multi-decadal drought variability over the
past millennium across the U.S. and northern Mexico, with particular focus on a
mode critical for California water resources and a mode reflecting an east-west
dipole that may lend insights regarding observed multi-decade trends; and (3)
reconstruct and diagnose the east-west dipole in drought variability across the
U.S. and determine how the expected magnitude of natural multi-decade variations
in this mode map onto projected climate trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts involve support for an early career scientist and the development of
regional- and continental- scale reconstructions of hydroclimate variability in
the United States spanning the past millennium of value to water resource
managers.