* 1703678
* CIF:Medium:Collaborative Research: Foundations of Coding for Modern Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2022
* USD 855,850.00

Coding and information theory provide a very rich body of knowledge from theory
to concepts to constructions for creating, leveraging, and removing ?redundancy"
in ways that have revolutionized the digital era. This project brings these
concepts and techniques to bear in a new field: large-scale distributed
computing. The modern paradigm for large-scale distributed computing systems is
driven by  "scaling out" of computations across clusters consisting of as many
as tens or hundreds of thousands of machines. As such, there is an abundance of
resource redundancy that can be exploited. This project develops a foundation
for "coded computing", a new framework that combines coding with distributed
computing to overcome several fundamental challenges limiting the performance of
today's large-scale distributed computing platforms. The research outcomes of
the project will be integrated into education and will be disseminated
broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a principled and foundational
approach to providing a unified coding framework to tackle three key challenges
in large-scale distributed computing: significant delays due to straggling
nodes; large communication loads between computing nodes; and massive input
data-sets. In particular, three novel coding concepts are proposed for
distributed computing: coding for injecting computation redundancy to mitigate
straggler issues; coding to trade local computation with global communication;
and coding for statistically principled data sketching. The unified role of
codes in both doing fast sketching and in providing robustness to straggler node
delays and communication bottlenecks is also studied.