* 1703598
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Sentinel: Constructing Secure Smart Home IoT Systems via Managed Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Brian Demsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2022
* USD 970,408.00

Smart home devices such as thermostats, baby monitors, security sensors, and
power meters offer significant benefits for the home, such as reduced energy and
water consumption, increased convenience, and remote monitoring.  But they also
bring significant new security challenges as they communicate with one another
and with cloud-based systems through the Internet. Configuring the diverse
security settings for these smart home devices is very challenging for home
users and the device manufacturers often do not have the resources to invest in
securing their smart home products. The Sentinel project is developing tools and
techniques to improve security for smart home systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Sentinel project team is developing techniques to isolate smart home devices
from attackers, while still implementing the desired functionality. The approach
leverages two key insights: (1) Smart home devices do not need to run general
purpose software, and (2) Smart home devices rely heavily on communication
patterns that can be pre-defined. The Sentinel software development framework
provides application programming language support for defining and enforcing
communication patterns, as well as static analysis tools to check security
properties. The system uses router-based runtime protection to secure local
communications among smart home devices and cryptographic techniques for
securing the communication between devices and the cloud.