* 1704701
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Understanding and Fortifying Machine Learning Based Security Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Wenke Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,216,000.00

Preliminary research has demonstrated that by gaining control of the input data
or the computation procedures, attackers can render machine learning based
security analysis ineffective. The history of cybersecurity suggests that such
attacks will become more prevalent in the real-world soon. This project
undertakes the challenge of developing a systematic, foundational, and practical
framework to understand attacks, quantify vulnerabilities, and fortify machine
learning based security analytics. The framework's effectiveness is evaluated
and demonstrated in realistic, user-facing environments, using real malware
datasets. This project aims to fundamentally change how machine learning based
systems will be designed, developed and deployed for security and malware
analytics, cybersecurity more broadly, and numerous other application areas in
science, education, and technology, as the use of machine learning is
ubiquitous. The findings can lead to new breeds of adaptive defense systems that
are highly resilient to current and future security attacks, helping protect the
nation and its citizens from cyber harm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
combines multiple novel ideas synergistically, organized into four inter-related
research thrusts: (1) machine learning theoretical framework, based on machine
teaching and active learning, for understanding attacks, quantifying
vulnerabilities, and measuring the capabilities of adversaries and model
robustness; (2) algorithmic techniques for machine learning resilience, to
adaptively counter adversaries' feature and sample manipulation strategies; (3)
extensive evaluation of the identified attack and defense strategies with real
and mutated malware datasets, on existing security systems, and demonstrate the
improved attack resilience of the new, fortified machine learning system; (4)
system-level countermeasures in real-world user-facing security analysis
environments.