* 1704141
* Integrated Experimental and Computational Studies Of MILD Oxy-Coal Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Terry Ring, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 493,290.00

1704141 &lt;br/&gt;Sutherland, James C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxy-coal combustion
(OCC) is a viable technology that produces a concentrated carbon dioxide (CO2)
stream suitable for sequestration. However, nearly all coal power plants in
operation today, and most slated for construction, are air-fired power plants.
Moderate and Intensive Low oxygen Dilution (MILD) combustion has been proposed
as a technique to achieve higher combustion efficiencies, to produce higher
uniformity in reaction zones, to reduce pollutant formation and to provide more
uniform heat flux. This project aims to combine these two technologies and to
investigate fundamental questions surrounding MILD oxy-coal combustion (MILD-
OCC). Improved understanding of MILD-OCC can lead to viable retrofits or new
designs for boilers that will not only improve efficiency but also provide
sequestration-ready CO2 streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is motivated
by the hypothesis that simulation and experiments, analyzed together over a
multi-scale range of conditions, can provide valuable insights into MILD-OCC
systems. Such insights can be used to design cleaner, more efficient, and more
reliable coal combustion systems. A multiscale, hierarchical approach will be
undertaken whereby state of the art experiments obtained under well-controlled
conditions can be used to study individual phenomena (particle ignition, char
oxidation/gasification, etc.), and this understanding can be moved up-scale to
more complex and practical systems. This research will combine existing
experimental data of OCC with new data to be gathered at Tsinghua University on
MILD-OCC systems and with multiscale modeling and simulation to improve
understanding of MILD-OCC systems. The simulation and experimental work will be
closely interwoven, with experimental results used to validate models and
simulations used to guide experimental measurement needs. Additionally, focus on
both instrument models (facilitating comparison between experiment and
simulation) as well as techniques for upscaling models, beginning with high-
fidelity models and coarsening to obtain models suitable for implementation,
will be pursued. This award is co-funded by the CBET Environmental
Sustainability program and the Office of International Science and Engineering.