* 1704542
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Towards a Usable, Practical, and Provably Secure Browser Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ljudevit Bauer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,228,800.00

Web browsers have become the predominant software platform for interacting with
services such as shopping, banking, and health care. Many of the same
technologies that enable these applications, such as third-party JavaScript and
browser extensions, also have the unintended effect of making users' private
information vulnerable to theft or misuse. Existing security policies and
mechanisms---such as the same origin policy (SOP), the content security policy
(CSP), and permission systems for extensions---are too coarse grained and not
sufficient to protect users' data. Prior work has proposed information flow
control (IFC) as a solution. However, existing IFC solutions are not yet
practical: they suffer from poor usability and struggle to interoperate with
other enforcement mechanisms that protect parts of web applications or browser
state. The goal of this project is to construct a practical, usable, and secure
browser infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a modular
model for a provably secure browser infrastructure using compositional
principles. This model will be instantiated with concrete enforcement mechanisms
to develop a browser that meets the functionality standards of current browser
platforms. An important part of the project is to understand users' perceptions
and expectations with respect to security goals; to extract practical IFC
policies based on user data; and to build mechanisms that help users safely
navigate the web. Finally, the project will develop testing and validation
benchmarks and use these benchmarks to compare the effectiveness and the cost of
different enforcement mechanisms. The results of this project will lay the
foundation for building practical web browsers that have information flow
security built in. This project targets technology that people use every day and
has the potential to help not only web application developers but all web users.