* 1704436
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: A Structure-Math-Function Approach for Designing Robustly Intelligent Synthetic Nervous Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Roger Quinn, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 753,043.00

Robots are becoming integrated into more areas of life, no longer confined to
the predictable environment of a factory, performing the same task. Robots that
work among humans require greater intelligence and the ability to adapt to
changing tasks in an unpredictable environment. This work develops a
sophisticated control system for robotics by modeling the control systems in the
brain of a remarkably intelligent, capable, and adaptable insect: the praying
mantis. This work promises to transform our understanding of intelligence in
both robotics and neuroscience. A model of decision-making in the relatively
simple brains of insects advances the study of more complex brains. The model
will then be used to allow a legged robot to adapt its movement to suit its
goals such as assisting humans, or its "needs" such as seeking energy or
avoiding danger. These advances seek to give robots the autonomy that animals
have. Instead of being programmed for every possible situation, a robot could be
trained, continue to learn from experience, and improve efficiency even in novel
situations. At an after-school robotics program at an inner-city school,
students will benefit from hands-on experience creating robots with the unique
perspective of bio-inspired design and modeling of nervous systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work expands the scale and sophistication of a
synthetic nervous system (SNS), a continuous time dynamical model of praying
mantis nervous system, and applies it to robotic control. Multi-channel neural
recording and stimulation techniques are revealing how insects simplify motor
control by distributing computation throughout the nervous system. This project
leverages these techniques to understand how the capability of the "higher"
level (the brain, where sensory input is processed) is directly supported by
intelligence in the "lower" level (ganglia that coordinate the legs). These data
will be used to develop and implement an SNS to control the six-legged
MantisBot, endowing it with online learning and intelligent autonomy.
Neurobiology will inform this work in all three specific aims: 1) Investigate
the lower-level intelligence of the mantis nervous system and use the results to
increase the intelligence of MantisBot's low-level control networks; 2)
Investigate the correlation between descending commands and behavior and use the
results to develop a simplified brain (i.e. high-level controller) for
MantisBot; and 3) Investigate the effect of conflicting visual inputs (e.g.
simultaneous prey and predator) on descending commands, and use these findings
to endow MantisBot with robust intelligence distributed throughout its SNS.