* 1704240
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Low-Resolution Sampling with Generalized Thresholds
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Jian Li, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2021
* USD 176,441.00

CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Low-Resolution Sampling with Generalized
Thresholds

Jian Li, Lee Swindlehurst, and Mojtaba Soltanalian

Abstract

Quantization of signals of interest is a necessary first step in digital signal
processing applications. When signals across a wide frequency band are of
interest, a fundamental tradeoff between sampling rate, amplitude quantization
precision, cost, and power consumption is encountered. The investigators study
low resolution sampling techniques with general thresholds, which are
affordable, technically feasible, easy to apply, energy-efficient, and
consistent with technological trends. The enormous gains in capacity and
spectral efficiency, for example, that could be provided by a successful
millimeter wave (mm-wave) massive multiple-input multiple output implementation
could have a revolutionary effect on the performance of wireless systems nearly
everywhere we use them: at home, at work, at school, commuting via public
transportation or by plane, shopping, at restaurants, recreational venues,
sporting events, and so on. Besides consumer applications, there are many
military- and security-related scenarios where our systems could be used.

This project involves advancing fundamental knowledge in developing dynamic
energy-efficient and cost-effective sampling techniques and applies engineering
principles to address the critical needs of several important and related
applications. Specifically, this project involves addressing significant open
questions, including deterministic identifiability, performance bounds, and
impact of thresholding pattern on spectrum sensing and array processing, radio
frequency interference mitigation, and mm-wave communications to gain
fundamental insights into the novel paradigm of low resolution sampling with
general thresholds, devising novel signal processing algorithms, including
effective and efficient sparse signal recovery techniques and parametric maximum
likelihood methods for enhanced performance, and evaluating and demonstrating
the performance using measured data. This project also involves preparing
students for engineering in the 21st century through the incorporation of
practical design and problem-solving techniques into both the education
curriculum.