* 1704859
* SHF: Medium: Conquering MPSoC Complexity with Principles of a Self-Aware Information Processing Factory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,080,000.00

Self-aware systems are reactive and proactive, and capable of thinking outside
the box, thereby coping with unforeseen situations in a dependable manner,
unlike existing systems that are designed subject to deterministic procedural
specifications. Self-awareness is a critical feature for future cyber-physical
systems which must cope with scenarios that were not conceived when they were
developed. This project will explore directions for overhead-efficient self-
aware HW/SW systems while guaranteeing critical properties such as real-time
behaviors, resilience, security, and energy efficiency. The project's study of
self-awareness principles to enable autonomy in the face of dynamic and
unforeseen changes will significantly impact a wide range of cyber physical
application domains that critically depend on high-performance, low power and
dependable computing. These systems play a pivotal role for conquering key
societal challenges in healthcare, safety, transportation and industrial
automation. The parallel collaborative nature of this project with German
partners at TU Braunschweig and TU Munich will train a diverse group of students
and researchers and enrich their learning experiences by exposing them to the
challenges of delivering autonomous IT services in different societal and
international contexts. The project will also motivate undergraduate and
underrepresented students to pursue research and graduate studies. Students will
benefit tremendously from exposure to and involvement in the design of new
design and development paradigms for introducing cognition into a multi-tiered
CPS and IoT infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces the
notion of a self-aware Information Processing Factory (IPF) as a step towards
autonomous Multi-Processor System-on-Chip (MPSoC) platforms in Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS) and the Internet of Things (IoT). The objective is to
synergistically merge the situational flexibility of self-aware/self-organizing
emergence with the predictability of hierarchical top-down control in a holistic
multi-layer approach, resembling an Information Processing Factory. Sensory
information at multiple scales -- on-chip, run-time systems, applications --
will be monitored, fused, and interpreted intelligently to assess health status,
mitigate adverse effects, and optimize system goals of the MPSoC using a novel
hierarchy of self-aware control loops that can both manage complexity, as well
as achieve guarantees. Additionally, a unique scalable distributed run-time
verification architecture will enable hardware-supported cross-layer monitoring
of parametric specifications. The resulting approach synergistically covers the
multi-tiered abstraction hierarchy from low-level VLSI circuits to runtime OS
and dynamic application software. The project complements efforts at TU
Braunschweig and TU Munich in Germany, and leverages research efforts on self-
awareness and self-organization at the hardware and software layers of cyber
physical multicore platforms.