* 1704532
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: StructNet: Constructing and Mining Structure-Rich Information Networks for Scientific Research
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Jiawei Han, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Science disciplines have been generating huge volume of research publications,
which is of tremendous value but far beyond researchers' capacity to digest and
analyze. There is a critical need to automatically (with the help of widely
available, general knowledge-bases) transform research text into structured
information networks on which advanced search and analytics tools can be
developed to facilitate researchers and practitioners to quickly locate
knowledge, make inferences, and even generate new scientific
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at developing a new data-to-
network-to-knowledge (D2N2K) paradigm to transform massive, unstructured but
interconnected research text data into actionable knowledge, by integrating
semi-structured and unstructured data. First, organized heterogeneous
information networks (hence called StructNet) are constructed, and then powerful
mining mechanisms on such organized networks are developed. With a focus on
biomedical sciences, the project investigates the principles, methodologies and
algorithms for (i) construction of relatively structured heterogeneous
information networks (called MediNet) by mining biomedical research corpora via
attribute extraction, relation typing, and claim mining, and (ii) exploration
and mining of the networks so constructed via graph OLAP and task-guided
embedding. The project develops an extensible framework to facilitate
literature-based scientific research. The study on construction and exploration
of MediNet not only impacts biomedical research but also consolidates this data-
to-network-to knowledge methodology, readily to be transferred to other domains,
for automatic transformation of massive unstructured text data in those domains
into structured and actionable knowledge.