* 1704472
* WRF: Experimental observation and modeling of coagulant mediated contaminant removal: flocculation, floc blankets, and sedimentation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Leonard Lion, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 337,000.00

PI Name: Monroe L. Weber-Shirk&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1704472&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flocculation is a core process used to convert
water from rivers, streams, and reservoirs into safe drinking water. In the
flocculation process, particles and some dissolved contaminants stick together
and form large aggregates that can be removed by sedimentation. Although
flocculation is the workhorse of surface water treatment, it is not well
understood, and thus it has not been possible to optimize the design of the
nation's drinking water treatment infrastructure. The PIs plan a detailed
investigation of particle aggregation mechanisms that operate under decreasing
mixing conditions (tapered flocculation) as a technique to enhance performance
as measured by particle removal in drinking water treatment. Preliminary studies
indicate that the proposed tapered flocculation design has the potential to
decrease contaminant loading to filters by a factor of 10, which would
significantly reduce operation and maintenance costs for drinking water
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models produced by the PIs indicate that
flocculation performance as measured by settled water turbidity is the most
significant limiting factor for current treatment process sequences. In
flocculation the increasing separation distance between flocculating particles,
as the flocculation process proceeds, limits high rate
flocculation/sedimentation from producing water with particle concentrations
less than a few mg/L. The primary goal of this investigation is to increase the
number of particles flocculating by lowering the relative velocity of particles
at the moment of collision through a stepwise decrease in mixing intensity. A
decrease in velocity gradient enables aggregates that had previously reached
maximum size to have successful collisions with smaller particles. Thus, each
time the fluid deformation rate is decreased, the distance between growing
particles is decreased, and non-settleable particles have an additional
opportunity to be transformed into settleable particles. Experiments will be
carried out on pilot treatment plants with differing flow rates and imaging
capacities. These experimental units have the combined capacity to vary velocity
gradients and image flocs to determine size distribution in both influent and
effluent. This experimental design has the capability to investigate tapered
flocculation in hydraulic and floc blanket flocculators with varying residence
time, velocity gradients, and energy dissipation rates to determine optimal
flocculation design. The research performed under this project will be
integrated into Cornell?s AguaClara program, which was initiated over a decade
ago for developing low-cost water treatment technologies so that communities can
self-finance and sustainably operate municipal water treatment plants. The
tapered flocculation technology has the potential to significantly lower the
cost of high quality water treatment and enable the development of lower cost
treatment plants to protect the health of the approximately two billion people
who do not yet have access to safe drinking water.