* 1704745
* Preferred binding regions for highly selective and orthogonal multimodal protein separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 326,479.00

The development of protein-based medicines is having an increasing impact on
treatment of many diseases such as cancer, diabetes, and multiple sclerosis.
Example protein-based therapeutics for these diseases include rituxan, insulin,
and avonex, respectively, with many more in various stages of discovery and
development. However, the costs of producing these drugs and the challenge of
obtaining highly pure drugs with minimal side effects is a major challenge.
Often, negative side effects are due to small amounts of impurities that are
extremely similar to the desired medicine and thus very difficult to remove.
This NSF funded project will develop new methods for efficiently removing these
challenging drug impurities from a range of biopharmaceuticals, resulting in
reduced production costs, safer medicines and more patient
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental and computational project will
focus on the development of multimodal ligands for chromatographic resins, which
will be used to achieve highly selective separations of complex biological
products. The new multimodal ligands will increase selectivity by targeting
specific regions on protein surfaces, enabling the effective removal of
bioproduct related impurities, a critical challenge in biomanufacturing.
Experimental characterization techniques will validate molecular-level binding
information. The computational work will predict key binding faces and relative
binding affinities and will produce powerful predictive tools for bioprocess
development. The development of multimodal systems with unique and targeted
selectivities on specific protein surface regions will enable the development of
highly effective orthogonal downstream processes guided by molecular level
understanding and predictive tools. This will result in reduced costs and
improved product quality and safety. Graduate and undergraduate students working
on this project will be directly exposed to the state of the art in biophysics,
chromatography and molecular simulations. More broadly, the concepts will be
incorporated into both undergraduate coursework and on-line animated movies for
the the Molecularium project, the flagship outreach and education effort of
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's Nanotechnology Center.