* 1704788
* SaTC: CORE: Large: Viaduct: A Framework for Automatically Synthesizing Cryptographic Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Andrew Myers, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 2,499,998.00

Advanced cryptographic technology can enable new kinds of computing systems:
secure computing and storage in the cloud, internet voting systems, secure
cryptographic currencies, and more. Unfortunately, advanced cryptography has not
been widely adopted, because it tends to be too complex for most software
developers to use correctly. Even experts make security-critical mistakes with
modern cryptography. The expected outcome of this project is a simpler and less
error-prone way to build computer systems that use advanced cryptography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a new way to put the full power of
cryptography in the hands of programmers. Programmers will not design
cryptography directly. Instead, they will develop software using a high-level
programming language, and the Viaduct system will automatically introduce
sophisticated cryptographic mechanisms as needed to make the software secure.
Viaduct automatically compiles high-level protocols to primitive cryptographic
building blocks, offering formal security guarantees in the form of machine-
checkable security proofs. The project demonstrates end-to-end synthesis based
on universal composability as a practical way to build secure systems. Viaduct
will make security engineering stronger, easier, and cheaper. The project will
open-source Viaduct and promote it through demos, workshops, and tutorials.