* 1704833
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Model-Predictive Safety Systems for Predictive Detection of Operation Hazards
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 107,675.00

Model predictive control is widely being implemented in many industries, such as
chemical plants and oil refineries, leading to substantial improvement in
operations. The use of process monitoring through model-based sensors has
enabled industries to predict and improve processes. Prior research has
introduced novel safety systems using models, which generate alarm signals that
can provide warnings of pending problems. This research project involves
developing a process improvement model will not only prove useful for the
chemical and petrochemical industries, but will also benefit the food, nuclear,
aircraft, and petroleum industries by identifying potential hazards. Deployment
of this model would result in saving lives, reducing workplace injuries, and
economic benefits. The researchers are collaborating with theÂ Air Liquide
Corporation, which will ensure the industrial relevance and practicality of the
results of this research and will enhance the dissemination of research results.
The data resulting from this research project will also provide improved
security of industrial operations. Additionally, the researchers are developing
educational modules and projects based on the outcomes of this research for use
in graduate and undergraduate engineering courses at Drexel University and the
University of Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research
project are to study: (1) robust large-scale state-estimate prediction (robust
to process-model mismatch and unmeasured inputs), (2) offline optimization-based
calculation of the worst-case combinations of process-model parameter values and
the most extreme control actions, (3) efficient implementation of the model-
predictive safety system for large-scale plants, and (4) implementation and
testing of the model-predictive safety system first on the steam-drum system of
an integrated steam-methane reformer/pressure-swing adsorber unit through
simulations, and then on a steam-drum system in a real integrated steam-methane
reformer/pressure-swing adsorber system in real time at Air Liquide. The
research team also is developing industrial guidelines for adding and
maintaining model-predictive safety systems as a complement for existing
functional (safety-instrumented) systems. The involvement of the industrial
collaborator enriches the training of graduate and undergraduate students
involved in the project. The research project also is being integrated with the
Drexel Co-op Program, and undergraduate students, preferably from
underrepresented groups, are being recruited for six-month long research
internships.