* 1704992
* Collaborative research: Self-sustaining microbial photoelectrosynthesis for energy and fuel production
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jing Gu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2022
* USD 222,115.00

Harnessing energy directly from sunlight and water presents a tremendous
opportunity for a sustainable future. Artificial photosynthesis simulates plant
processes to convert sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide into renewable fuels
and chemicals. Current artificial photosynthesis technologies have low
efficiency and stability and require an external electrical voltage to sustain
the conversion, which is energy intensive. Also, frequently, these systems
require clean water for fuel production. This project will investigate the
feasibility of a self-sustaining microbial photoelectrosynthesis process to
solve both energy and water problems in solar to fuel conversions. Such modular
systems can potentially transform expensive centralized energy and water
infrastructure to more sustainable, flexible, and modular solutions. The
investigators will train graduate and undergraduate students and actively
involve underrepresented minorities and women. New course materials will be
developed to promote interdisciplinary learning, and practicum based learning
programs will be developed in conjunction with field service for communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the integration of microbial
electrochemical oxidation on the anode and photoelectrochemical reduction on the
cathode in a combined system to produce fuels and electricity. By utilizing the
potential generated from the anode, microbial photoelectrochemical systems can
become self-sustaining without any external voltage application. The system does
not require clean water to operate, rather it potentially cleans up wastewater
via microbial organic oxidation. The project will study the underlying
mechanisms of the interactions at both electrodes to achieve high current
density and fuels production including hydrogen, syngas and methane. Fuel
generation will be controlled by new individual catalyst systems designed for
increased selectivity towards targeted products. Moreover, new anode catalysts
will be applied to facilitate anode electron transfer and organic oxidation, and
scalable reactor systems will be designed.