* 1704938
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Incorporating Biologically-Motivated Circuit Motifs into Large-Scale Deep Neural Network Models of the Brain
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Kenneth Miller, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 525,000.00

This project studies the effects of incorporating, into deep neural networks for
visual processing, several heretofore unincorporated features of biological
visual cortical circuits. Deep neural networks are artificial circuits loosely
inspired by the brain's cerebral cortex. Their abilities to solve complex
problems, such as recognizing objects in visual scenes, have revolutionized
artificial intelligence and machine learning in recent years. The hierarchy of
layers in a deep network trained for visual object recognition also provides the
best existing models of the hierarchy of areas in the visual cortex implicated
in object recognition (the "ventral stream"). This project seeks to understand
whether and how incorporating additional features of brain circuits may (1)
improve machine learning performance, particularly on tasks that are more
challenging than those typically studied; and (2) yield improved models of
visual cortex. Improving the performance of deep networks would yield great
benefits across wide swaths of society and industry that are impacted by
advances in artificial intelligence. Improved models of visual cortex will
advance understanding of cortical function, which may lead to significant
further benefits for understanding normal mental functioning and perception and
their potential enhancement, as well as mental illness and perceptual and
cognitive deficits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep networks currently achieve their
success using almost purely feedforward processing. Yet the visual cortical
ventral stream that helped inspire deep networks also uses massive recurrent
processing within each area as well as feedback connections from higher areas to
lower areas and "bypass" connections from lower areas to areas multiple steps
higher in the hierarchy. Deep networks also use "neurons" that can either excite
or inhibit different neurons that they project to, whereas biological neurons
are exclusively excitatory or inhibitory. This project will incorporate feedback
and bypass connections into deep networks, as well as local recurrent processing
in networks of separate excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Recent work by the
investigators has shown how local recurrent processing explains a number of
nonlinear visual cortical operations often summarized as "normalization." Simple
forms of normalization currently used in deep networks maintain activities in an
appropriate dynamic range, but the biological forms of normalization involve
interactions between different stimulus features and locations in determining
neural responses, which may have important computational roles e.g. in parsing
visual scenes. The performance of deep networks incorporating these features
will be assayed on a variety of visual tasks and as models of ventral stream
neural data and human psychophysical data, and compared to performance of
existing deep net models.