* 1704899
* CSR: CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Improving Pedestrian Safety in Urban Cities using Intelligent Wearable Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Peter Kinget, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2023
* USD 766,642.00

Using smartphones while walking poses an increasingly common safety problem for
people in urban environments. Whether listening to music, texting, or talking,
pedestrians that are absorbed with their smartphones are considerably less
likely to notice important auditory cues of danger, such as the honks and sounds
of approaching vehicles, putting pedestrians at far greater risk of being hit.
This project aims to develop an intelligent wearable system that uses miniature
microphones - embedded in earphones or headsets - to detect and locate
approaching vehicles and warn the wearer of imminent dangers from cars, buses,
motorbikes, trucks, and trams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system comprises
multiple microphones embedded in a wearable headset, an ultra-low-power feature
extraction and data processing pipeline, and a set of machine-learning
classifiers running on a smartphone. This project is organized in four research
thrusts: (1) designing an architecture and data processing pipeline for a
wearable system composed of heterogeneous embedded modules; (2) devising an
ultra-low-power, analog, signal-processing Application-Specific Integrated
Circuit (ASIC) for energy-efficient, on-board feature extraction; (3) modeling
and optimizing machine-learning classifiers for acoustic event detection and
localization; and (4) designing an interface and feedback mechanisms that are
optimized for the users' perceptual, cognitive, and motor control
abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help reduce pedestrian
injuries and fatalities, and expand knowledge on designing wearable systems for
enhancing safety in cities, workplaces, and the home. The underlying framework
can be generalized to other systems - employing low-power signal processors and
algorithms to solve real-time sensing and classification problems of many kinds.
Research products will be made publicly available to anyone to apply these
techniques in their own system designs. Course modules developed on embedded
systems, mobile computing, and Internet-of-Things will be used at the three
participating universities to train undergraduate and graduate students, and
will be made available online.