* 1704932
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Causal Inference: Identification, Learning, and Decision-Making
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Judea Pearl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2020
* USD 265,000.00

Understanding the causal mechanisms underlying an observed phenomenon is one of
the primary goals of science. The realization that statistical associations in
themselves are insufficient for elucidating those mechanisms has led researchers
to enrich traditional statistical analysis with techniques based on "causal
inference". Most of the recent advances in the field, however, operate under
overly optimistic assumptions, which are often not met in practical, large-scale
situations. This project seeks to develop a sound and general causal inference
theory to cover those situations. The goal is to design a framework for
decision-making of intelligent systems, including (1) learning a causal
representation of the data-generating environment (learning), (2) performing
efficient inference leveraging the learned model (planning/inference), and (3)
using the new inferred representation, based on (1) and (2), to decide how to
act next (decision-making). The new finding will benefit investigators in every
area of the empirical sciences, including artificial intelligence, machine
learning, statistics, economics, and the health and social sciences. The
research is expected to fundamentally change the practice of data science in
areas where the standard causal assumptions are violated (i.e., missing data,
selection bias, and confounding bias). The work on decision-making is expected
to pave the way toward the design of an "automated scientist", i.e., a program
that combines both observational and experimental data, conducts its own
experiments, and decides on the best choices of actions and policies. The
project also helps to disseminate the principles of causal inference throughout
the sciences by (1) engaging in the establishment of new "data science"
curriculum where causal inference plays a central role, and (2) developing new
educational materials for students and the general public explaining the
practice of causal inference (e.g., book). Furthermore, the project supports the
causal inference community by fostering a number of educational initiatives such
as forums, workshops, and the creation of new incentives for the development of
educational material (e.g., a "Causality Education
Award").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making claims about the existence of causal
connections (structural learning), the magnitude of causal effects
(identification), and designing optimal interventions (decision-making) are some
of the most important tasks found throughout data-driven fields. This project
studies identification, learning, and decision-making settings where (1) data
are missing not at random, (2) non-parametric estimation is not feasible, and
(3) aggregated behavior does not translate into guidance for individual-level
decision-making. Specifically, the project considers the problem when
measurements are systematically distorted (missing data), which has received an
enormous amount of attention in the statistical literature, but has not
essentially been investigated in the context of causal inference when data are
missing not at random. The project further aims to leverage the special
properties of linear models, the most common first approximation to non-
parametric causal inference, to elucidate causal relationships in data, and to
facilitate sensitivity analysis in such models. Finally, the project considers
the fundamental problem on how causal and counterfactual knowledge can speed-up
experimentation and support principled decision-making. The goal is to develop a
complete algorithmic theory to determine when a particular causal effect can be
learned from data and how to incorporate causal knowledge learned (possibly by
experimentation) so that it can be amortized over new environmental conditions.