* 1704668
* Direct Observation of Vesicle Dynamics, Collision, and Adhesion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Charles Schroeder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

CBET - 1704668 PI: Schroeder, Charles

This award will support an experimental and numerical study of the dynamics of
vesicles, particles composed of liquid or gas that is surrounded by a membrane,
suspended in flow. The vesicles in this project are liquid-filled and are
surrounded by a lipid bilayer membrane, which makes them similar to vesicles
found in biological systems. They are also similar to synthetic vesicles that
are used in a variety of consumer products and foods. The goals of the project
are to characterize dynamics of the vesicles in flow, to use the behavior of the
vesicles to characterize their mechanical properties, and to study collisions
between vesicles and their adhesion. To accomplish these goals, vesicles of
known composition will be placed in a microfluidic cell that has multiple
fluidic channels arranged to keep the vesicle stationary in the surrounding
flow. The deformation of single vesicles and collisions among vesicles will be
viewed through a microscope. The results of the project will enable
practitioners to design robust and stable vesicles for use in products. The
project team will participate in the Illinois iRise program, which works with
teachers to develop hands-on experimental labs for K-12 and high school
students. The team will also develop hands-on demonstrations for students from
underrepresented groups participating in local Boys and Girls Clubs.

The dynamics of single vesicles will be studied in precisely controlled steady
and oscillatory extensional flow. Parameters that affect vesicle shapes and the
transition from stable to unstable shapes will be examined, including flow rate,
membrane bending energy, membrane elasticity and viscosity. A phase diagram for
vesicle stability and deformation in extensional flow will be constructed.
Results from the project will help resolve discrepancies between experiments and
simulations regarding the onset of vesicle shape instabilities such as pearling.
The oscillatory flow used in this project will expose vesicles to time-dependent
strains, which will expose the effect of unsteadiness on shape instabilities.
Collisions and adhesion of freely-suspended vesicles will be characterized. Most
prior work has focused on the weak interaction limit, wherein the membrane
bending energy plays a dominant role and membrane elasticity is not relevant.
However, vesicle membranes deform and stretch upon collision, which has been
predicted to give rise to enhanced interactions and unexpected aggregation. The
experiments in this project will study collision and adhesion under these
conditions.