* 1704624
* CIF:Medium:Collaborative Research: Geometric Network Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ayfer Ozgur, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 451,330.00

The proliferation of communication networks means that their efficiency and
security now affects almost all aspects of our daily lives. At the societal
level, reliable and efficient networks are of central importance to
technological development, national economic growth and national defense. In
light of this, the problem of understanding fundamental information limits of
networked devices is more acute now than ever. Unfortunately, it has been a
longstanding challenge in information theory to systematically extend its
success beyond classical point-to-point exchanges of information. Despite
significant research effort since the inception of the field in 1948, the
information limits for most network settings, even for networks as fundamental
as a three node relay channel, have remained open to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to change the way many network
problems are analyzed today in information theory. Traditional information-
theoretic approaches for quantifying fundamental performance limits of networks
often fail because the current toolset of information theory is not sufficiently
refined to characterize tensions that emerge in networks due to competing
objectives. Looking beyond traditional methods, this project will study the role
that inequalities from geometric and functional analysis can play in
characterizing tensions between information measures. The research project will
be complemented with a strong inter-university education program, which includes
joint and collaborative student and post-doctoral researcher advising.