* 1704113
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: A Linguistically-Informed Approach for Measuring and Circumventing Internet Censorship
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Anna Feldman, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,849.00

Internet censorship consists of restrictions on what information can be
publicized or viewed on the Internet. According to Freedom House's annual
Freedom on the Net report, more than half the world's Internet users now live in
a place where the Internet is censored or restricted. However, members of the
Internet Freedom community lack comprehensive real-time awareness of where and
how censorship is being imposed. The challenges to achieving such a solution
include but are not limited to coverage, scalability, adoption, and safety. The
project explores a linguistically-informed approach for measuring and
circumventing Internet censorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research takes a new
perspective on the problem by investigating a hybrid method for censorship
detection and evasion from the lens of linguistic analysis. The team develops
new models to measure Internet censorship, investigates mechanisms to circumvent
censorship using linguistic techniques, conducts communication and social
network measurements of censored content. Active Sensing and natural language
processing techniques, in conjunction with machine learning and optimization,
invigorates new research directions in Internet Freedom and produces new high
quality data and tools available for public use. This new allogamy between
computer science, information security, network analysis and linguistics
provides the foundation for evolution of anti-censorship technologies. The
research contributes to a number of fields including Internet censorship,
privacy and online information retrieval, as well as computational social
science by modeling and analyzing the phenomenon of censorship using the signal
available in language. The broader contribution includes wide dissemination of
the research results via peer-reviewed publications, special topic courses and
workshops. Additional benefits include providing graduate and undergraduate
researchers with significant experience of highly practical work on a difficult
interdisciplinary problem. Significant gains are obtained in recruitment of
minority students through research training in computer science and linguistics.