* 1704957
* Collaborative Research:  SusCHEM:  Environmental Sustainability of Lead Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jason Baxter, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 208,000.00

CBET - 1705606 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Fthenakis, Vasilis &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last
five years have seen an unprecedented rise in the efficiencies of lead-based
organometal halide perovskite solar cells, which now exceed 22% and match the
best thin film device technologies that have been developed over several
decades. The record device efficiencies, earth-abundant constituent elements,
and potential for low-cost processing have led to great enthusiasm for this
technology and hopes of rapid commercialization. However, the necessity of using
acutely toxic lead has caused concern. Current opinion within industry, academia
and government ranges from the assertion that any use of lead is unacceptable to
the belief that the lead intensity will be small and the risks minimal. Given
this dichotomy, the primary objectives of this project are: (1) to assess the
environmental sustainability of lead halide perovskite photovoltaics (PVs), and
(2) to apply this assessment to inform and direct future research, development,
and manufacturing approaches related to perovskite PVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
data-driven approach to be employed centers on environmental sustainability and
life cycle assessment (LCA) of lead-based perovskite PVs with materials and
processing methods of real industrial relevance. Environmental impacts of lead
perovskite solar cells will be assessed throughout their life cycle, including
extraction of materials, manufacturing of PV modules, deployment and operation
of modules, and end-of-life recycling. LCA will focus primarily on metrics
related to carbon and lead intensity, including greenhouse gas emissions, energy
payback time, and heavy metal emissions. Specific aims include: (1) Developing a
life cycle inventory for lead halide perovskite PVs with materials and
processing methods that are industrially relevant, enabling PVs with high
efficiency, long operational lifetimes, highrate manufacturing, and low cost;
(2) Evaluating LCA results for a variety of perovskite PV device designs and
manufacturing routes to identify the most environmentally sustainable pathways
to commercialization; (3) Quantifying heavy metal and carbon intensity for
perovskite PVs and comparing to other PV technologies such as CdTe and Si with
and without lead-based solder and to lead-emitting fossil-fuel life cycles.
Efficient, low-cost solar cells based upon lead halide perovskites have the
potential to transform the US and global energy portfolio and improve energy
security if they can be manufactured, operated, and retired in an
environmentally sustainable manner. This project has the potential to impact the
future of PV manufacturing by providing industry, policy-makers, and academia
with insights necessary to choose which, if any, lead-based solar cell life
cycles are environmentally sustainable. Research will be integrated into
multiple courses and senior design projects at Drexel and Columbia. Outreach
will extend to underserved K-12 students through expansion of the Junior Solar
Sprint program in the West Philadelphia Promise Zone, where the poverty rate is
over 50%.