* 1704397
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Privacy Attacks and Defense Mechanisms in Online Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Robert Pless, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 544,168.00

In online social networks, people and their connections often share personal
information, such as demographics, interests, and opinions, and leave traces of
their interaction with others and content in the network. Not everyone wants to
share personal information; however, people's attributes are correlated with
each other among themselves, with attributes of nearby people in the network,
and between a person's accounts on different networks. These correlations create
risks around inferring attributes people would rather keep private. This project
will try to identify and quantify the risks by developing new ways to infer
attributes by leveraging these correlations, then develop defense mechanisms in
two common social networking tasks. For querying social network datasets, which
is commonly used in advertising and research, the researchers will develop new
differential privacy techniques for networks to ensure that query results do not
inadvertently identify individual users or their attributes. For matching social
network profiles, which is often used in recommender systems, the team will
develop novel similarity matching methods that work on encrypted personal data.
Overall, the research will provide a deeper understanding of the risks of
inadvertent leakage of personal information and possible technical and policy
approaches for addressing those risks. The project will also provide research
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students at three
institutions, and the research team will emphasize recruiting students from
historically underrepresented groups in computing both at the college and high
school level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized around three main
thrusts. The first thrust is to develop inference attacks on users' attributes
and identity in social networks. To do this the team will first compute the
relative discriminatory power of different attributes based on their
distributions in the network, then use this and network structural information
to perform attribute inference through affinity propagation. The second thrust
focuses on improving differential privacy protection for graph queries. For
this, the team will define similarity metrics that account for the non-
independence of edges in social networks to better protect attribute privacy and
develop new query techniques based on subgraph partitioning and consideration of
the sensitivity of the query function. They will also develop new variants of
differential privacy based on k-anonymity that hide a user's attributes relative
to those of similar users. The third thrust explores how to do profile matching
without revealing sensitive personal information, inspired by ideas from secure
multiparty computation. Here, the team will develop efficient and accurate
methods to do dot-product computation on data protected by chaos-based
encryption and keyword search on data protected by attribute-set-based
encryption, as well as hashing-based approaches to compute image similarity
without sharing the image data itself. The team will release its code, suitably
protected datasets, and tutorials and educational materials through a dedicated
project website, and do outreach to members of underrepresented groups through
the McNair programs, Women in Computer Science, the Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers, and the National Society of Black Engineers.