* 1704350
* EAGER: Student Support in STEM: Developing and validating a tool to assess the magnitude of college-level support provided to undergraduate students
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* David Knight, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 257,372.00

Researchers at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University propose to
conduct exploratory research through the EHR Core Research (ECR) program to
further develop and validate a survey instrument that can be used by college
administrators and student-support practitioners to assess the magnitude of
institutional support received by undergraduate students in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). An instrument to do this work does not
currently exist. Such an instrument is important because it will facilitate
college administrators monitoring progress in this area. It will also lead to
the identification of opportunities with regard to making local STEM learning
environments more supportive from the perspectives of undergraduate students in
general. The research team will survey students at three institutions to assess
their local environments, provide data-driven evidence for interventions
tailored to the unmet needs of the target population, and monitor progress
relative to effectively supporting students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student-
retention theories traditionally focus on institutional retention, even though
efforts to support STEM students occur at the college level. The proposed study
will bridge this gap between research and practice by extending and empirically
testing the Model of Co-curricular Support (MCCS), which specifically focuses on
supporting and retaining underrepresented groups in STEM. The project will
extend a prior student-retention theory to provide evidence that STEM
researchers, educators, administrators, and policy makers need for informed
decisions to improve STEM learning environments and design effective programs,
activities, and services. The project will enable institutions to gauge the
effectiveness of their institutional support for undergraduate STEM students,
including those from under-served populations. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, extensive, and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development.