* 1704889
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Managing Stress in the Workplace: Unobtrusive Monitoring and Adaptive Interventions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Gloria Mark, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 419,998.00

Workplace stress is a serious problem that has a direct and negative impact on
health, happiness, and productivity. Current approaches for both measuring
stress and reducing it are limited; measurements typically rely on self-report
or obtrusive sensors, while people often don't seek treatment until the stress
has built to dangerous levels (or at all, if they are afraid of other people's
judgments). This project's goal is to develop methods both to detect stress and
provide personalized relaxation exercises, in real time and in the work context.
To detect stress, the research team will study how well data from commonly
available devices at work such as webcams, fitness trackers, and keyboards can
predict individuals' stress levels. To reduce stress, the team will develop a
suite of brief relaxation exercises and a system that uses predicted stress
levels to recommend different exercises, learning over time which ones work best
for a particular person. These predictive models and interventions will be
tested in a long-term study in a real office environment, both validating the
work and providing direct effects on experimental participants' well-being. The
project will also have direct educational impacts for groups underrepresented in
STEM fields and generate anonymized datasets that other researchers can use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will develop experimental methods to reliably
extract stress cues from commodity devices, using a suite of cognitive tasks
that represent knowledge work and typical workplace stressors (e.g., time
pressure, noise, distractions). Participants will perform the tasks and
experience stressors while the team collects behavioral data from the commodity
devices and ground truth stress measurements using physiological signals derived
from thermal imaging. The team will evaluate how well features derived from the
sensed behavioral data, using different sets of devices, can predict the ground
truth stress data and how it varies based on specific stressors. The team will
also develop a framework to deliver brief stress-reduction exercises that
promote deep breathing, a proven effective and learnable stress reduction
technique. The team will use iterative prototyping to develop novel, engaging
mobile apps that use biofeedback, games, and music to support breathing
exercises; these will be delivered by a multi-arm bandit-based recommendation
system that considers the current context (predicted stress and stressors, time
of day, particular computer activities) along with historical exercise adherence
and results to suggest effective exercises. The stress sensing models and
intervention framework will be validated through a series of lab and field
studies with information workers at a software company, collecting stress data
in situ with ecological momentary assessment techniques, validated survey
instruments for stress and affect, and interviews.