* 1704712
* Quasiparticle Scattering and Tunneling Spectroscopic Studies on Kondo Lattices, Topological Insulators and Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/16/2016,07/31/2019
* Wan Kyu Park, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 185,564.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how novel
electronic states emerge has become a central research topic in condensed matter
physics. Identifying the organizing principles for such electronic matter will
facilitate discovering materials with novel and useful functionalities. The goal
of this project is to investigate this theme in two separate venues: Kondo
lattices and topological materials. An entanglement of localized states with
itinerant electrons in a so-called Kondo lattice leads to a novel electronic
state with greatly enhanced mass at low temperature. How exactly this process
occurs and its relationship to a further transition into an ordered state will
be studied in detail. For this purpose, measurement techniques to probe how
electron waves interfere in such a system will be employed. Novel electronic
states, called topological, that cannot be continuously transformed to ordinary
states can exist in a certain class of materials and they are known to exhibit
exotic properties, such as conducting electricity on their boundaries without
dissipation while behaving as insulators for transport through the bulk. In this
project, the nature of superconductivity induced in these topological states and
the elusive Majorana particles that could potentially help in building a quantum
computer in the future, will be probed using similar measurement techniques.
Graduate and undergraduate students will take parts in this project by carrying
out experiments and data analysis and attending workshops/conferences to
disseminate the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have witnessed resurging interest in
understanding the organizing principles for novel quantum matter. This project
aims at unraveling the underlying mechanism for emergent phenomena in Kondo
lattices and topological materials. The hidden order phase in URu2Si2 has long
defied an unambiguous determination of its order parameter. Towards resolving
this problem, the detailed hybridization process between localized states and
itinerant bands and its relationship to the hidden order transition will be
investigated using spectroscopic techniques such as quasiparticle scattering and
tunneling. Other closely related Kondo lattice systems will also be studied.
Novel topological electronic states emerge due to a combined effect of
unconventional band structure and Fermi surface topology. Understanding their
underlying physics is a frontier research topic. In this project, the nature of
proximity-induced superconductivity in topological materials and Majorana
fermions predicted to exist in such systems will be probed using tunneling
spectroscopy and other phase-sensitive measurements. Graduate and undergraduate
students will take parts in this project by carrying out experiments and data
analysis and attending workshops/conferences to disseminate the results.