* 1704266
* Enabling high-throughput computational discovery of stable and active single-site oxidation catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Heather Kulik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 317,245.00

The project will advance computational tools for the discovery, design, and
mechanistic understanding of factors promoting reactions on catalysts containing
a single, highly-specific active site. Such single-site catalysts offer unique
opportunities for improving the activity and product selectivity of a range of
catalytic reactions. The computational tool development will focus on the
dehydrogenation of light alkanes that comprise the major component of natural
gas. The abundance of shale gas resources has brought increasing need for more
efficient catalysts for transforming the relatively unreactive alkanes to more
reactive species of value as intermediates in the manufacture of a wide range of
chemicals and fuels. Development of the new computational tools will hasten the
identification of efficient single-site catalysts, thus providing the chemical
and petroleum industries with new catalysts needed to maintain our Nation's
competitiveness in the chemicals and energy sectors of the economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-site catalysts present unique opportunities for
high-selectivity and activity, but challenges remain for their study and design.
Computational catalysis has emerged as a powerful tool - when coupled with
experimental studies - to guide the design of catalysts based on fundamental
structure-activity relationships rather than the inefficient trial-and-error
approach often used. The project will advance computational tools for discovery,
design, and mechanistic study of single-site catalysts. The computational
platform will combine new methodology for catalyst structure building and
development, with methods for improving first-principles prediction accuracy.
New iterative screening approaches will impart fundamental understanding to
structure-property relationships that give rise to gas phase oxidant activation
for selective C-H activation with high stability. The research efforts will
focus on three aims: 1) building high-throughput single-site catalyst structure
generation tools; 2) developing robust augmented-DFT (density functional theory)
predictions for energetics; and 3) generating iterative design strategies for
discovering stable and active single-site catalysts. These three aims will bring
to bear a robust, open-source platform for the discovery of catalysts needed to
capitalize on the abundant energy and chemical feedstock reserves found in shale
resources. From a broader perspective, the open-source software tools and
structure-property correlations will provide benefit to the computational
catalysis community beyond the single-site catalysts studied in this work. The
project integrates the education of graduate and undergraduate students with
innovative research in computational catalyst design. The research will be
shared with the community through a hands-on workshop at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Museum for grades 6-12 students in Boston-area schools,
with a special emphasis on engaging female and underrepresented minorities in
STEM. Local efforts will be augmented by online tutorials that teach chemistry,
catalysis, and electronic structure to a general audience.