* 1704204
* CIF:Medium:Convex Optimization for Blind Inverse Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Michael Wakin, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 11/30/2021
* USD 752,998.00

One of the fundamental tasks in processing sensor and imaging data&lt;br/&gt;is
to solve an inverse problem, determining the nature of
some&lt;br/&gt;fundamental structure that produced that data. Such problems
are&lt;br/&gt;often underdetermined, meaning that the number of unknowns
exceeds&lt;br/&gt;the number of observations, and these problems are even
more&lt;br/&gt;complicated in the blind setting, where the fundamental
structure&lt;br/&gt;may undergo some unknown transformation en route to the
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;This project considers a number of such blind inverse
problems,&lt;br/&gt;including non-stationary deconvolution, where an unknown
point&lt;br/&gt;spread function changes over time; multi-band
signal&lt;br/&gt;identification, where line spectrum estimation is extended
to&lt;br/&gt;signals with multiple narrow frequency bands; super-
resolution&lt;br/&gt;radar imaging, where extended and accelerating targets may
cause&lt;br/&gt;unwanted spreading in the delay-Doppler space; and
simultaneous&lt;br/&gt;blind deconvolution and phase retrieval. Conventionally,
all of&lt;br/&gt;these problems have been studied separately. This
project&lt;br/&gt;investigates all of the problems jointly under a
unifying&lt;br/&gt;optimization and analysis framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
modeling unknown transformation operators using subspaces,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigators transform each non-convex inverse problem into
a&lt;br/&gt;linear inverse problem of recovering a structured signal.
This&lt;br/&gt;signal is a parsimonious mixture of lifted atoms generated by
the&lt;br/&gt;original atomic set, allowing the investigators to enforce
its&lt;br/&gt;simplicity using a new atomic norm. The investigators develop
novel&lt;br/&gt;analysis techniques to demonstrate the optimality of this
framework&lt;br/&gt;by deriving sampling complexities that achieve
the&lt;br/&gt;information-theoretical limits, calculating mean-squared
denoising&lt;br/&gt;errors that match the minimax rates, and developing
parameter&lt;br/&gt;estimation bounds that approach the Cramer-Rao bounds. The
project&lt;br/&gt;builds on the investigators' combined expertise in
signal&lt;br/&gt;processing, convex optimization in continuously
parameterized&lt;br/&gt;inverse problems, and geometric modeling.