* 1704309
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Understanding and Editing Visual Sentiment
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Liqiang Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 485,688.00

The project develops computer vision and pattern recognition technologies for
visual sentiment understanding and visual sentiment editing. The
interdisciplinary research team investigates the problem of understanding how
images and video convey emotion. The project develops methods to infer, edit,
and synthesize visual sentimental content in image/videos, in addition to their
semantic contents. The project applies developed technologies to reduce violence
from multimedia materials for children, and negative psychological impacts from
social media for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) patients. The project
integrates research and education by creating new interdisciplinary courses and
training graduate students. The project builds connection with the veteran
academic resource center on the campus to help PTSD patients to recover from
mental health problems. The research team also shares collected data with
research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops visual
sentiment understanding algorithms through joint extraction of sentiments and
semantics, in order to advance the understanding of how semantic entities
substantiate and carry sentiments at a fine-grained object or pixel level.
Computer vision algorithms and psychometric assessment techniques are combined
to automatically analyze visual and recognize sentiments and emotions from
multimedia materials and social media contents posted and shared by veterans.
The research also explores methods of visual sentiment editing to reduce
violence from multimedia materials and social media contents. The research can
help (1) to protect children from accessing violent multimedia materials, and
(2) to provide appropriate social media contents for applications of
automatically detecting violent contents from veteran-shared multimedia.