* 1704587
* SaTC: CORE: Improving Password Ecosystem: A Holistic Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Ninghui Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 308,000.00

User authentication is an important part of most information systems that
require some level of security. Due to their ease of use, wide deployment, and
user familiarity, passwords have been the most widely adopted user
authentication mechanism in the past and are likely to continue to be an
important part of cybersecurity for the foreseeable future. At the same time, it
is well known that there is a tension between the security and usability of
passwords. Often times, secure passwords are difficult to memorize, making them
less usable, whereas passwords that are memorable tend to be predictable and
discoverable. This project aims to improve the complex password ecosystem,
including ways to help both human users and websites that require passwords. One
research thrust focuses on developing techniques to help human users, and in
particular, ways that effectively train humans in the skills to create and
remember secure passwords. Another research thrust focuses on studying how to
improve the password-generation interface of the website, which plays a decisive
role in users' performance of password generation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To help
human users, the project aims to develop and evaluate mental password generation
strategies--cognitive algorithms that can be executed by humans--for generating
high-entropy passwords that can be acquired and implemented by human users. An
effective generation strategy should be easy to use, and the resulting passwords
should be both unpredictable and easy to recall. Another major challenge a user
faces is the large number of accounts that need passwords. The researchers are
studying effective mental password management systems, in which passwords for
different accounts are organized in a hierarchical manner and related to the
website domain name to make recall easier, while it remains difficult for an
attacker who possesses such a password to easily guess another. To help websites
promote user-centered and safe password generation, this project studies how to
improve the password-generation interface of the website by developing effective
password strength communication and embedded training methods. The project poses
the research question of how should websites check for weak passwords and
effectively warn against or forbid their use, without imposing excess effort on
the user.