* 1704615
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Proactive and Reactive Mechanisms for Safer Smart Contracts
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Andrew Myers, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,199,947.00

Smart contracts are autonomously executing programs that can manipulate digital
assets. Their key capability is the creation of trustworthy transaction
environments: They can execute arbitrarily complex agreements in a manner that
is fair to all parties. Smart contracts promise to have a transformative
societal impact, bringing radical new efficiency to sectors as diverse as
finance, digital media, and insurance. An impediment to the successful
deployment of smart contracts, however, is their heightened susceptibility to
bugs, which can lead directly to violation of contractual obligations and even
theft of assets. Thus, new ways of ensuring the trustworthiness of smart
contracts are needed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project attacks the
problem of trustworthiness in smart contracts from two sides. It explores new,
proactive, language-based mechanisms for increasing the assurance that contracts
are correctly implemented before deployment. Not all errors can be caught prior
to deployment, however, so the project also investigates reactive mechanisms for
preventing and mitigating the damage caused by incorrectly programmed smart
contracts. The reactive methods explored in this research include the principled
use of bug bounties to incentivize discovery and reporting of bugs, coupled with
built-in mitigation mechanisms that alter contract behavior when bugs are
uncovered. The outcomes of this research will include new scientific foundations
for smart contract assurance that are applicable to the broader problem of
software assurance, as well as practical methods that combine proactive and
reactive tools to achieve heightened trustworthiness in deployed smart
contracts.