* 1704527
* SaTC: CORE: Large: Collaborative: Accountable Information Use: Privacy and Fairness in Decision-Making Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Helen Nissenbaum, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 949,983.00

Increasingly, decisions and actions affecting people's lives are determined by
automated systems processing personal data.  Excitement about these systems has
been accompanied by serious concerns about their opacity and the threats that
they pose to privacy, fairness, and other values.  Recognizing these concerns,
the investigators seek to make real-world automated decision-making systems
accountable for privacy and fairness by enabling them to detect and explain
violations of these values.  The technical work is informed by, and applied to,
online advertising, healthcare, and criminal justice, in collaboration with and
as advised by domain experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing privacy and
fairness in decision systems requires providing formal definitional frameworks
and practical system designs.  The investigators provide new notions of privacy
and fairness that deal with both protected information itself and proxies for
it, while handling context-dependent, normative definitions of violations.  A
fundamental tension they address pits the access given to auditors of a system
against the system owners' intellectual property protections and the
confidentiality of the personal data used by the system.  The investigators
decompose such auditing into stages, where the level of access granted to an
auditor is increased when potential (but not explainable) violations of privacy
or fairness are detected. Workshops and public releases of code and data amplify
the investigators' interactions with policy makers and other stakeholders. Their
partnerships with outreach organizations encourage diversity.