* 1704758
* SHF: Medium: Integrating Human and Machine Intelligence for Next Generation Interactive Analog IC Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Nan Sun, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

At present, almost all analog integrated circuits (ICs) are designed manually,
leading to low productivity and low performance. The goal of this research
project is to change the way analog circuits are designed by significantly
increasing design automation. If successful, it will greatly shorten the time-
to-market, increase the system capability, reduce the design cost, and lower the
chip failure rate. The proposed research topic bridges the circuit design
community with the electronic design automation (EDA) community, initiating
collaboration and co-development. On the application side, the proposed novel
analog circuit design methodology will serve as the catalyst for emerging
applications, such as IoT, 5G cellular communication, wearable electronics, and
self-driving vehicles. On the educational side, a new and dedicated course will
be developed to facilitate designers to adopt the proposed novel analog IC
design methodology. The PIs will also continue their active roles in graduate
student mentoring, minority outreach, local community service, and settling up
close ties between UT Austin and local industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two existing analog design flows in
existence today. One is the classic manual design methodology. Despite wide
acceptance, it has low productivity and low accuracy, which results from the
hard fact that human beings are inefficient at complicated numerical computation
and multi-dimensional optimization. The other is analog IC design automation
(ADA), which treats circuit design as a black-box optimization problem and
solves it by powerful optimization algorithms. Despite its high efficiency, ADA
has received limited acceptance due to unreliability. The algorithms do not
understand circuits, leading to unpractical synthesis results that only make
numerical sense. Analog IC design is complex both in high-level reasoning and
low-level computation, thus, neither human nor algorithm alone is adequate. To
address this dilemma, a new analog IC design methodology that integrates both
human and machine intelligence (HMI) is proposed. Its goal is to place the
designers at the center and empower them with novel interactive tools. The
specific research thrusts of this project include: 1) HMI guided interactive
schematic design tools; 2) HMI guided interactive layout design tools; 3) HMI
guided interactive analog design methodology and silicon validation; 4) HMI
guided interactive circuit architecture selection and creation; 5) overall
framework and toolkit.