* 1704901
* Tuning Interfacial Biomolecule Interactions with Massively Parallel Nanopore Arrays
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,10/31/2021
* Matthew Kipper, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 10/31/2021
* USD 439,341.00

DNA stores biological information with a very high density. New tools of
genomics and genetic engineering that have emerged over the past 20 years,
providing the transformative capabilities to both "read" DNA, and to "write"
DNA. New biosensors that diagnose diseases and predict responses to treatments
can be based on "reading" DNA, and development of new pest-resistant crops, for
example, can be based on "writing" DNA. While DNA is protected when inside
living cells, it is relatively unstable when exposed to environments outside of
cells. This work will advance our understanding of how DNA interacts with a new
class of materials with DNA-sized, nanoscale pores. The chemistry of these pores
can be tuned to optimize interactions with DNA, for storage, stability, and for
reporting specific chemical binding events. In future work, these materials
could be used to develop new biosensors and advanced nanomaterials that could
store DNA or transduce mechanical and chemical signals through controlled DNA
binding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will study the interactions of short DNA
segments with the surfaces and pores of crosslinked protein crystals, by atomic
force microscopy and adsorption isotherm measurements. Diffusion of DNA within
nanopores will be characterized by fluorescence microscopy methods. Finally, we
will assess the ability of protein crystals to: stabilize guest DNA, couple DNA-
pore interactions to ligand binding on the protein crystal surface, and report
DNA hybridization through fluorescence.