* 1704443
* CIF:Medium:Collaborative Research:Maximal Leakage and Active Receivers for Side- and Covert Channel Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Gookwon Suh, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

A side-channel is any process that inevitably and unintentionally leaks
information to an unauthorized user in a computer or communication system. A
covert channel is any mechanism through which two parties simultaneously
accessing the same computer intentionally communicate, despite this mechanism
being disallowed for communication. Examples of both channels abound, and their
presence makes our computation and communication infrastructure less secure:
side channels allow attackers to glean sensitive information that they would not
otherwise be able to access, and covert channels enable unauthorized disclosure
between users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables engineers to attenuate
side- and convert channels, thereby making our electronic infrastructure less
vulnerable to external attack and internal leaks. In the process, the project
enables a new collaboration between researchers in information theory, computer
architecture, and communication networks. The project broadens participation of
under-represented groups, especially women, through research opportunities and
an improved mentoring program for a professional
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project approaches the study of side- and
covert channels information theoretically. Historically, information theory has
provided relatively little assistance toward mitigating side- and covert
channels. This is partly because it is unclear how to quantify the amount of
information leaked through a side channel and partly because many side- and
covert channels involve a receiver that can actively control the channel. Such
receivers are not well understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these two
impediments, the project develops a recently-proposed metric for measuring
leakage in side-channels that is operationally justified and easily computed.
The project also develops results that enable one to predict how active
receivers will act. The project culminates in the application of these results
to three specific scenarios spanning communication networks and multi-core
processors.