* 1704097
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: In-Band Full-Duplex Underwater Acoustic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Xiang-Gen Xia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 05/31/2023
* USD 215,000.00

Wireless communication technologies in the ocean are critical to scientific,
commercial, and national defense operations, and yet are still primitive,
especially with respect to their data rates and reliability. This project
develops new underwater acoustic communications and networking strategies to
improve network efficiency in the harsh ocean environment, through underwater
in-band full-duplex (IBFD) acoustic networks. The project creates a vertically
integrated research experience for both undergraduate and graduate students by
exposing them to interdisciplinary research. Through partnerships with local
communities, the project investigators develop outreach programs to attract
future students, especially those from minority and under-represented
communities, to STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
project is to develop innovative acoustic IBFD networks that contain: 1)
spectrally efficient physical layer receivers capable of acoustic-specific self-
interference cancellation, and 2) cross-layer protocols allowing enhanced
network efficiency via IBFD. Guided by a cross-layer, interdisciplinary
methodology, the project includes four research tasks: 1) Interference
cancellation through acoustic-specific methods; 2) Prototyping of acoustic IBFD
modems and networks, 3) Field experiments to evaluate acoustic IBFD
communications and networking, and 4) Development of cross-layer simulation and
optimization toolboxes. To maximize outcomes, this project leverages a range of
existing instruments, resources, tools, and design experiences from the research
team.