* 1704662
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Big Data Enabled Wireless Networking: A Deep Learning Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jian Tang, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2021
* USD 700,000.00

Wireless networks are becoming larger and more complicated, generating a huge
amount of runtime statistics data (such as traffic load, resource usages, etc.)
every second. Instead of treating big data in wireless networks as an unwanted
burden, we aim to leverage them as a great opportunity for better understanding
user demands and system capabilities such that we can optimize resource
allocation to better serve mobile users. In addition, Cloud Radio Access
Networks (C-RANs) have become a key enabling technology for the next generation
wireless communication systems. Their centralized architecture makes it easy to
collect and analyze various runtime system data. This project aims to exploit
how the powerful new machine learning techniques, including Deep Learning (DL)
and Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), can be leveraged to grasp the exciting
opportunity provided by big data to enable future wireless networks to better
serve their users. The proposed research is expected to significantly improve
resource utilization of wireless networks and reduce their operational costs
(such as power consumption), which can substantially benefit wireless network
carriers and mobile users, and more importantly, is good for global environment.
Beyond wireless networking, the proposed DL models and algorithms may find its
applications in a large variety of domains, including video content analysis,
user behavior study, etc. Moreover, the proposed project is expected to advance
public understanding of the emerging 5G wireless communications, DL and DRL via
publications, seminars and workshops, and international and industrial
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a novel deep learning approach to enable efficient design and operations
of future wireless networks with big data. Specifically, we will propose DL
models and algorithms for spatiotemporal analysis and prediction of key system
parameters, which can provide accurate and useful input information for existing
resource allocation algorithms to better operate a wireless network. Moreover,
we will develop a novel DRL-based control framework for a wireless network to
efficiently allocate its resources by jointly learning the system environment
and making decisions under the guidance of a powerful deep neural network. To
achieve the above object, the project is organized into three cohesive thrusts:
Thrust 1 Deep Learning based Modeling and Prediction; Thrust 2 Deep
Reinforcement Learning based Dynamic Resource Allocation; and Thrust 3
Validation and Performance Evaluation.