* 1704591
* Study of evaporation, micro-explosion, and combustion of nanofluid fuel droplets
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Ruey-Hung Chen, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 10/31/2018
* USD 352,524.00

Many industrial applications involve evaporating liquid containing small-size
particles. One example is to manufacture pharmaceutical powder aggregates in a
way that they would be easily inhaled or ingested. In this application, the
shape and density of aggregates determine the easiness with which the patient
take the medication. Burning fuels containing particles, such as heavy fuel oils
or rocket propellants, also involves similar evaporation process. In the case of
burning fuels, the shape and density of the particle aggregates also affect the
means and effectiveness with which particles are captured to minimize pollutant
emissions. In this project, effects of particle size and concentration on liquid
evaporation and burning will be characterized. The effort will be mainly
experimental, aided by theoretical analysis for a full understanding of the
evaporation, burning, and aggregate formation mechanisms. Both undergraduate and
graduate students with diverse backgrounds will be recruited and involved in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study uses the combination of
the electrospray technique to generate fuel droplets containing nano-size
energetic particles, which are freely suspended in space by the electro-dynamic
balance. The droplet will then be ignited for combustion study, and the results
will be compared with those without adding nano particles. The proposed study
will answer the following specific questions: (1) Does the droplet burning
follow the conventional d-square law due to the presence of particles and why?
(2) Can the existing theory explain the non-d-square behavior? (3) How does the
droplet burn when the droplet is electrically charged? (4) Is there secondary
atomization during the single-droplet evaporation due to the Rayleigh charge
limit (the critical charge density of a droplet)? (5) How does the aluminum
particle affect the secondary atomization, Rayleigh limit, ignition, and
burning? The proposed study is of great significance in advancing the power
density of energy systems. This work has the main application in propulsion as
adding metal energetic particles to liquid propellants can increase both the
gravimetric and volumetric energy density of the propellant, thus increasing the
range of the atmospheric flights and space vehicles. In addition to combustion,
this work is also relevant to the dynamics of functional droplets, sprays, and
heat/mass transfer. The results also have implications for other applications,
such as food, pharmaceutical, ceramic, chemical, and nanotechnology.