* 1704458
* III: Medium: Non-Convex Methods for Discovering High-Dimensional Structures in Big and Corrupted Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,150,000.00

Discovering structure in high-dimensional data, such as images, videos and 3D
point clouds, has become an essential part of scientific discovery in many
disciplines, including machine learning, computer vision, pattern recognition,
and signal processing. This has motivated extraordinary advances in the past
decade, including various sparse and low-rank modeling methods based on convex
optimization with provable theoretical guarantees of correct recovery. However,
existing theory and algorithms rely on the assumption that high-dimensional data
can be well approximated by low-dimensional structures. While this assumption is
adequate for some datasets, e.g., images of faces under varying illumination, it
may be violated in many emerging datasets, e.g., 3D point clouds. The goal of
this project is to develop a mathematical modeling framework and associated non-
convex optimization tools for discovering high-dimensional structures in big and
corrupted data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop provably correct
and scalable optimization algorithms for learning a union of high-dimensional
subspaces from big and corrupted data. The proposed algorithms will be based on
a novel framework called Dual Principal Component Pursuit that, instead of
learning a basis for each subspace, seeks to learn a basis for their orthogonal
complements. In sharp contrast with existing sparse and low-rank methods, which
require both the dimensions of the subspaces and the percentage of outliers to
be sufficiently small, the proposed framework will lead to results where even
subspaces of the highest possible dimension (i.e., hyperplanes) can be correctly
recovered from highly corrupted data. This will be achieved by solving a family
of non-convex sparse representation problems whose analysis will require the
development of novel theoretical results to guarantee the correct recovery of
the subspaces from corrupted data. The project will also develop scalable
algorithms for solving these non-convex optimization problems and study
conditions for their convergence to the global optimum. These algorithms will be
evaluated in two major applications in computer vision: segmentation of point
clouds and clustering of image categorization datasets.