* 1704059
* Development of a Neutral Atom Microscope
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Mark Raizen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 12/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Microscopes of various types are widely used in scientific research, medicine,
and industry. The ability to see objects that are too small to see with the
naked eye is crucial for characterizing materials, for manufacturing, and for
forensic science. New capabilities in scientific research and technology are
enabled by developing novel new microscopes with enhanced resolution and
sensitivity. This project will explore ways to use focused atom beams to probe
surfaces with nanometer-scale resolution. This addresses the longstanding goal
in atomic physics of making a neutral atom microscope, similar to an electron
microscope, but with different chemical sensitivity and less destructive
interactions. An improved method to focus atom beams will be implemented using a
pulsed magnetic lens. This aberration-corrected lens for atoms will enable the
research team to pioneer applications for a neutral-atom microscope. The
correction of aberrations is tremendously important for the performance of
optical microscopes, and has enabled atomic scale resolution for electron
microscopes. A breakthrough in aberration-corrected lenses for atoms will enable
advances in atom lithography and the operation of a neutral atom microscope with
molecular resolution. Students working on this project will gain training in
atomic physics, atom optics, and surface chemistry research methods, and this
will help prepare them for careers in universities and high tech
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle of the microscope to be developed
in this project is that neutral neon atoms in an excited metastable state are
focused to a surface. After the impact of each atom, an electron is emitted
which is energy-analyzed, providing a unique fingerprint of the chemical
composition of the surface. The image will be acquired by rastering the atoms
across the surface. The research team will use a pulsed electromagnetic coil as
a lens for magnetic imaging of atoms. This allows for pulsed, high-current wires
to exert a brief, strong focusing field on an atomic beam, taking advantage of
the high refractive power without subjecting the atoms to fringing fields as
they enter and leave the lens. Aberration correction will be achieved by
tapering the lens to be narrower towards the front, thereby applying a greater
force to the faster atoms. The pulsed lens is well-matched to a pulsed
supersonic beam which produces a very bright beam of metastable neon atoms. The
team has constructed a working prototype and plans to implement methods of beam
brightening and velocity selection. With these improvements, a resolution better
than 10 nm is expected. Further developments of the atomic lens will address
residual aberrations. In parallel, the group will develop metastable impact
electron microscopy using an analyzer system. Combining the two developments
will enable demonstration of a neutral atom microscope with nanoscale
resolution.