* 1704540
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Fast Photorealistic Computer Graphics Rendering of Non-Smooth Surfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Steve Marschner, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 587,537.00

Computer graphics is finding growing application to virtual visual prototyping
for the design of materials and products where appearance is important. Using
graphics rendering on a display to replace physical prototypes could potentially
make it faster and cheaper to bring new products and designs to market. But such
applications demand high fidelity in the appearance of specific real materials
on displays with ever-higher resolution. The fundamental problem is that current
mathematical models for light reflection assume that details smaller than a
pixel can be ignored, and replaced by smooth averages. At high resolutions this
assumption breaks down; most materials start to appear noisy, grainy, or
glittery as one looks closer. But to simply include microscopic detail in the
model and continue with conventional rendering methods would be far too slow.
This project will develop a range of methods to model the visible effects of
sub-pixel details without greatly increasing the time and expense of rendering
images. The results of this research will generalize a broad range of material
models used in computer graphics so that they work under close-range
observation. It will transform the field by fundamentally changing the
definition of surface reflectance and by providing a suite of new tools for
implementing and designing reflectance in industrial applications including
automotive design, virtual prototyping, visual effects, and predictive product
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately rendering the appearance of
materials has always been a central problem of computer graphics. With today's
ever-higher display resolutions, and applications demanding exact reproduction
of specific materials, the status quo in material modeling is reaching its
limits. The problem is that the standard approach to modeling surface
reflectance, the Bi-directional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF),
fundamentally assumes that surface roughness is far smaller than the scale of
pixels. But rough surfaces, which can be modeled by smooth BRDF models for more
distant or lower-resolution views, start to appear noisy, grainy, or glittery as
one looks closer and the effects of individual scattering elements become
visible. This produces "shimmering" or "glints" in a variety of materials that
are difficult to model using current technology, including metallic paints used
on cars, bead-blasted and brushed metal finishes popular for electronics, and
the ubiquitous textured finishes on injection-molded plastic, as well as in
fabrics, wood finishes and wood grain, and many other materials. This project
will develop new ways to think about surface reflection in terms of reflectance
models that build in spatial and angular variation at their core, without
assuming smoothness at small scales. These models account for the visible
effects of individual scattering features, and spatial and angular detail
emerges naturally as the viewing and illumination conditions reveal it. Several
mathematical representations for detailed materials are proposed, covering both
surface and subsurface effects, to form the core of a full end-to-end pipeline
that spans new acquisition methods and rendering techniques.