* 1704456
* Superconductor-Insulator Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 510,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research supports the experimental
investigation of superconductor-insulator transitions of ultrathin films of
elements and compounds. Understanding their nature is important, in part because
of their role in high temperature superconductivity. They are the simplest
examples of an important paradigm of contemporary condensed matter physics,
continuous quantum phase transitions, which in contrast with thermal
transitions, occur at zero temperature, but have measurable signatures at
nonzero temperatures, which are used to characterize them. In the case of the
superconductor-insulator transition, the ground state is changed in response to
the variation of an external parameter of the system, such as parallel or
perpendicular magnetic field, disorder, or carrier density. Among other systems
exhibiting quantum phase transitions are 4He adsorbed on random substrates, two-
dimensional electron gases, numerous complex strongly correlated electron
materials, and configurations of cold atoms, which can be effectively used to
model many condensed matter phenomena. The study of superconductor-insulator
transitions requires advanced tools of experimental science such as film growth,
nanofabrication and ultra-low temperature measurement techniques. This project
supports the training of both Ph.D. and undergraduate students that is excellent
preparation for a scientific career. The primary outreach activity of the PI is
the teaching of freshman seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research is directed at identifying the mechanisms
associated with a variety of superconductor-insulator transitions involving
different materials and tuning parameters. It involves four distinct
investigations. The first investigation is an attempt to see whether a
superconductor-insulator transition in a disordered thin film can be
systematically tuned by dissipation provided by a tunable, proximate two-
dimensional electron gas. The second investigation is the measurement of the
charge-density dependence of films of the super-electron density using an AC
technique, over a range of carrier concentrations of films of the oxygen-
enriched compound, La2CuO4+x (LCO) which are electrostatically doped using ionic
liquids. The third thrust is the measurement of the out-of-equilibrium, current
noise spectral density near the superconductor-insulator transition of quench-
deposited metal films, and the fourth direction of research is the study of the
perpendicular-field tuned superconductor-insulator transition of quench-
deposited metal films with the goal of determining whether the limiting
resistance at the quantum critical point is the quantum resistance for pairs,
and whether there is a Hall insulator in these materials, as is apparently
present in the case of compounds such as indium oxide.