* 1704634
* Enhanced Efficiency in Transparent Organic Photovoltaics Using Oxide Plasmonic Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Delia Milliron, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2021
* USD 395,000.00

This project addresses low-cost photovoltaic (PV) thin film technology that can
offer alternative methods to integrating solar energy technology into building
envelops. The integration of solar-harvesting components into the building
envelope is a transformative route to capturing solar energy for electricity
generation while lowering effective solar cell installation costs and improving
building energy efficiency. This fundamental research project addresses low-cost
thin-film organic photovoltaic technology that is highly transparent in the
visible light spectrum enabling integration onto windows, glazing systems, and
siding in the building envelope. This project addresses fundamental research to
increase the power conversion efficiency of these thin-film transparent systems
by increasing absorption of near infrared light using oxide plasmonic
nanoparticles embedded in the device. The research will exploit unique optical
properties of oxide plasmonic nanoparticles in the near-infrared regime to
enhance light absorption and power conversion efficiency. The project will also
advance the fundamental understanding of oxide plasmonic nanoparticles, which
are promising for a wider range of applications such as thermal management and
night vision devices. The educational and outreach component of this project
will train graduate and undergraduate researchers to gain a new level of
understanding of light and matter at the nanometer
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing transparent organic photovoltaics have low
efficiency due to the use of less than 50% of incident near-infrared sunlight.
The objective of this project is to identify and understand mechanisms by which
localized surface plasmon resonances of oxide plasmonic nanoparticles enhance
the power conversion efficiency of transparent organic photovoltaics. With their
low-concentrated free electrons and localized surface plasmon resonances in the
near-infrared regime, oxide plasmonic nanoparticles will enhance near-infrared
light absorption by organic thin films and the photon-current conversion in
transparent organic photovoltaics while retaining visual transparency of the
devices. The specific research aims include: (1) synthesize and characterize
oxide plasmonic nanoparticles that support near-infrared localized surface
plasmon resonances, (2) probe electron and energy transfer at the interfaces of
organic thin films and oxide plasmonic nanoparticles, and (3) investigate
efficiency enhancement of transparent organic photovoltaic devices that
incorporate oxide plasmonic nanoparticles. The project will advance fundamental
knowledge in the field of optoelectronics of oxide plasmonic nanoparticles and
transparent organic photovoltaics.