* 1704176
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Energy-Harvested Security for the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Dong Ha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2022
* USD 881,992.00

The Internet of Things integrates the virtual world of computers into real-world
applications, leading to better efficiency, economy and an improved quality of
life. This requires a huge amount of tiny computers, and this project addresses
the challenge of powering those computers in a sustainable manner. Tiny
computers can run off harvested energy sources such as solar, vibration and/or
temperature gradient. The project objective is to show how such energy-
constrained devices can support secure and full Internet connectivity. This can
be achieved by reworking the computations leading up to a secure Internet
connection and spreading them out over time. The proposed solution aims to use
every harvested Joule of energy towards useful
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on insights from three
domains, including cryptographic engineering, energy-harvesting technologies,
and formal verification. The harvester-friendly version of a cryptographic
algorithm is created by partitioning it in pre-computed steps that generate
coupons. Coupons are created when there is a surplus energy, and they can be
used to speed up online computations at a later phase. The project optimizes
cryptography from the standard Internet stack and integrates it with energy-
harvester technology. Verification techniques ensure the functional equivalence
of pre-computed versions of Internet protocols to their mainstream counterparts.
The project contributes to the research agenda in crucial areas such as
lightweight cryptography, formal methods, and realization of energy-harvesting
systems. The project will disseminate publications, open-source hardware, and
software, and it will establish a programming competition to raise the awareness
of energy-constraints in the Internet of Things.