* 1704085
* CREWS: Chemical Resonance Excitation Wavelength Selection for Label-Free DNA Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

This project will develop a multiwavelength surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
(SERS) method for determining genomic mutations within specific genes related to
antimicrobial resistance. The PI has published convincing preliminary results on
extracting relevant information related to the composition of DNA strands from
the measured SERS spectra. The ability to rapidly determining the genomic
mutations within specific genes related to antimicrobial resistance would have a
significant societal impact.mThe project will provide scientific training for
students at graduate and undergraduate levels across several multidisciplinary
fields, exposing them to advanced photonics, nanoscale fabrication, surface
chemistry, and medical diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop the chemical resonance excitation wavelength selection
(CREWS) method for determining genomic mutations within specific genes related
to antimicrobial resistance (AMR). The proposed platform employs multiple
excitation wavelengths to maximize the amount of data acquired from DNA using
Raman spectroscopy, and uses advanced signal processing techniques to identify
mutations within genes responsible for causing AMR. This technique provides an
alternative approach to genomic mutation detection without the need for DNA
sequencing, in which quick and efficient label-free detection of single point
mutations in DNA strands can be performed.