* 1704077
* NeTS: Medium: From Packets to Insights: Programmable Streaming Analytics for Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Nicholas Feamster, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,212,750.00

The ability to monitor Internet traffic on our communications networks is of
critical importance to our nation's economic prosperity and national security.
For communications networks to run well, however, network operators must be able
to manage them: they must be able to detect, diagnose, and fix problems that
degrade the performance of the applications we use, and they must be able to
detect and mitigate attacks against the infrastructure.  To ensure that computer
networks are secure and perform well, network operators need to gather
measurements to detect attack traffic, diagnose performance problems, identify
flaky equipment, drive traffic-engineering decisions, and more. Although network
devices provide reasonable mechanisms for monitoring the control plane -- that
part of the network that is responsible for routing packets/information through
the network.  Tools and mechanisms for monitoring the flow of network traffic
remain primitive (e.g., ping and traceroute for active measurement, Netflow and
sFlow for passive measurement). These measurements provide coarse statistics
about network traffic or conditions, but they provide at once both too little
information (because they obscure important details about the flows, such as
packet timings, queue sizes, and loss rates) and too much information (because,
for any particular question about performance or security, the operator needs
detailed information about a few flows, as opposed to coarse information about
all of them). This project aims to develop measurements that are "just right"
for each of the above tasks and to design a data-analytics platform for querying
the data that can be used to diagnose and mitigate network
problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Two technological trends enable fundamentally
new paradigms for network measurement. The first trend is the rise of
programmable network hardware -- including reconfigurable application-specific
integrated circuits (ASICs), field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), and network
processors -- that are fast and inexpensive enough for use in commodity
switches, and also programmable in target-independent languages like P4. The
second trend is the emergence of scalable streaming analytics platforms, such as
Spark Streaming and Apache Storm. These platforms make it possible to express
queries based on streams of tuples and efficiently filter and aggregate the
data. Using the programmable functionality from switches, one can define the
types of tuples that a switch exports, and even perform simple computations over
the tuples directly in the data plane. Given input tuple streams from one or
more switches, the stream processor can compute the answer to a high-level
query. This project is developing a streaming analytics framework that addresses
these challenges. The researchers will develop a query language with familiar
programming paradigms from existing streaming analytics platforms, which they
will extend to support domain-specific primitives. They are also developing a
runtime system that partitions this query across the stream processor and the
switches in the data plane. Queries will entail network-wide aggregation,
iterative "drill down" capabilities, and joins with external data sources (e.g.,
routing, application identification). The researchers are evaluating the
feasibility and usability of this platform in the context of a wide-range of
security and performance diagnosis queries that arise in operational networks.