* 1704063
* Molecular Characterization of Water Oxidation in Metal-Organic Frameworks through Computer Simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Francesco Paesani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 443,452.00

Molecular Characterization of Water Oxidation in Metal-Organic Frameworks
through Computer Simulations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer simulations have
become a powerful tool to gain critical insights into complex molecular
processes, which are otherwise difficult to obtain by other means. However,
achieving the necessary accuracy for realistic and predictive simulations is a
challenge. In this project, Dr. Paesani and his group are developing and
applying a novel and powerful simulation methodology to model water oxidation in
a class of highly porous solids known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Water
oxidation is one of the key reactions in natural photosynthesis. Therefore,
understanding the steps involved in water oxidation at the molecular level may
aid in the development of artificial photosynthetic systems. MOFs are a
relatively new class of materials and are ideal for these catalysts. The studies
carried out by Dr. Paesani and his group are advancing both the theory and the
computer modeling of MOFs and their chemistry, which are key to the rational
development of new catalysts. In parallel with the research activities, an
innovative education and outreach plan is being established to introduce
freshman and sophomore undergraduate students to computational methods in
chemistry and materials research. Dr. Paesani and his group are also promoting
interest in STEM disciplines among underprivileged and underrepresented minority
students through the development of summer exchange programs at the University
of California - San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental understanding of
how to control water oxidation to molecular oxygen is a prerequisite for the
development of artificial systems to harvest and convert solar energy as well as
to enable visible-light-driven organic synthesis. It is well known that the
availability of water as an electron donor opens up a wide variety of reductive
processes that can be driven with electricity or sunlight. Since water is one of
the ultimate products of fossil fuel combustion, the conversion of H2O molecules
back into fuel involves thermodynamically uphill reactions that remove oxygen
atoms. In this project, Dr. Paesani and his group are performing fundamental
studies to investigate the elementary steps involved in water oxidation
reactions in metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). MOFs are a relatively new class of
porous materials with large surface areas that have already found application in
gas storage (e.g., methane and hydrogen storage), carbon capture, hydrocarbon
separation, chemical sensing, nonlinear optics, biomedical imaging, drug
delivery, catalysis, electrical and proton conductivity, magnetism, and
luminescence. Since MOF structure and physicochemical properties are highly
tunable, MOFs represent promising platforms for building efficient functional
devices for solar energy harvesting and conversion. Dr. Paesani and his group
are developing and applying novel simulation methodologies that combine many-
body representations of the molecular interactions with advanced techniques to
describe chemical reactivity in the condensed phase to characterize the
elementary steps associated with catalytic processes in MOFs. This information
is key to the rational design of new MOF structures with properties specifically
tailored for solar energy harvesting and conversion. The interdisciplinary
nature of the research project represents an extraordinary opportunity for
training at the interface of different disciplines, providing bridges and inter-
connections between the fundamental laws of physics and the molecular properties
of materials at the nanoscale. In this context, mentoring and outreach
activities are specifically designed to promote science disciplines among high
school and college students from underprivileged and underrepresented minorities
through the development and implementation of summer exchange programs at UC San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.