* 1704018
* III: Medium: Bias Tracking and Reduction Methods for High-Dimensional Exploratory Visual Analysis and Selection
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,11/30/2022
* David Gotz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,097,598.00

Exploratory visualization and analysis of large and complex datasets is growing
increasingly common across a range of domains. For example, online companies
track users to learn about their products, computer security logs capture
detailed traces of network activity, and health care systems capture detailed
longitudinal records for their patients. In all of these fields, large and
complex data repositories are being created with the goal supporting data-
driven, evidence-based decision making. However, today's visualization tools --
a critical part of an analyst's toolbox -- are often overwhelmed when applied to
high-dimensional datasets (i.e., datasets with large numbers of variables).
Real-world datasets can often have many thousands of variables; a stark contrast
to the much smaller number of dimensions supported by most visualizations. This
gap in dimensionality puts the validity of any analysis at great risk of bias,
potentially leading to serious, hidden errors. This research project will
develop a new approach to high-dimensional exploratory visualization that will
help detect and reduce selection bias and other problems with data
interpretation during exploratory high-dimensional data visualization. The
project's results, including open-source software, will be broadly applicable
across domains. In addition, the project will be evaluated with users in a
health outcomes research setting. This offers significant potential to improve
health care around the world.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops a set
of Contextual Visualization Methods for exploratory data analysis which are
designed to support the discovery of more robust and generalizable insights from
high-dimensional data. These methods are built upon a recognition that the very
summarization that makes many visual methods effective also inherently obscures
aspects of a high-dimensional dataset that may be critical to accurate
interpretation of a user's visual findings. More specifically, the subset of
data (comprising both dimensions and records) that is actively accounted for
within a visualization -- the data focus -- must be interpreted within the
context of the many dimensions and data records that have been omitted or are
not clearly represented within a visualization--the data context. The methods
that this project develops, therefore, are designed to (1) explicitly model and
analyze the data context, and (2) convey the relationship between the data focus
and the context in order to better inform users about hidden problems such as
confounding variables and selection bias. The primary technical contributions of
the project include: (1) inline replication for visual validation; (2) baselined
selection methods for high-dimensional visualization; (3) interactive
rebalancing for representative visualization. In addition, open-source software
will be developed and evaluated with real-world data and practitioners. The
products of this research project -- including new methods, software products,
and evaluation results -- will be disseminated through a project website
(https://vaclab.web.unc.edu/contextual-visualization/).