* 1704447
* Modeling Reacting Interfaces for Biomass Combustion using Flame Generated Manifolds
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Paul DesJardin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 12/31/2020
* USD 280,000.00

This project will answer the fundamental question of what happens when solids or
liquids burn. The burning of any material involves complex heat and mass
transfer processes near the fuel surface. These reacting interfaces are commonly
found in engineering problems where chemical energy is converted to thermal
energy. Examples include biomass heating, solid rocket motors, and internal
combustion engines. Mathematical models to describe these interfaces, however,
continue to be one of the main challenges in predicting combustion performance.
This study focuses on developing new mathematical theories and conducting laser-
based measurements to understand the nature of reacting interfaces. The impact
of this effort to society is to offer scientific insight in the conversion of
fuels to useful energy for power production and
heating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing accurate models to describe reacting
interfaces remain a daunting task in combustion science. The fundamental
difficulty is the coupling of thermal and mass transport with chemical reactions
at length and time scales that are far smaller than system scales of interest.
Compounding these challenges is the response of liquid or solid fuel surfaces,
which regress during the burning process and are dependent on local flame
structure. To reduce the degree of freedom of the problem, flamelet generated
manifolds of the reacting interfaces will be explored in this research. The
appeal of the new modeling approach is that it couples important mass and
thermal transport processes with detailed descriptions of chemical kinetics,
thus allowing for accurate predictions of energy conversion rates and harmful
pollutants. The proposed method will be used to predict upward flame spread over
both synthetic and natural materials. To validate model predictions, both direct
numerical simulation and experiments are planned. The experiments will employ
tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy to probe species composition and
temperature near at the reacting fuel surface. The expected short-term impact of
the research is to provide a flamelet generated manifold library to the
combustion and fire modeling community. The long-term impact of this research is
to provide a high-fidelity, broad-based computational tool and experimental
techniques to understand and predict the burning of biomass materials.