* 1704996
* Collaborative Research: Electrorotational fluid instabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Miksis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 258,850.00

A particle can spontaneously start spinning in an electric field, a phenomenon
called Quincke rotation. This project will explore fundamentals and applications
of electrorotation in fluid systems such as liquid droplets. The fluid-fluid
interface can flow and the drop can deform, which creates a plethora of
unexplained flow behaviors: a drop can tumble or beat like a heart, or small
particles attached to the drop surface can cluster into vortices. The project
will experimentally map electrorotational flows as a function of fluid
properties and field strength. The experimental results will be used to develop
models to elucidate the observed instabilities. In addition to advancing basic
knowledge, the research will provide insights on how to harness these novel
electrorotational flows for engineering of complex flows or of novel colloidal
products such as patchy particles with dynamic surface patterns. At UCSD, the PI
has been involved in engineering outreach to local high-school students, in the
form of a summer course entitled "Introduction to Fluid Mechanics in
Engineering: From a Straw to an Airplane." The results from this research can be
folded into materials to support outreach of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
electrohydrodynamic flow about a leaky-dielectric liquid drop can undergo
intriguing instabilities which involve generation of rotational flow, e.g., drop
steady tilt or tumbling, or of vortices as previously observed on the surface of
particle-coated drops. This project will establish the mechanisms of these
electorotational fluid instabilities by developing (i) numerical simulations,
based on the three-dimensional Boundary Integral Method, and (ii) analytical
models using asymptotic methods, of drop dynamics in electric fields.
Experiments will be designed and carried out to guide and validate the
computations and analytical results. The driving hypothesis is that
electrorotational fluid instabilities are related to the Quincke effect (the
spontaneous rotation of a particle in a uniform DC electric field occurring
above a threshold field strength). The research outcomes will lead to a much
deeper understanding of the underlying physics as well as the discovery of new
dynamical regimes and engineering opportunities. The potentially transformative
nature of the proposal lies in the unexplained emergent behavior of the system
that could inspire new research directions and applications related to complex
fluids, instabilities and interfacial flows.