* 1704768
* Examination of Pressure and Velocity Fields and Their Relationships to Radiated Noise in a Jet
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Mark Sheplak, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2021
* USD 399,319.00

Noise production from turbulent flow represents a fundamental flow phenomena
that has wide reaching practical applications including transportation vehicles.
One specific example is the noise produced by the turbulent flow exiting from
the jet of an aircraft. Jet noise can be the dominant aircraft noise during
takeoff and can be a limiting factor for the number of flights, the time of day,
and the flight path for aircraft leaving the airport because of regulations
focused on quality of life (acceptable noise pollution) for residence adjacent
to an airport. Significant reductions in jet noise over the past many years has
primarily been achieved by increasing the fan flow in turbo-fan engines. Other
advances in jet noise reduction have been achieved by the introduction of
corrugated nozzles to alter the mixing in the jet shear layer. In general,
however, there is still a lack of a fundamental understanding of the underlying
physics in the turbulent flow that leads to noise production and hence how to
reduce it in an efficient fashion. The proposed experimental effort is designed
to identify noise producing events within the turbulence of the free shear flow
of an axisymmetric jet using novel experimental instrumentation and analysis
techniques. Although jet flows are the focus of this investigation, the
fundamental understanding of relationships between the pressure and velocity
fields and how they relate to noise generation should directly impact many other
applications where there is free shear flow generated noise. The project will
provide high school students an opportunity to work in the laboratory and to
develop noise and sensing modules for a summer program.

The presence of noise generated by free shear layers in turbulent flows is
ubiquitous throughout engineering applications. In this effort a new and novel
MEMS sensor will be developed that can measure static pressure fluctuations,
with minimal flow disturbances. Measurements from this sensor will be coupled
with planar velocity measurements from particle image velocimetry to shed
insight into the noise produced by turbulent motions in a jet shear layer. The
analysis of the data will involve single and multi-point measurements of the
inflow pressures to examine the spatio-temporal nature of wave-packet events in
the flow. Additionally, synchronous velocity and fluctuating static pressure
measurements will be examined to correlate flow events associated with pressure
field through direct analysis along with an examination of the pressure-strain
rate correlations. Stochastic estimation techniques of the time-dependent
velocity events conditioned to the static pressure fluctuations will be used to
elucidate the large scale turbulent flow features associated with the flow
pressure events. Further analysis will involve causality studies relating the
pressure events in the flow to the far field noise.