* 1704200
* RAPID:  Experimental Recovery at the Bear Brook Watershed in Maine
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Michael SanClements, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,720.00

This research project will measure the response of a forest ecosystem in Maine
as a 27-year long experiment ends. The experiment consisted of adding acid,
nitrogen, and sulfur to the forest by helicopter every other month. Starting in
early 2017 and extending over a one-year period, samples of soil and stream
water will be collected and analyzed for changes in their chemical composition.
The researchers will sample a stream in the watershed that had been subjected to
additions and a stream in another watershed that did not receive additions.
Samples will be collected from streams under periods of normal flow when there
are no storms and during storms as storms change how water moves from the
landscape to the streams and storms increase the flow within the streams. The
prior additions to the forested watershed were done as part of a long-term study
of the effects of acid precipitation. However, over the past 25 years Eastern
North America and Europe have experienced dramatic declines in the amounts of
sulfur and nitrogen that are deposited on landscapes from the atmosphere. During
that same time period forest ecosystems have also experienced changes in climate
and other disturbances that include ice storms, land development, and outbreaks
of insects and disease. The overlap in a decline in acid precipitation with
increased levels of other disturbances make it difficult to isolate the
influences of the decline in atmospheric inputs alone. The abrupt end to the
experimental additions of nitrogen and sulfur provides a unique opportunity to
assess forest ecosystem responses to those inputs while all other disturbances
are held relatively constant. As a result, this research has the potential to
test hypotheses about how the chemistry of organic molecules dissolved in
surface waters and the movement of sulfur through soils will change with
reductions in acid precipitation. The increased understanding of forest
ecosystem dynamics has the potential to influence policy at the state and
national level, associated with the stewardship of forests and their ecosystem
services such as providing a source of high quality drinking water.

This project takes advantage of a unique scientific opportunity associated with
a whole watershed manipulation. Stopping the 27-year experimental additions of
nitrogen and sulfur to West Bear Brook watershed in October 2016 will allow the
researchers to compare the responses in West Bear Brook to the changes observed
in a reference watershed, East Bear Brook watershed. The researchers will sample
the streams under base flow conditions and during storms to test hypotheses
about why increases in dissolved organic matter concentrations in some streams,
referred to as browning of the waters, have occurred as acidic atmospheric
deposition has diminished. The research should allow the scientists to
distinguish changes observed with the abrupt cessation of atmospheric additions
from the long-term changes that could be the result of climate change and
forestland development. Characterization of dissolved organic carbon will employ
state of the art spectrophotometric, fluorescence, and molecular methodologies
to test hypotheses about the nature of organic matter and mineral complexes in
the soil. The researchers will also study mechanisms of recovery driven by
declining sulfate export from soils, will sample soils from the long-term soil
plots at the end of the first year of recovery to capture potential initial
evidence of alterations in soil chemistry, and ultimately hope to gain a better
understanding of the sequence of changing chemistry in soils and streams with
particular reference to aluminum. The project will include participation by
undergraduate and graduate students, with linkages to K-12 teachers and students
at a local high school.