* 1704679
* SusChEM: Designer Glycoligands for Enabling Targeted Multimodal Protein Bioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Shishir Chundawat, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

An intermediate step in the synthesis of most pharmaceutical products, including
therapeutic proteins, genome-enabled personalized medicine, and anti-viral
vaccines, is the isolation of the target compound of interest from a complex
biological mixture. Separation of the species of interest is a complex,
resource-intensive multi-step process, but is essential to ensure the purity and
quality of the resulting pharmaceutical product. Pharmaceuticals are generally
separated via chromatography, in which a complex mixture is passed over multiple
beds packed with solid resin particles. Although the solids are generally inert,
different components of the mixture pass through the bed at different
velocities, as dictated by the size of each molecule present in the mixture, its
travel path, and interactions with the solid surface that may impede motion.
This project will develop new chromatographic resins that more efficiently
separate biological mixtures, by imparting chemical ligands to the solid that
have binding interactions with the compounds of interest that selectively impede
their motion through the packed column. It is anticipated that such multimodal
ligands, i.e. those that have multiple interactions with specific compounds,
will significantly reduce the complexity, and thus the cost, of chromatographic
purification of biological mixtures. Specifically, this project will genetically
engineer the active sites of enzymes, such that the enzymes will synthesize
designer ligands with properties that make them more selectively bind to
targeted proteins from the complex mixture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The binding
sites to be developed in this project are therapeutic protein-specific glycan-
based ligands (or glycoligands), which will be synthesized via a novel
biosynthetic approach fusing engineered glycosynthase enzymes. These enzymes
offer several advantages over traditional approaches, including that they can be
easily engineered to tailor the reaction specificity to produce highly
biocompatible ligands for protein purification. The central hypothesis of this
work is that genetic engineering of multifunctional glycosynthase enzymes will
lead to the ability of these enzymes to finely tailor glycoligands, which in
turn, will have desirable selectivity for multimodal ligand based protein
chromatography. A library of enzymes will be designed to produce a library of
active and selective binding ligand resins. The resulting multimodal
interactions, including recognition, binding, and unbinding, will be
characterized using a high throughput experimental platform. Glycoligands
synthesized using various glycone and aglycone moieties with fine-tuned hydrogen
bonding, hydrophobic, and/or electrostatic interactions will facilitate targeted
purification of proteins with defined surface properties. This work will lead to
the development of new biomaterials, experimental tools, and quantitative
structure-property relationship models for predicting protein-glycan
interactions that will advance diverse fields ranging from glycobiology to
bioseparations. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the
interdisciplinary areas of protein engineering and bioseparations, and concepts
from the research will be incorporated into an undergraduate course and into an
outreach/training program at Rutgers University. The PI will partner with
university and industrial partners to test the commercial potential of the
designer glycoligands.