* 1704151
* Advanced Metal Thin Film Nucleation During Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Gregory Parsons, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 385,446.00

Thin film electronic materials formed by atomic layer deposition (ALD) are now
well ingrained in semiconductor device manufacturing, and they are emerging as
important materials for encapsulation of organic light-emitting displays and
lighting, flexible and wearable electronics, and photovoltaics, batteries,
supercapacitors and other renewable energy conversion and storage devices. While
commercial ALD is well developed for metal oxides, there is a strong and growing
need for new approaches for metal ALD. Relatively few options are currently
available due to lack of effective vapor-phase reducing agents and ALD-
compatible metal precursors that provide sufficient volatility and self-limiting
surface reaction capacity to satisfy ALD reaction requirements. Beyond
understanding steady-state metal ALD reactions, there is a critical need to
attain a more detailed understanding of metal ALD nucleation, including defining
elementary reactions during growth initiation. In particular, substrate
selective ALD is becoming an acute challenge for the semiconductor industry to
achieve advanced sub-10 nm feature patterning. This project addresses these
challenges by combining first-principles modeling with in-situ analysis of ALD
nucleation and growth using novel metal precursors and reducing agents to
develop new models and insights into elementary surface reactions important for
advanced thin film reaction engineering design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project aims at exploring newly available metal precursors and metal
reducing agents to expand fundamental understanding of low temperature
thermally-driven reaction mechanisms on a range of substrate surfaces. The
fundamental understanding of vapor/surface chemical reaction mechanisms
developed by combined experiment/first-principles modeling approach may lead to
new nanoscale elemental metal, semimetal and metalloid thin films by thermal
atomic layer deposition (ALD). The combination of novel precursors and reducing
agents combined with insights gained from modeling will be used to understand
substrate-dependent nucleation. In-situ reaction analysis will improve ALD-
nucleation models and provide pathways for improved selective area ALD. There is
a plan to explore nucleation reversibility in ALD, including emerging thermal
atomic layer etching (ALE) processes. Adapting a strategy from CVD to coupling
deposition and etching, new ALE processes could refine significantly expand
selective ALD capabilities. The proposed approach is unique because of the
choice of novel materials to study, new modeling approaches, and unique
combinations of in-situ atomic-scale surface reaction characterization tools.