* 1704417
* AF:Medium:Collaborative Research:Estimation, Learning, and Memory: The Quest for Statistically Optimal Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Gregory Valiant, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2023
* USD 550,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop new, efficient algorithms that extract as
much information as is possible from a given quantity of data. In particular,
this research aims to develop an understanding of how to leverage structure that
is present in natural language settings, medical and genomic settings, and
network- or graph-based settings. Many fundamental types of structure are
encountered repeatedly in widely varying scientific and technological settings;
our goal is to build on a recent body of work that focused on the simplest
unstructured settings, and develop broadly applicable tools and insights to
these diverse settings. A central component of this project is a close
interaction and transfer of ideas, problems, and techniques, between the theory
community, the machine learning community, and the broader set of data-centric
researchers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical
perspective, this research focuses on three fundamental types of structure:
geometric structure, algebraic or low-rank structure, and the structure that is
present in sequential&lt;br/&gt;data (such as natural language). For the first
two types of structure, the research focus is on understanding the possibilities
and limitations in the sparse data regime where the amount of data is comparable
to, or sublinear in, the dimensionality of the data. In the third setting, the
focus is on understanding the role of memory for learning and prediction
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the direct research goals of the project, the
PIs are extensively involved in teaching and outreach, including designing UW?s
new data sciences curriculum, and developing new courses on algorithms and
foundational aspects of data sciences at Stanford.