* 1704813
* NeTS: Cognitive Networking of the Oceans: Localization and Tracking Fundamentals
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Stella Batalama, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 10/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Undersea wireless communications and networking has a wide range of potential
scientific, commercial, and military applications, but is still a daunting task
due to the very nature of the water propagation medium. Fundamental to the
success of undersea communications is robust localization and tracking to
support position-aware data routing and autonomous navigation in the GPS-less
oceanic environment. Current state-of-the-art approaches for undersea
localization and tracking consider expensive, power-intense inertial measurement
sensors, geophysical-based imaging, and acoustic signaling techniques. However,
long propagation delays, Doppler effects due to water movement, and the highly
dynamic multipath nature of the undersea environment result in significant
errors and outliers in acoustic and imaging measurements. This project aims to
significantly advance (five-fold in precision) the state of the art in
3D-passive undersea acoustic localization by providing novel algorithmic
solutions to the problem of estimating the angle of arrival of undersea
propagating signals in the presence of potentially faulty measurements. The
algorithms will then be embedded in in-house-developed programmable underwater
acoustic modems to form an experimental four-node network for evaluation and
demonstration. Localization capabilities will be demonstrated in communication,
command and control application scenarios for remote wireless navigation and
surveillance. The project will integrate research and education at all
University-degree levels by establishing cross-listed graduate/undergraduate
courses on undersea acoustic localization and its applications and activities to
reach out to groups of middle and high-school students. Technology transfer
activities in this field will be also pursued.

The project pursues a paradigm shift in how signal Direction-of-Arrival (DoA)
estimation is carried out over undersea acoustic links by deviating from the
familiar L2-norm-subspace decomposition theory and its variants and considering,
for the first time, L1-norm signal subspace decomposition. Motivated by the
resistance of L1-norm-derived subspaces against outliers and/or data corruption
and the recent computational advances in the field, this project will employ
novel L1-norm maximum-projection principal-component analysis of the antenna
array measurements to design a novel, outlier- Doppler- and multipath-resistant
DoA estimation method for undersea acoustic networks. L1-norm localization and
tracking will support position-aware data routing and autonomous navigation
applications in the GPS-less oceans under occasional severe dynamic signal
scattering and path loss.