* 1704379
* Fundamental Study of Nonlinear Electrokinetic Phenomena in Insulator-based Dielectrophoretic Microdevices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Xiangchun Xuan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 01/31/2022
* USD 298,539.00

Dielectrophoresis (DEP) is very useful in manipulating micro/nano-sized
particles (e.g., cells, beads, viruses, DNA and protein molecules). Insulator-
based dielectrophoresis (iDEP) exploits insulating structures, such as hurdles,
posts and ridges, to trap, concentrate, separate and sort particles. Compared to
the traditional electrode-based dielectrophoresis (eDEP), iDEP microdevices have
the advantages of easy fabrication and robust performance. However, the presence
of in-channel insulating structures cause two phenomena that may strongly
disturb the flow and either suppress or enhance the particle manipulation in
iDEP microdevices. These phenomena are: the electrothermal flow due to the
amplified Joule heating in the fluid around the insulators, and the induced
charge electroosmotic (ICEO) flow due to the electrical polarization of the
insulators. An accurate understanding of either phenomenon is significantly
complicated by the thermal diffusion or electric field leakage that occurs in
the entire device. This project seeks to develop a generalized depth-averaged
model for the fundamental study of nonlinear electrokinetic phenomena in iDEP
microdevices. The proposed model will substantially reduce the computational
cost for predicting the particle manipulation performance in iDEP devices. It
will also serve as an efficient and accurate tool for the optimal design and
control of a wide class of electrokinetic microfluidic devices with shallow-
channel geometries. This research will be intimately weaved into the
undergraduate and graduate educations at Clemson University and the high school
outreach in South Carolina. Undergraduate and high school students will be
actively involved through various programs available in the department,
university, and state with emphasis on the inclusion of women and
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the
first comprehensive fundamental study of nonlinear electrokinetic phenomena in
iDEP microdevices. It is hypothesized that the nonlinear ICEO and electrothermal
flows are dominant in low and high ionic concentration fluids, respectively, and
can suppress each other in an intermediate ionic concentration fluid. An
asymptotic analysis of the temperature-coupled heat, fluid and charge transport
equations will be performed for electrokinetic flow in shallow microchannels. A
depth-averaged model will be developed based on the asymptotic analysis to
simulate the development of temperature, flow and electric fields in typical
iDEP microdevices with consideration of both Joule heating and induced charge
effects. The fluid temperature and velocity fields will be measured near the
insulating structures. The validity of the developed depth-averaged model will
be assessed by comparing its predictions with both 3D full-scale numerical
simulations and experimental data. The acquired fundamental knowledge of
nonlinear electrokinetic phenomena will establish a heat transfer and fluid
mechanics framework for iDEP microdevices.