* 1704504
* SHF: Medium: WHOLEPRO: An Online, Holistic Job Scheduling and Resource Provisioning Framework for Datacenter Architectures and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Hong Jiang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,045,923.00

The ultimate design goal of datacenter services is to enable user-centric
services that meet diverse Quality-of-Experience (QoE) requirements for
individual users, while allowing for optimized and fair computing and networking
resource sharing among users. However, achieving this goal is by no means easy.
Existing datacenter job scheduling and resource provisioning mechanisms are
bottom-up, point solutions, addressing partial aspects of the related design
challenges only, and hence, fail to achieve the above
goal.  &lt;br/&gt;     &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a top-down,
holistic approach concerning the entire datacenter systems stack, aiming at
achieving the dual goal. It starts from the very top, i.e., the QoE or user
utility requirements at the user application level. It then works its way
downward, by mapping user-level requirements into datacenter system-level
resource demands, which, together with the datacenter computing and networking
resource constraints, set the boundary conditions for a proposed user-utility-
aware optimization framework. Finally, an example software-based design and
implementation of the proposed solution will be developed for a state-of-the-
art, distributed datacenter. Successfully achieving this goal will provide
significant improvement in performance guarantees and resource utilization in
current and future datacenters for a wide range of applications with diverse QoE
requirements. Moreover, the proposed approach promotes fundamental analysis in
guiding the design of robust complex systems and may give rise to new theories
for datacenter and cloud computing in general. The involvement of
underrepresented minority and women students, and students with disability in
this proposed research through existing course offerings and a REU program will
enhance their competitiveness in the future job market.