* 1704144
* CBET: A two step chemocatalytic conversion of cellulosic biomass to hydrocarbon biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ananda Amarasekara, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 315,000.00

The long-term security of our economy requires a portfolio of domestic
feedstocks to produce fuels and chemicals. Biomass is a promising choice;
however, conversion technologies that are reliable, reproducible and economic
are still needed. This project addresses fundamental knowledge supporting a
conversion technology uses resources that are targeted solely for fuels
production. This project addresses direct conversion of lignocellulosic biomass
into a bio-oil that has the potential to be a drop-in replacement for gasoline
and other fuels. These fuels would be applicable in current automotive internal
combustion engines and for air transportation. The project researches a novel
catalyst that serves three functions to break up the biomass structure of
cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin into smaller chemical entities that are
converted into a fuel mixture. The catalyst mixture is recyclable and readily
recovered from the product mixture. Potential savings are gained in a simpler
2-step process, recycling of catalyst, and higher yield of product from the
feedstock. The resulting product would be stable and have high energy content to
mix into existing fuel stockpiles. The project's educational activities stress
undergraduate research and outreach to high school students for participation in
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to research
an energy efficient recyclable two step catalytic process for the transformation
of biomass to next generation hydrocarbon biofuels. This goal will be achieved
by the design of a recyclable catalyst that can produce C5-C20 range partially
oxygenated furanic alkene type biocrude oil from lignocellulosic biomass in a
single reactor operation under mild conditions. In the first conversion step,
cellulose and hemicelluloses in the biomass undergoes an acidic ionic liquid
catalyzed depolymerization to glucose and xylose at a relatively low
temperature. In the next stage the catalyst will dehydrate the monosaccharides
into a furan mixture, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural and furfural. In the final
reaction step, the furan aldehydes will undergo acid catalyzed aldol
condensation with acetone in the medium. The complex product will consist of
C5-C20 range compounds resulting from cross aldol condensation between biomass
derived furans and acetone, as well as acetone self-condensation products. The
biocrude produced by this catalytic process is stable and composed of well-
defined stable furanic alkene and enone products, which are then upgraded to
hydrocarbons using established catalytic reduction technology.