* 1704245
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Nonconvex Optimization for High-Dimensional Signal Estimation: Theory and Fast Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Yuejie Chi, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 01/31/2018
* USD 95,859.00

High-dimensional signal estimation plays fundamental roles in various
engineering and science applications, such as medical imaging, video and network
surveillance. Estimation procedures that maintain both statistical and
computational efficacy are of great practical value, which translate into
desiderata such as less time patients need to spend in a medical scanner, faster
response to cyber attacks, and capabilities to handle very large datasets. While
a lot of signal estimation tasks are naturally formulated as nonconvex
optimization problems, existing results for nonconvex methods have several
fundamental limitations, and the current state of the art is still limited in
terms of when, why and which nonconvex approaches are effective for a given
problem. The goal of this research program is to significantly deepen and
broaden the understanding and applications of nonconvex optimization for high-
dimensional signal estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators will study high-dimensional signal estimation via direct
optimization of nonconvex, and potentially nonsmooth, loss functions, without
resorting to convex relaxation. This research will explore geometric structures
shared by nonconvex functions commonly encountered in signal estimation, and
study the fundamental roles these structures play in determining the algorithmic
convergence. These results will then be exploited as guidelines to develop fast
and provably correct algorithms for estimating high-dimensional signals with
physically induced structures and under streaming data observations.
Specifically, the research program consists of three major thrusts: (1)
understanding the geometric structures of important classes of nonconvex loss
surfaces, and characterizing their impact on the convergence of optimization
algorithms; (2) developing fast algorithms and the associated theory for the
recovery of structured low-rank matrices; (3) designing new online algorithms
that are time and space efficient under a streaming setting, with the capability
of detecting and tracking the time-varying signals of interest.