* 1704933
* ME-Green: Manufacturing for Environment by Generating Renewable Energy in Enterprise Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Tongdan Jin, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,286.00

The goal of this research is to model and design a grid-connected onsite
generation system featuring intermittent renewable power to realize zero-carbon
industrial operations. Three fundamental questions will be addressed that are
confronted by the manufacturing industries: 1) is it economically variable to
deploy wind, solar and other green power to achieve energy independency, 2) is
it technically feasible to operate a net-zero carbon facility using intermittent
power, and 3) can distributed energy resources (DER)actively participate in
demand responses by forming a virtual power plant to provide two-way energy
flow? To answer these questions, multi-criteria stochastic programming models
will be developed to optimize the DER sizing, siting, and maintenance for
minimizing energy cost with ensuring reliability, resilience and power quality.
Primary DER units include wind turbine, solar photovoltaics, combined heat and
power, electric vehicles, and battery banks.

The research hypothesis is that that virtually any manufacturing facility around
the world could be powered with 100 percent onsite wind and solar power at an
affordable cost. This hypothesis will be tested in various locations around the
world with diverse climatic conditions. Research activities include analytics,
system modeling and optimization, and simulation to address the operational
challenges pertaining to power intermittency, voltage stability, demand
response, production-inventory schedule, grid resilience, and transportation
electrification. This research makes an attempt to seek a zero-carbon energy
solution for enterprise systems through the integration of intermittent
renewable power. Though onsite generation and microgrids have been adopted by
industries, an in-depth study on return-on-investment, loss-of-load risks, and
interaction with utility grid is still rare in the literature. Methodologically,
a two-stage optimization algorithm will be employed. In stage 1, the sizing and
siting of DER units will be optimized. In stage 2, the maintenance policy to
minimize the equipment lifecycle cost will be established. A two-stage decision
process is able to eliminate inferior solutions in the initial search. In
modeling, a probabilistic measure to ensure grid resilience by minimizing the
DER and microgrid recovery time against natural disasters or extreme events will
be employed. This research is targeted to assist the U.S. manufacturing industry
in gaining unprecedented competitive advantages by transforming from power-
intensive, carbon producers to environmentally-benign and energy-independent
entities.