* 1704625
* Thermoelectric metal nanostructures:  Disorder, plasmons, and photodetection
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 359,999.00

Abstract: Nontechnical: The flow of heat and electric charge are coupled
together, and these thermoelectric effects underpin diverse critical
technologies, including thermostats, electrically driven refrigerators, and
photodetectors. Thermoelectric properties can be engineered by structuring
materials on the nanoscale. Using a scanning laser as a moveable heat source,
the PI's group has revealed unexpected thermoelectric effects even in nominally
simple metal structures. Specifically, grain boundaries and surface chemistry
can modify thermoelectric response, and greatly enhanced photo-voltages are
possible in structures where electrons have to "tunnel" across a nanoscale gap
between metal electrodes. This project will confirm the mechanisms behind these
surprising features, and build upon this knowledge to create and characterize
prototypes of new photodetectors based on metal optical antennas. While not as
sensitive as semiconductor-based photodetectors, metal optical antenna systems
are geometrically tunable, have different noise processes, and can be simpler to
fabricate. Results will be disseminated via publications, presentations at
conferences, and popular writings by the PI on his blog. This project will
provide training and professional development to graduate students and
undergraduate researchers, aiding in the creation of the next generation of a
technologically skilled and innovative workforce. The PI will also work with K12
teachers and undergraduates from other institutions through ongoing Rice
programs. Through his blog and writings in collaboration with the Houston
Chronicle, the PI will continue to popularize nanoscale science and engineering
in general, and this project's research outcomes in particular.

Technical: Nanostructured thermoelectric devices have enormous potential as
technologies and as tools to acquire the basic scientific and engineering
knowledge necessary to control and optimize the flow of energy at the nanoscale.
By coupling electronic transport measurements and illumination via a scanning
laser microscope, the PI's group has found unexpected photothermoelectric
effects in nominally simple metal nanostructures. Metal nanowires demonstrate
previously unreported inhomogeneities in Seebeck response, indicating that grain
boundaries and surface chemistry can be tools for engineering thermoelectric
response. Nanoscale tunneling gaps between metallic electrodes show greatly
enhanced photovoltages compared to nontunneling structures, with material and
polarization dependences that are consistent with plasmon-enhanced hot electron
tunneling as the mechanism. The intellectual merit of this project lies in its
three specific research goals: quantifying and engineering photothermoelectric
effects in metal nanostructures through control of surface conditions (via self-
assembled monolayers) and grain structure; understanding and optimizing greatly
enhanced thermoelectric effects in nanogaps; and demonstrating photodetectors
based on these enhanced photothermoelectric effects, looking at sensitivity and
noise properties. The PI's team of graduate and undergraduate students will
collaborate with theorists in modeling the optoelectronic and thermal transport
processes at work in these structures, providing critical feedback for
optimization of response. Results will be disseminated broadly through
publications, presentations at conferences, and when appropriate the PI's blog.
This project will provide training and professional development to graduate
students and undergraduate researchers, aiding in the creation of the next
generation of a technologically skilled and innovative workforce. The PI will
also work with K12 teachers and undergraduates from other institutions through
ongoing Rice programs. Through his blog and writings in collaboration with the
Houston Chronicle, the PI will continue to popularize nanoscale science and
engineering in general, and this project's research outcomes in particular.