* 1704904
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Sculpting Visualizations: Toward a Practice and Theory of 3D Scientific Visualizations Using Physical Objects and Augmented Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Francesca Samsel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 554,030.00

Advances in 3D printing, augmented reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR), are
creating new possibilities for computing tools that integrate with our physical
environment and take advantage of our physical abilities. This proposal will
study how these technologies can support 3D data visualization, an increasingly
important and common scientific activity. The team, which includes computer
scientists, artists, neuroscientists, geologists, and oceanologists, will first
use 3D printing to develop physical representations of 3D data ("physical data
forms") that match the needs of specific analysis domains and tasks, and through
this develop principles for doing 3D design for visualizations in general. They
will then design hybrid spaces that use AR visual representations along with
physical data forms, looking at ways to leverage the strengths of each and
developing ways to interact with the data through both the virtual and physical
forms. Finally, they will create tools that leverage these design principles and
interaction techniques to allow scientists to create new physical data forms and
hybrid visualizations to address outstanding data analysis challenges in brain
imaging, geology, and, ultimately, many scientific fields. The work will support
interdisciplinary courses at the intersection of art, science, computing, and
data visualization at the PIs' institutions; students will also be trained in
research methods and work with the research team to develop public science
museum exhibits that raise awareness of both the technology and the science
involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To leverage the possibilities of rapid,
creative, artistic iteration and exploration of physical form, the team will
develop interfaces and algorithms for capturing and extracting properties of
physical forms, along with tools for exploring mappings between these properties
and 3D data, a design theory and taxonomy, and a catalog for using physical
inputs in visualization processes. These physical elements will be augmented
with colocated digital head-tracked stereoscopic displays that directly
incorporate the printed objects into the AR experience, along with touch-based
interaction techniques such as touch-sensitive input surfaces or the direct
inclusion of physical widgets in the printed objects. These visualizations will
be evaluated through user studies based on existing methodologies for comparing
3D vector field visualization methods. The team will then develop exploratory
visualization tools, using streamlined versions of the catalog and
visualizations developed earlier to help manage the complexity of creating new
visualizations while teaching visual design processes to scientists through the
use of the tools, recasting the scientific task of data exploration as a
creative process of visualization design to support learning, engagement, and
effective analysis. These tools will be iteratively developed by teams of art
and computer science students in conjunction with domain scientists and used to
facilitate data exploration and discovery, as well as to bring science more
directly into the public sphere through interactive experiences, such as at
science museums.