* 1704941
* NeTS: CSR: Large: Collaborative Research: Co-Design of Network, Storage and Computation Fabrics for Disaggregated Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Scott Shenker, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 899,960.00

Traditional datacenters are built using servers, each of which tightly
integrates a small amount of CPU (central processing unit), memory and storage
onto a single motherboard. However, the end of Dennard's scaling and the
slowdown of Moore's Law has led to surfacing of several fundamental limitations
of such server-centric architectures (e.g., the memory-capacity wall making CPU-
memory co-location unsustainable). Consequently, a new computing paradigm is
emerging -- a disaggregated architecture, where each resource type is built as a
standalone 'blade' and a network fabric interconnects the resource blades within
and across racks. The computer architecture community has established a number
of benefits of such disaggregated architectures, including the potential to have
10-100x larger resource capacity. While beneficial from the computer
architecture perspective, disaggregated architectures alter several assumptions
that once guided the design and optimization of existing networks, systems and
applications (e.g., CPU-storage colocation, high CPU-memory bandwidth, storage
hierarchy, data locality, failure models, etc.). Capitalizing on the benefits of
disaggregated architectures will thus require re-architecting legacy systems and
networks. This project aims to co-design the network, storage and compute
fabrics for disaggregated datacenters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the network
front, the project will design ultra-low latency intra-rack and inter-rack
fabrics including a new network software stack that incorporates efficient
congestion control, failure tolerance and scheduling mechanisms. The co-design
of network and storage fabrics will lead to new (distributed) memory and storage
management stacks for disaggregated storage, and a resource manager that
provides essential isolation, sharing and elasticity guarantees across multiple
applications sharing disaggregated storage and network fabrics. Finally, the
project will build new distributed programming frameworks and re-architect
existing applications to efficiently and correctly operate on disaggregated
architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide solutions to some
of the most difficult and important technical questions surrounding this
emerging computing paradigm and will have broad community impact primarily
through educational and outreach activities, and technology transfer. Software
artifacts resulting from this project will be publicly released to ensure
repeatability and to foster follow up research. The project also has a
substantial educational component including new courses and public release of
teaching materials. Finally, the project will provide the necessary thrust to
build an inter-disciplinary research community via mentoring of graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars, yearly workshops and industry retreats to
bridge the gap between industrial development and academic research.