* 1704264
* Noise in 2d topological edges and spin Hall systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 433,075.00

Non-Technical Abstract: Electrons carry both electrical charge and, much like a
top, angular momentum called "spin", and while ordinary electronic devices
typically only use the charge, there is increasing interest in taking advantage
of the spin for information storage and processing. In some materials with
particular structures, a current of charge in one direction can drive a current
of spin in a transverse direction (the "spin Hall effect"), and a net imbalance
of spin can build up at the material's surface. In other materials (two-
dimensional "topological insulators"), charge and spin are predicted to flow
only around the perimeter of the material. In both systems, because charge and
spin come in discrete amounts and are coupled together, a lot can be learned
about how they move by measuring not just the charge current, but fluctuations
in the charge current called "shot noise". This project measures the shot noise
at radio frequencies produced by current flow along the edges of 2d topological
insulators, to determine the nature of that edge transport and the scattering
mechanisms that limit its flow. This information is revealed by the geometry,
temperature, and magnetic field dependence of the noise. This project applies
the same measurement approach to look for shot noise predicted to result when
the spin Hall effect builds up spin polarization at a material surface. This is
one avenue to determine the amount of spin build-up without the need for
complicated device structures involving magnetic materials. This project
provides research training and professional development for two graduate
students, as well as research opportunities for undergraduates. Results are
disseminated through publications, presentations at conferences and
universities, and through the principal investigator's blog. The principal
investigator is working with K12 teachers and undergraduates to explain this and
related research at level appropriate for a general audience, in writings
distributed in the blog and in cooperation with the Houston Chronicle. The
principal investigator is also developing resources for science writers and
journalists, to aid in explaining condensed matter and nanoscale physics
concepts to the public.

Technical Abstract: There is a growing appreciation that the interplay between
spin and orbital degrees of freedom of electrons provides opportunities to
manipulate spin and create previously unprecedented electronic systems. The
intellectual merit of this effort focuses on understanding two physical systems.
In particular materials, band structure predicts the formation of a two-
dimensional "topological insulator" state in the bulk, with topologically
protected, 1d helical edge states girding the perimeter. Understanding these
edge states is essential for realizing their benefits in dissipationless
transport and computing. Electron-electron interactions, magnetic impurities,
and disorder are expected to affect these edge states in ways testable through
measurements of nonequilibrium noise in the edge state conduction. In addition,
the related spin Hall effect is a viable means of generating nonequilibrium spin
accumulation in metals, with tremendous potential for information storage and
processing. Charge noise is predicted to be a way to characterize that spin
accumulation without the need for ferromagnetic materials. This project measures
nonequilibrium noise and charge transport to examine edge states at 2d TI
interfaces and SHE-driven spin accumulation in metal nanostructures. Specific
scientific questions include: Are edge states at semiconductor heterointerfaces
trivial or topological? What limits ballistic transport in such edge states? To
what extent does spin accumulation from the spin Hall effect produce charge
current noise? These science questions have relevance for technological
applications, including exotic computational architectures and magnetic
information storage and processing. Beyond technologies, the broader impacts of
this project involve the professional training of graduate students and
undergraduates as the next generation of technological workforce, and public
outreach including K12 education. The principal investigator works with Rice K12
programs and an ongoing Rice REU program focusing on Houston-area community
college students; and public outreach based on his decade-established blog.
Specific products include a primer/guide to condensed matter/nano physics for
science journalists; "tip-sheets" to science journalists regarding new
developments in the field; and science writing contributions for the Houston
Chronicle.