* 1704173
* SusChEM: Nonflammable, Highly Conductive Ionic Liquid based Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Electrolytes for Lithium Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Qing Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Lithium ion batteries have great potential to reduce dependence on fossil fuels
for transportation and play a critical role in moving the U.S. toward a
sustainable, clean energy future. The electrolyte, an essential component of a
battery, allows the flow of electrical charge between the electrodes. Lithium-
ion batteries typically use a mixture of volatile organic solvents and salts as
electrolytes, which creates potential safety and reliability concerns. This
research will develop a new class of nonflammable organic-inorganic hybrid Li-
ion electrolytes. The research will lead to improved understanding of
fundamental mechanisms of ion conduction and electrochemical properties of the
solid-state electrolytes. The scientific aspects of the research program will be
integrated with broader outreach and educational initiatives in the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Additionally, this
project will include international collaboration with Seoul National University
in South Korea to give the students valuable experience in the international
research and education.

This research will address ionic liquid-based nonflammable, solid-state Li-ion
electrolytes. The project includes synthesis, characterization, and ion
transport in ionic liquid tethered polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS-
IL) mixtures with lithium bistrifluoromethanesulfonimidate) salts (LiTSFI). The
research will explore how tuning the interactions between the cationic
structures and immobilized anions could affect ionic conductivity and
electrochemical properties. The project will include the systematic variation of
chemical structures of electrolytes to gain fundamental insight into how
molecular structures, e.g. cationic structures and immobilized anions, affect
lithium ion conductivity and electrochemical properties. The synthetic effort
will be closely coupled with Raman spectroscopy, electrochemical property and
battery performance measurements to create a complete picture of structure-
property-performance relationships. Dielectric spectroscopy will be utilized to
uncover the mechanisms of ion dissociation and transport. The project will
generate fundamental understanding of the relationship between molecular
structure and ion transport.