* 1705440
* NSF/CBET-BSF: Processing of Polar Absorbers to Enable Hot-Carrier All-Oxide Transparent Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jonathan Spanier, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2022
* USD 319,199.00

Due to an inexhaustible supply of energy from the sun, conversion of sunlight
into electricity by photovoltaics (PVs) is a promising long-term sustainable
energy technology. In this NSF-Binational Science Foundation (BSF) project,
Drexel University, in partnership with Bar-Ilan University in Israel, will
conduct a fundamental research study on new materials design and synthesis
strategy for producing optically-transparent semiconductors for efficient solar
energy conversion. The new materials will be obtained through a combination of
computational design of materials and advanced synthesis, processing, and
property measurements. Devices will be prepared and evaluated using these
materials, which will simultaneously and efficiently absorb ultraviolet and
infrared sunlight, but transmit visible light, and convert the absorbed light
efficiently into power. The new solar energy absorber paradigm, which relies on
inexpensive, earth-abundant, non-toxic and stable materials, has the potential
to transform PV solar power conversion capacity using already existing building
windows and other building surfaces. The investigations undertaken in this
project will advance fundamental knowledge on the photocurrent generation
mechanism that promises to dramatically enhance solar power conversion
efficiencies of photovoltaic cells based on ferroelectric oxides. This project
also serves as ideal training for a cadre of talented young engineers, including
those from historically underrepresented groups, to tackle important fundamental
materials engineering challenges and participate in outreach activities as part
of collaborative, interdisciplinary effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel,
highly-efficient hot-carrier mechanism of solar energy conversion is promising
for the use of ferroelectric oxide films in single absorber, transparent
photovoltaics. This project will result in fundamental knowledge of the
relationships between processing and the structural, optical and photo-generated
charge transport properties and performance of transparent photovoltaic absorber
films. The approach of the project uses a series of tightly coupled experimental
and theoretical investigations. This research program combines aspects of
advanced materials processing and device fabrication with fundamental materials
design and understanding to achieve the unusual combination of infrared and
ultraviolet light absorption, visible light transparency and functional
ferroelectric properties for enabling novel transparent hot-carrier solar cells
with efficiencies possibly beyond the Shockley-Queisser limit. Deposition and
post-deposition processing protocols that enable the use of the semiconducting
ferroelectric-type films for transparent photovoltaic absorbers will be
researched, along with device fabrication, testing and analysis. While
computational methods have been used for materials discovery, their use for
fundamental studies of processing of cation-doped and oxygen vacancy-rich solid-
solution semiconducting ferroelectric oxide perovskites will be one of the first
examples for theory-guided processing research. Building on the collaborations
between the PI and his Israel-based collaborator, comparison of theory and
experiment will provide feedback for the physical vapor deposition-based film
synthesis effort and will enhance the accuracy of the first principles density
functional theoretical-based computational approach.