* 1705110
* Representation Theory as Gauge Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* David Ben-Zvi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2020
* USD 173,949.00

Representation theory seeks to classify and describe the possible realizations
of symmetries, and to exploit symmetry by providing a tool to decompose
symmetric structures into elementary constituents. Representation theory has
been an essential tool in quantum physics almost from its inception, providing
for example the structure of atomic orbitals. Gauge theories, quantum theories
built directly out of the structure of local symmetry, are the language of much
of high energy physics, in particular the Standard Model, which describes all
the fundamental forces besides gravity. Gauge theory in turn has had a
tremendous impact on low dimensional topology and geometry. This project is
concerned with the reversal of the relationship between representation theory
and gauge theory: applying the structure of gauge theory as a powerful
organizing framework for representation theory in the abstract. In this
paradigm, different representation theories are encoded by different models of
gauge theory, and inherit a radically new and uniform structure from the
behavior of observables and defects in gauge theory. Thus the fundamental
symmetries of nature become powerful tools to understand the most abstract
questions in algebra and analysis -- in particular some of the deepest
structures we know in algebra (the Langlands program, responsible for the
resolution of Fermat's Last Theorem) derive from the symmetry between
electricity and magnetism. These connections and synergies will be developed
under this project, both in the PI's research and in his extensive expository
work, including writing a graduate text introducing this paradigm to a broader
audience for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gauge theories are quantum
field theories built directly out of local Lie group symmetry. Conversely, one
can view many aspects of representation theory of Lie groups through the lens of
gauge theory, which provides a powerful organizing principle for representation
theory through the medium of low-dimensional topology. The object of this
project is to develop and disseminate the perspective of representation theory
as gauge theory. The project details two primary research projects inspired by
developments in gauge theory. The first is the exploitation of a new source of
commutative symmetry algebras in geometric representation theory inspired by
Seiberg-Witten geometry of gauge theory and uncovered in the PI's recent work.
The PI will apply spectral decomposition with respect to these symmetries in a
variety of contexts, including Lusztig's theory of character sheaves, the
homology of character varieties of surfaces, and the geometric Langlands
correspondence. The second is the development of the new "Betti" (or
topological) form of the Geometric Langlands Correspondence introduced by the
PI, which he intends to reduce to elementary building blocks by proving an
"automorphic Verlinde formula." The case of genus one appears accessible, and
has implications for much-studied topics in representation theory. In addition
the PI intends to engage in extensive expository writing, including a graduate
text and interdisciplinary expository work with theoretical high energy
physicists.