* 1705048
* INFEWS N/P/H2O:EPRI:GOALI: A Novel Janus Membrane with Asymmetric Wetting Properties  for Simultaneous Anti-wetting and Anti-fouling Membrane Distillation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Chaoxun Zhao, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2022
* USD 329,327.00

PI Name: Shihong Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1705048&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Membrane distillation (MD) is an emerging membrane-based thermal
desalination technology that can utilize low-temperature heat to desalinate
hypersaline water. Current MD membranes are typically made of polymeric
materials that are readily wet by compounds such as surfactants and fouled by
many organic compounds. These drawbacks typically limit MD processes to
desalinating relatively clean saline water free of these constituents.
Overcoming these limitations in material properties will permit MD processes to
be used with a much broader range of feed water and wastewater that are
challenging for existing technologies. The PIs plan to develop a novel membrane
with resistance to both wetting and fouling for MD as a solution to overcome the
materials limitations and enhance the capability of MD as a desalination
technology. The novel membranes will be fabricated by integrating two functional
layers with distinct wetting properties to impart the simultaneous resistance to
fouling and wetting. The PIs will also integrate educational activities aimed at
fostering the interests of K-12 students in STEM. They will also develop
educational kits and modules for K-12 outreach and host talented high school
students to conduct research related to this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to develop a novel Janus membrane with
resistance to both wetting and fouling for robust and versatile MD applications.
This goal will be achieved by conducting the three following specific tasks.
First, Janus membranes will be fabricated by integrating an in-air omniphobic
substrate and an underwater superhydrophilic skin layer. The second major task
involves characterizing the morphological and wetting properties as well as the
standard MD performance of the fabricated Janus membranes. Lastly, the
performance of the Janus membranes will be tested with synthetic and real
wastewater to evaluate them in the presence of amphiphilic and hydrophobic
contaminants. For practical relevance, the real wastewater will be provided by
the industrial partner, which has expertise in treating specialized wastewater
from pharmaceutical and petrochemical industries. In addition to material
development, characterization, and performance testing, fundamental studies of
wetting and fouling will also be conducted using electro-impedance spectroscopy
and multi-scale force spectroscopy, respectively. The PIs will develop novel
materials as a solution to relevant environmental problems. The fabrication
techniques developed in this study will enhance our capacity of engineering
structured membranes with multiple functional properties. The fundamental
studies on fouling and wetting will potentially have an impact on enhancing the
performance of other membrane-based processes as well. Through this project, the
PIs will integrate the research and education by incorporating the results from
the project into the course materials at both graduate and undergraduate level,
promoting the participation of undergraduate students and high school students
in laboratory research, and developing educational kits and modules for K-12
outreach. Specifically, the PIs will focus on surface wetting as the thematic
topic for K-12 outreach and develop hands-on experimental kits integrating STEM
and art that foster the curiosity and creativity of the K-12 students.