* 1705560
* Enhancing Transgene Expression and Retention by Co-delivery of DNA Vectors with Modified Histones
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ann Kirchmaier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 449,998.00

Gene therapy has been offered as a potential cure for a wide range of diseases,
including hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, Parkinson's, HIV, hepatitis, and heart
disease. Conventional gene delivery approaches currently lack the safety,
efficiency and durability required for many research, industrial and/or clinical
applications. Understanding how to create and maintain active gene expression
will have broad-ranging impacts on gene delivery and expression in humans. The
proposed work will bring effective gene therapies closer to reality, and will
also train and inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers through
their active participation in this interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of this project is to
elucidate how long-term cellular memories of transcriptional states are created
and maintained to advance research, industrial and gene therapy applications
requiring regulated transgene expression. The specific scientific objectives are
to 1) develop a robust strategy for co-delivering transgenes together with
modified histone proteins promoting active transcription; and 2) evaluate and
enhance protein expression from chromatin assembled on transgenic DNA. The
established delivery approach is expected to significantly improve the uptake
and controlled expression of transgenic DNA and to be compatible with a broad
range of vectors. The fundamental kowledge gained regarding the design of
epigenetic systems for heterologous gene expression could have profound
implications for all eukaryotic gene expression systems. Such insight could, for
example, significantly expand the scope and efficacy of human gene therapy,
leading to cures for many serious diseases.