* 1705364
* Quantum Hydrodynamics and Energy Flow in Fermi Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* John Thomas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 569,963.00

This project uses laser flash photography to image the nearly frictionless fluid
flow and energy flow of a unique ultra-cold atomic gas confined between sheets
made of laser light. This special atomic gas has the properties of being
"strongly interacting," and "fermionic" which causes it to behave in many ways
like a liquid metal. When two clouds of these atoms collide, they bounce off of
one another, creating shock waves. These experiments simulate properties of
exotic matter in intellectual disciplines well outside atomic physics, including
neutron stars and quark-gluon plasmas, which existed microseconds after the Big
Bang. The experiments also test theories of super-high temperature
superconductors, which operate far above room temperature, enabling energy-
saving power lines and magnetically levitated trains. The project provides an
ideal learning opportunity and serves to train undergraduate students, graduate
students, and post-doctoral associates, who work as a team in a supportive
environment with the PI to devise, construct, and perform new experiments, and
to theoretically analyze the results. With this broad training, graduating
students and post-doctoral associates are well situated to be leaders in
tackling research questions that arise in science and engineering.

This project will study hydrodynamic transport and energy flow in a Fermi gas of
6Li atoms trapped in designer optical potentials. The potentials will imaged
onto the cloud from a digital micro-mirror device (DMD) to control the spatial
profiles of the atomic gas density and temperature. Confining the atoms between
two repulsive sheet potentials enables in-situ imaging with nearly constant atom
density along the line-of-sight direction perpendicular to the sheets. This
suppresses unwanted averaging of the measured column density over hydrodynamic
and low density ballistic regions, which has plagued previous studies. With
tunable interaction strength, this method offers new opportunities to explore
concepts that cross interdisciplinary boundaries, including local transport
properties of scale-invariant systems, recent conformal field theory predictions
of quasi-steady state energy flow between scale-invariant systems at different
temperatures, and shock wave formation in strongly interacting fluids. The goals
of this project include in-situ measurements of i) 1D hydrodynamic flow, local
shear viscosity and thermal conductivity; ii) Energy flow between two scale-
invariant clouds at different temperatures; iii) Shock wave formation versus
interaction strength, temperature, and density profiles.