* 1705797
* Collaborative Research: Phage-based nanobiosensors for the rapid detection of food and waterborne pathogens
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Sam Nugen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2021
* USD 220,000.00

Accurately detecting low levels of disease-causing bacteria in a large
population of many types of (often similar but non-disease causing) bacteria is
challenging, and will be addressed in this project by designing a nanobiosensor
that is able to separate low numbers of the bad bacteria from complex samples,
and concentrate it into a small volume and finally detect the presence of the
disease-causing bacteria.

The proposed work consists of first generation nanobot consisting of a
genetically engineered and magnetized virus (phage) which can specifically bind,
separate, concentrate, and infect target bacteria in liquid samples. The phage
is specific to E. coli bacteria and will be genetically engineered to produce
large quantities of a reporter enzyme (phosphatase) during the 1-hour infection.
Following infection, the E. coli is naturally lysed to release replicated
viruses, thereby also releasing the high concentration of reporter enzyme. The
engineered enzymes can then be sensitively detected using electrochemistry on a
nanostructured electrode. It is proposed that phage can be utilized in
combination with magnetic nanoparticles and nanostructured electrodes to promote
the rapid recognition, separation, and detection in a pragmatic manner. The
following research aims will be pursued: 1) Engineer the phage T4 to carry a
gene for an engineered phosphatase enzyme and allow targeted attachment onto
magnetic nanoparticles, 2) Use the magnetic nanoprobes to separate and
concentrate E. coli from liquid samples, and 3) Electrochemically detect the
phosphatase on a nanostructured electrode correlating amperometric signal to
initial bacterial concentration. As part of this proposal, the PIs? research
groups will develop high-definition computer-generated teaching tools which will
allow students to visualize the concepts of genetic engineering and pages. The
educational videos will be produced documentary-style and will include photo-
realistic animations. The videos will be freely available for download via
YouTube and the PI websites.