* 1705251
* Fluid-structure interactions between non-Newtonian viscoelastic fluids and flexible cylinders
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Jonathan Rothstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 461,774.00

The goal of the proposed research is to study the interactions that occur
between a flexible or flexibly-mounted structure and the elastic instabilities
that can result from the flow of a non-Newtonian viscoelastic fluid past that
structure. A host of Fluid-Structure Interactions (FSI) studies have been
performed with Newtonian fluids; however, no viscoelasticity-induced FSI studies
of non-Newtonian fluids have been performed previously. As a result, a
comprehensive understanding of these vicoelastic FSI phenomena is both
intriguing from a fundamental scientific point of view and essential for a
number of biological and industrial applications, with potentials of being
transformative to the field of FSI. A fundamental understanding of FSI between
viscoelastic fluids and flexible structures has great potentials for improving
manufacturing techniques used for carbon fiber reinforced polymer composites
where often a polymer resin is driven through a cluster of carbon fibers. The
findings of this research will be disseminated at different levels by
integrating the proposed research into the outreach programs for K12 students
and teachers, and by increasing research opportunities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a flexibly-mounted bluff body (such as a
circular cylinder) is placed in Newtonian flows, the shedding of separated
vortices at high Reynolds numbers can drive the motion of the structure. This
phenomenon is known as Vortex-Induced Vibration (VIV) and has been studied
extensively. If the same flexibly-mounted circular cylinder is placed in non-
Newtonian flows, however, the structure's response is unknown. Unlike Newtonian
fluids, the flow of viscoelastic fluids can become unstable at infinitesimal
Reynolds numbers. For non-Newtonian flows around a fixed circular cylinder,
purely elastic flow instabilities have been observed. The research will focus on
the response of flexible or flexibly-mounted structures to forces from non-
Newtonian flows. Two classes of fluids will be used in the study. For wormlike
micelle solutions, the flow instabilities occur downstream of the cylinder, and
for polymer solutions the flow instabilities occur upstream of the cylinder. To
relate the findings to several important applications, FSI tests will be
conducted at a micro scale by considering the interactions between flexible
hydrogel beams and the forces of polymer solutions. In each test, a wide range
of flow velocities will be covered, before and after the flow instability, and
the structure's displacement will be measured at each step. Velocimetry and
flow-induced birefringence measurements will be taken in order to quantify the
influence of the structural oscillations on the flow instabilities.