* 1705511
* Effects of Surface-Adsorbed Biomolecules and Geomolecules on the Photoreactivity of Metal Oxide Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Debora Rodrigues, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,676.00

Recently, new nanomaterials that can degrade organic pollutants under sunlight
irradiation (photoreaction or photocatalysis) have been identified and
developed. This unique photoreactivity makes them attractive for applications in
diverse water treatment technologies. On the other hand, this property can also
correlate to the toxicological hazard of nanomaterials in natural environments.
Predicting nanomaterial photoreactivity is challenging in aqueous environments
since the surface of the nanomaterial can become coated with a complex mixture
of biomolecules and natural organic matter. The interactions of these complex
surface coatings with the irradiated nanomaterial and the resulting impact on
the effective photoreactivity of the nanomaterial are not yet well understood. A
further challenge is to generalize the coating effects across a variety of
photocatalytic nanomaterials currently being investigated. Examples of
photocatalytic nanomaterials include titanium dioxide, which is activated by
ultraviolet light, and novel visible light active nanomaterials, such as
molybdenum oxide that could show improved viability for water treatment
applications. This research will investigate the mechanisms underlying the
formation of complex surface coatings and their effects on the photoreactivity
of various metal oxide nanomaterials. The fundamental knowledge and models
developed in this research will facilitate the development of effective and safe
photocatalytic nanomaterials for environmental applications and alleviate the
burden on industry and regulatory agencies for large-scale testing of
nanomaterials. The results of this research will be disseminated to the public
through a joint program between the University of Houston and local museums
called "Unveiling the World of Nanomaterials." This program aims to expose and
recruit K-12 students, particularly from underrepresented groups, to careers in
science and engineering. This research will also be incorporated into hands-on
modules for high school teachers to disseminate knowledge to high school
students in the Houston area, demonstrate impacts of nanotechnology on society,
and recruit teachers to conduct research in the field of nanotechnology.
Finally, the results will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
environmental engineering courses on water quality and environmental modeling at
the University of Houston. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
research is to develop a model that is capable of predicting the effects of
surface coatings on photoreactivity across a variety of photocatalytic, metal
oxide nanomaterials, including titanium dioxide and molybdenum oxide. The effect
of the coating is hypothesized to be predictable from the composition of the
surface coating, which will dictate the type and extent of coating interactions
with the photoreactive nanomaterials. Novel approaches and analytical tools will
be incorporated in this research to enable a mechanistic understanding of the
coating effects, including (1) direct characterization and control of surface
coating formation onto photocatalytic nanomaterials from heterogeneous mixtures
of biomolecules and natural organic matter, (2) validation and refinement of
complementary biological and chemical assays to quantify photoreactivity, and
(3) application of in situ spectroscopic methods to identify and monitor the
reactions of specific coating components on the nanomaterial surface. The
detailed surface chemistry and reactivity data obtained in this research will
ultimately be used to develop quantitative models expressing the fundamental
mechanisms by which organic surface coatings modify the effective
photoreactivity of nanomaterials.