* 1705099
* SusChEM: Naturally produced fungal compounds for sustainable (opto)electronics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Oksana Ostroverkhova, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2020
* USD 410,000.00

The project will explore a new source of sustainable optoelectronic materials
for organic photovoltaics for renewable electricity generation. This project
uses bio-derived materials, fungi-derived pigments. An example of such materials
is xylindein, which is a blue-green pigment secreted by the non-pathogenic wood-
staining fungi Chlorociboria aeruginosa and C. aeruginascens native to the
Pacific Northwest of the U.S. This pigment has been used in art since the 15th
century, owing to its vibrant color and stability, but its optoelectronic
properties have not been explored. In this project, (opto)electronic properties
of xylindein and its derivatives will be systematically investigated and
incorporated into organic electronic devices such as solar cells. In addition to
the field of organic electronics, the project will impact wood products and
forestry industries, which stand to benefit from increased commercial potential
from Chlorociboria-infested wood having market value. The project will provide a
rich interdisciplinary experience involving physics, chemistry, and wood science
to the participating graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college students. The
outcome of this project is fundamental knowledge supporting organic
photovoltaics using these materials and the ability to mass produce the pigments
from fungi/biomass resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungi-derived pigments are
abundant; they represent a largely unexplored resource for organic electronics.
The goal of the project is to establish photophysical characteristics of
xylindein, a planar conjugated fungi-derived pigment, and its derivatives. The
project will aim to fulfill the following three objectives: to establish the
mechanisms that govern photophysics of xylindein derivatives in solution, to
establish effects of interplay between hydrogen bonding and pi-pi stacking on
molecular packing and optoelectronic properties, and to explore performance of
xylindein derivatives in (opto)electronic devices. Experiments aiming to
optimize wood fungi extraction, batch culture growth, and purification will be
combined with characterization of molecular photophysics and xylindein-based
organic semiconductor devices. The project creates unique opportunities for: (a)
the use of bio-derived (low-cost, low-toxicity, abundant) sustainable sources in
(opto)electronics; and (b) the possibility to explore synergistic work of pi-
stacking and hydrogen bonding for tunable optoelectronic properties via
tunability of molecular photophysics and solid-state molecular packing. The
results will be important not only for the field of organic electronics, but
also for applications relying on hydrogen-bonded pigments that include color
printer inks, textile dyes, and commercial paints.