* 1705566
* Collaborative Research: Solar-Driven Hydrogenation of CO2 using Hierarchically Porous TiO2 with Spatially Isolated Au and Pt Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jie He, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2021
* USD 230,087.00

Solar-powered production of fuels such as methanol from carbon dioxide (CO2)
offers the potential to enable solar power, which is available on a transient
basis, to be stored in the form of a chemical fuel for transport and other
applications. Efficient and cost-effective production of solar fuels remains a
scientific and technological challenge with issues of efficiency, cost, and
materials durability. This collaborative project aims to design innovative
materials that are capable of converting carbon dioxide and hydrogen to methanol
using natural sunlight as the only energy input. This class of materials will
consist of multiple components, including two types of metal nanoparticle
catalysts that are separately placed within porous nanostructures of the
catalyst system. By harvesting light, one of the metal nanoparticle catalyst
will produce both heat and hot electrons to activate the carbon dioxide
molecules. The other metal catalyst will split hydrogen molecules into hydrogen
atoms, which are also needed for converting carbon dioxide to methanol. Results
obtained through this project will offer fundamental insights and practical
guidelines to achieving low-temperature conversion of carbon dioxide to liquid
fuels using solar energy. The research will be incorporated into outreach
activities for high school teachers and students as well as summer research
activities for undergraduate students. Workshops on nanoscience and clean energy
will be designed and offered to local high school students and K-12 science
teachers in the New England area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the methods for
carbon dioxide utilization, hydrogenation which employs dihydrogen as an
electron donor and proton source to reduce carbon dioxide to high-value fuels is
of particular interest, due to its sustainability and low environmental impact.
Hydrogenation of carbon dioxide, however, often requires operation at high
temperature because a large energy input is needed to activate carbon dioxide,
even in the presence of catalysts. The focus of this collaborative effort is to
design a new class of hierarchical hybrid photocatalysts that can harness
visible light to mediate hydrogenation of carbon dioxide at room temperature.
The first objective of this project is to synthesize hybrid photocatalysts
consisting of porous titanium dioxides and spatially isolated nanoparticles of
Au and Pt. The plasmonic Au nanoparticles will harvest visible light and
subsequently convert photons to thermal energy and generate hot electrons for
carbon dioxide activation. The Pt nanoparticles will facilitate hydrogen
adsorption and dissociation. The second objective of this project is to
investigate the hybrid photocatalysts in cooperatively catalyzing carbon dioxide
activation and hydrogen spillover to achieve solar hydrogenation of carbon
dioxide. Mechanistic studies using in situ infrared spectroscopic studies will
be conducted to establish correlations between nanostructures of the hybrid
materials and their catalytic performance. The outcome of solar-driven
hydrogenation using these hybrid photocatalysts will illustrate a new pathway to
convert carbon dioxide to liquid fuels by utilizing renewable energy sources.