* 1705770
* A Multi-Scale Investigation of Transport of Complex Nanoparticles in Complex Flows: Integrating Lab, Field, and Models to Simplify Complexity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2021
* USD 329,215.00

Streams and rivers connect landscapes to oceans, moving natural and
anthropogenic materials through extensive and heterogeneous systems. Engineered
nanoparticles are an emerging class of materials that can be transported in
these systems, and with the growing use of nanoparticles for commercial and
industrial applications, their release into the environment is inevitable.
Feasible management of environmental risks and applications of nanoparticles
will require reliable, parsimonious, and accurate models that can predict the
fate and transport behavior of nanoparticles. This project aims to produce
comprehensive datasets from laboratory and field experiments to develop models
that can predict the fate and transport of nanoparticles in the environment.
Understanding the fate and transport of nanoparticles is important to numerous
research areas, and accurate models are integral for regulatory agencies
developing new legislation. While the developed models will focus on
nanoparticles, project outcomes are expected to yield significant benefits to
understanding and improving transport modeling of other complex substances
(e.g., environmental DNA) in realistic hydrologic environments. This project
will present numerous educational opportunities for young students (K-12) and
adults by establishing modules that use the field-site to highlight the
importance of understanding nanoparticle behavior in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first to date that
completely integrates laboratory experiments, field experiments, and state-of-
the-art mechanistic models to determine the fate of complex nanoparticles in
complex streams. The PIs will establish a collection of nanoparticles that have
differing physicochemical properties representing various aspects of the
nanoparticle life-cycle. The field experiments will be conducted at the
University of Notre Dame Linked Experimental Ecosystem site, a globally unique
research facility that contains two man-made experimental watersheds consisting
of an interconnected pond, streams, and a wetland. The outcomes of this project
will be (i) comprehensive experimental datasets from nanoparticle transport-
related experiments from laboratory scales, (ii) experimental datasets from
controlled field experiments looking at nanoparticle transport in realistic
streams and (iii) the development of a stochastic-based theoretical framework
capable of modeling nanoparticle transport at these and other scales of
environmental importance. Data outcomes will provide significant advances in
understanding nanoparticle fate and transport in realistic flow environments. By
building the models in a hierarchical manner and using a mechanistic framework
to translate information from controlled laboratory scales up to field scales, a
well-defined methodology will be developed for extension to even larger scales
(e.g., entire stream and river networks).