* 1705371
* Transport, evolution, and induced mixing of bubble swarms across pycnoclines
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Sadegh Dabiri, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 417,186.00

The density of water in lakes and oceans is far from uniform; it varies over
length scales from meters to a kilometer. This variation in density (or density
stratification) can be due to two reasons: i) thermal, wherein the density
varies due to variations in local temperature or, ii) saline, wherein the
density varies due to variations in the salt concentration. The subsurface
layers across which this change in density is observed are called pycnoclines.
Researchers often neglect the effects of density stratification on the motion of
rising bubbles and droplets and the induced mixing of the background fluid.
However, the PIs showed that such density gradients can significantly affect the
ascent of small drops by enhancing the drag experienced by them. Quantifying the
impact of density stratification on bubbles and drops is an essential, yet
under-explored area of fluid dynamics, and the need to better understand this
area is prevalent in different multiphase phenomena pertaining to lakes and
oceans, for example, destratification of water reservoirs by air-bubble plume
systems, release of methane in marine sediments, dispersion of an oil plume
during an oil spill, and the use of artificially generated bubble plumes to
lower surface temperatures in order to arrest excessive evaporation from lakes.
The new physical insights to be gained in this study, along with the numerical
techniques that have been and will be developed, will be significantly
beneficial for a broad range of other researchers who are devoted at the
interface between fluid dynamics, hydrology, and oceanography.

This research will use state-of-the-art, experimentally validated computational
tools to quantify the effects of density stratification on (1) the mixing of the
background fluid by laminar bubbly upflows in density stratification, (2) the
migration velocity and microstructure formation of bubble/droplet swarms, and
(3) the mixing and the motions of bubbles/drops in the presence of background
turbulence. The research will pave the way to systematically investigate the
motion of multiphase flows at pycnoclines and the resultant mixing. The extent
of mixing will be quantified by computing the mixing efficiency (a measure of
the rate of increase in background potential energy due to mixing against the
rate of dissipation of kinetic energy in the process), the diapycnal eddy
diffusivity (a measure of mixing due to vertical transport of the fluid) and the
temperature micro-structure. The properties of the bubble/droplet swarms will be
quantified by calculating the drift velocity and the fluctuation velocities of
the dispersed and continuous phases, and pair probability distribution functions
for the dispersed phase.