* 1705817
* Adsorption and Self-Assembly of Surfactants on Metallic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Young, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 343,360.00

The research project will employ experimental techniques and computer
simulations to study the adsorption and self-assembly of surfactant molecules on
metal-water interfaces, and their effect on the electrochemical nature of the
interfaces. Corrosion-related failure of oil and gas pipelines is a significant
health, safety, financial, and environmental problem. Surfactant molecules with
imidazoline, amine and amido-amine based polar groups and hydrophobic alkyl
chains are known to strongly adsorb and self-assemble onto metallic surfaces.
These molecules are useful as inhibitors of corrosion in oil and gas pipelines.
It is suggested that the self-assembled adsorbed films of these molecules
mitigate corrosion by either repelling the corrosive species from metal-water
interfaces, by rendering the interface hydrophobic, or by changing the
electrochemical nature of the interface. Electrochemical experimental techniques
will be employed to measure changes in electrical properties of metallic
interfaces upon adsorption. The experimental results, combined with molecular
simulations, will provide a comprehensive molecular picture of the phenomena.
This level of understanding will be a significant step towards improving the
methodologies of designing more effective corrosion inhibitor molecules for
various applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phenomenon of adsorption and
self-assembly of surfactants on metallic surfaces is fundamentally important for
many catalysis and electrochemical applications. Because of high polarizability
of metals, interactions between metals and polar molecules depend on the local
environment. While there have been exciting new developments in improving our
knowledge of metal-water interfaces, there are significant gaps in our
understanding of the molecular-level details of adsorption of surfactant
molecules on metallic surfaces. Many aspects of the phenomenon are only vaguely
understood, such as the nature of binding between metal atoms and surfactant
molecules; molecular orientation and packing in adsorbed films; factors
promoting self-assembly; and the electrochemical nature of the interface. Using
experimental techniques, such as electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance
(EQCM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), sum frequency generation spectroscopy
(SFG), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and molecular simulations,
the investigators seek to address each of these unknowns in the proposed
research. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students on
interdisciplinary research projects, the investigators plan to pursue outreach
activities in the Appalachian region of Ohio to provide an avenue for the
citizens of this economically disadvantaged area to advance via education.