* 1705891
* Complexation of charged polymers and nanoparticles at all aqueous interfaces for functional membrane formation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 340,302.00

CBET - 1705891&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lee, Daeyeon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microcapsules are
particles consisting of an interior core surrounded by a membrane. They are
widely used in applications where the interior of the microcapsule contains an
active ingredient that is released to the surroundings. Microcapsules are used
in a variety of products, including food additives, drug carriers for timed
release, healing agents, and pesticides. Microcapsules are especially effective
when the permeability of the membrane is selective so that release rates of
chemical components inside the microcapsule can be controlled and can be
programmed to respond to changes in environmental conditions. This award will
support experiments to synthesize and characterize microcapsules made with
membranes composed of pairs of polyelectrolytes or a polyelectrolyte and
nanoparticle. The membrane is formed by the spontaneous formation of a complex
at the interface between two aqueous phases. The advantage of these
microcapsules is that they are formulated completely in water-based systems,
which makes them compatible with living cells and organisms. The details of the
membrane formation process, the transport and mechanical properties of the
membrane, and the encapsulation efficiency will be studied using a variety of
techniques. The project will provide opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in the research. The team will also
prepare a hands-on kit for students and teachers that demonstrates emulsion
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an experimental program
to understand the transport phenomena and thermodynamics that govern the
formation and properties of functional membranes synthesized from
polyelectrolytes and charged nanoparticles via interfacial complexation of
polyelectrolyte-polyelectrolyte pairs or polyelectrolyte-nanoparticle pairs in
aqueous two phase systems. The growth of the membranes and membrane dynamics
will be investigated using (1) fluorescence microscopy of membranes formed with
labeled components to identify their location as membranes form; (2) pendant
drop-based observation and characterization of the elastic membranes,
complemented by atomic force microscopy measurements;(3) fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching-enabled measurements of polyelectrolyte mobility within the
membranes; and (4) isothermal titration calorimetry to detect the thermal events
during complexation. Membrane mechanical properties will be measured using
micropipette aspiration and osmotic pressure-induced buckling methods. Results
of the research will not only improve methods of forming microcapsules with
functional membranes, but also will provide information that can be applied to
the formation of functional membranes in other configurations.