* 1705823
* Erodibility of claypan soils:   Identifying erosion mechanisms for sustainable reduction of sediment loss
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Stacey Kulesza, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 114,084.00

1705823 (Sassenrath). Claypan soils cover approximately 4 million hectares in
the US and are characterized by a highly impermeable layer below the topsoil.
This impermeable layer may create lateral flow within the soil matrix that
increases the rate of erosion of the topsoil. Surface vegetation increases the
erosion resistance at the surface of claypan soils; however, the limited topsoil
continues to diminish annually. This research addresses the need to identify the
mechanisms that are causing this sediment loss and restore the ecological
function of soil and water ecosystems before the topsoil is irretrievably lost.

The objective is to test the hypothesis that the impermeable claypan layer is
increasing soil erosion by undermining topsoil. This will be achieved by
measuring the erodibility and strength of soil samples from areas where soil
management practices are identical yet soil loss is variable. The variability
has been identified by aerial imagery, terrain analysis, yield maps and surface
conductivity measurements. Geotechnical delineation of erodibility will be
measured using a variety of geotechnical methodologies, including an Erosion
Function Apparatus in the laboratory and a Jet Erosion Test in the field. The
primary hypothesis of this research is that topsoil is undergoing undermining
erosion within the soil core which is further reducing its shear strength and
thus increasing the erodibility. Measured strength and erosion parameters will
be used to better predict sediment loss. The research plan has been developed in
close collaboration with local landowners. The understanding of the fundamental
mechanisms that are resulting in the claypan erodibility phenomena will be
shared with landowners so appropriate land use management practices can be
developed and implemented. The multidisciplinary leadership team of an
agronomist, a geotechnical engineer, and a mass communications specialist will
work closely with Extension personnel, conservationists and landowners to
address this multifaceted problem and implement change.