* 1705088
* Collaborative Research: WERF: GOALI: Bioaugmentation-Enhanced Anammox for Mainstream Nitrogen Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Krzmarzick, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 99,905.00

Krzmarzick&lt;br/&gt;1705088&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient nitrogen (N) in
excess is a major pollutant affecting the environment and public health;
consequently, excess N must be removed from wastewater (WW). Conventional
nutrient N-removal technology relies on a sequence of two microbial process
known as nitrification-denitrification. The first step (nitrification) involves
the oxidation of ammonium to nitrate. The drawback is that nitrification
requires a large input of energy to aerate the water. The second step
(denitrification) involves the reduction of nitrate to harmless elemental
nitrogen gas. The drawback is that valuable chemical energy is required for the
nitrate reduction that could be better used to make biofuels such as methane-
rich biogas. Improvements in the economy of nutrient N-removal can be achieved
with anaerobic ammonia oxidizing (anammox) bacteria. Anammox converts nitrite
and ammonium to elemental nitrogen gas without any need for aeration or chemical
energy. As a technology anammox must be combined with partial aeration to form
nitrite from about half of the ammonium (partial nitritation), but this process
saves 57% of the aeration costs and 100% of the chemical energy demand compared
to conventional nutrient N-removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anammox has become a
mature technology for the treatment of high ammonium, low organic matter WW,
exemplified by sludge liquor side streams from the dewatering of anaerobically
digested sludge, which accounst for 15-30% of the N load at wastewater treatment
plants (WWTP). The objective of this research is to apply anammox to the 70-85%
of the N-load in the mainstream of a WWTP. The strategy proposed is based on
utilizing highly active anammox sludge cultivated on the ammonium rich side
stream with an upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor to bioaugment
another UASB treating the mainstream. The reactors will be operated as a single-
stage partial-nitritation anammox process by introducing substoichiometric
quantities of elemental oxygen via aeration. The intellectual merit of the
proposed work is to convert the liability of the high N-loading embodied by the
ammonium rich side stream into an asset for biological N-removal for the
mainstream. The key scientific/engineering question is whether bioaugmentation
of highly enriched anammox sludge can be used to enhance the N-treatment process
in the mainstream where conditions are less favorable for growing and sustaining
anammox due to competition from heterotrophic bacteria and low N concentrations.
The PIs will explore a novel stratification of partial nitritation and anammox
in the microaerophilic exterior and anoxic interior of the same sludge
particles, respectively. Through kinetic, metabolic and
metagenomic/transcriptomic analyses, the PIs will determine whether the enriched
anammox sludge deteriorates in mainstream by providing biomarkers to
quantitatively monitor the anammox bacteria they contain. They will also obtain
information on the shifting composition and function of the microbial
population. The project directly addresses the National Academy of Engineering
grand challenge of improving the management of the N cycle by developing energy
saving technology to control the load of excess nutrient-N into the environment.
Two PhD students will be working with the GOALI partner at the regional
wastewater reclamation facility to gain industrial experience.