* 1705775
* Collaborative Research: Mechanics of fusion of dissimilar lipid bilayers and multi-lamellar vesicles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Weitz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2020
* USD 217,028.00

Vesicles are small sacs surrounded by a lipid bilayer membrane and enclosing
biomolecules essential for inter- and intra-cellular communication,
transportation, and other physiological functions. Vesicles can fuse with cells
and other vesicles to deliver designated drugs, segments of DNA for gene
therapy, and neurotransmitters in a wide spectrum of medical treatments.
Understanding the mechanism of membrane fusion is critical to interpret natural
phenomena and to design and facilitate drug delivery. The overarching goal of
this collaborative project between Northeastern University and Harvard
University is to investigate the underlying biomechanics and biochemistry of
membrane and liposome fusion by coordinated experiments and theoretical
modeling. Vesicles with ranges of lipids and pseudo-lipids, microstructures, and
size will be fabricated using specialized microfluidic devices. Mechanical
characterization and intermediate steps of fusion under physiologically relevant
conditions will be performed using atomic force microscopy. A mechanistic model
of vesicle fusion, including membrane properties and inter-surface forces, will
be developed to reveal molecular and membrane interactions. Outcomes of this
study will lead to new insights into transport processes that are ubiquitous in
mammalian cells, as well as guidelines to fabricate synthetic vesicles for drug
delivery. The project will involve participation of students at all academic
levels. Research outputs will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
level courses at both universities. Educational videos will be developed to
demonstrate vesicle dynamics for K-12 students and for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this award is to investigate the
underlying principles of fusion of similar and dissimilar lipid bilayers and
vesicles and to develop a universal fusibility index by probing an extensive
experimental parameter space. A wide range of known lipids relevant to drug
delivery, lipids derived from healthy and diseased cell lines, and co-block
polymer as pseudo lipids will be investigated. New microfluidics devices will be
designed and built to manufacture homogeneous, heterogeneous, and multi-lamellar
vesicles, with a wide range of diameters. Atomic force microscopy will be used
to determine membrane properties of single liposomes in compression mode, as
well as the energy barrier involved in hemifusion and fusion of two similar and
dissimilar vesicles under physiologically relevant conditions. Hemifusion and
fusion will be monitored in-situ by fluorescence microscopy, as well as a
fluorescence resonance energy transfer technique. We will test the hypothesis
that mechanics in terms of internal and intersurface forces, large deformation
of the vesicles and associated strain energy, and statistical mechanics of
surface domains plays a significant role in vesicle fusion. The fusibility index
will be derived as a function of material properties of lipid membranes, vesicle
geometry, interface and surface chemistry, and physiological environments, based
on fundamental engineering principles.