* 1705941
* Ecological Similitude and Scaling for Robust Modeling and Predictions of Ecosystem Carbon, Water and Energy Fluxes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Omar Abdul-Aziz, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

1705941 (Abdul-Aziz). The goal of this research is to discover the similitude
patterns and scaling laws of ecosystem carbon, water and energy fluxes, and
formulate robust models to predict the fluxes at variable time and space scales.
The underlying hypothesis is that the ecosystem fluxes follow emergent
ecological similitude and scaling laws, which will lead to robust estimation and
predictive models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives are to
(1) identify the dominant drivers and quantify the relative linkages of
ecosystem carbon (CO2), latent heat (LE) and sensitive heat (H) fluxes with the
relevant climatic, hydrologic and ecological variables at different time and
space scales; (2) investigate similitude (parametric reductions), formulate
meaningful dimensionless groups, and develop scaling laws (emergent patterns)
for the ecosystem fluxes; and (3) formulate spatiotemporally robust empirical
models for predicting the ecosystem fluxes from diverse ecosystems. The research
will utilize the AmeriFlux data of fluxes, climate, environmental, and
ecological variables for different time-scales (e.g., hourly, daily, weekly,
monthly, yearly) and periods (e.g., 2000-2015) at numerous sites (above 100)
across America, representing gradients of hydroclimatic, biogeochemical, and
ecological processes. The research objectives will be achieved by conducting
dimensional analysis and empirical modeling, which has successfully been applied
in fluid mechanics, hydraulic engineering and stream ecology. The research
builds on a previous project on wetland biogeochemical similitude and scaling to
robustly predict wetland greenhouse gas fluxes by using chamber-based field
data. This project will use flux tower-based eddy-covariance data (AmeriFlux) to
generalize the similitude, scaling and robust modeling hypothesis across diverse
ecosystems (e.g., deciduous forests, evergreen needleleaf forests, rain forests,
grasslands, croplands, wetlands) at variable time (hour to year) and space
(site, region, continent) scales. The research will promote environmental
sustainability by contributing insights, understanding, and broad knowledge into
the emergence (similarity and scaling) patterns of ecosystem carbon, water and
energy fluxes. Robust, parsimonious models can be utilized as simple, scale-
independent engineering tools to predict the ecosystem fluxes across a wide
range of spatial and temporal scales. Research outcomes will be broadly
disseminated through journal publications, conference presentations, graduate
dissertations, reports, YouTube videos, and an open-access project website. The
research findings will be utilized to teach two interdisciplinary courses,
Ecohydrological Engineering (undergraduate) and Ecological Engineering
(graduate), using inductive learning methods. High school students and teachers
will also be involved with the research through outreach activities.