* 1705752
* Experimental validation of molecular simulation of water transport across zeolite membranes of nanoscale-thickness
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Arindam Chakraborty, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2023
* USD 160,000.00

Transport of a fluid in porous media is relevant to extraction of oil from the
subsurface, contaminant transport in groundwater, sequestration of carbon
dioxide in underground reservoirs, and desalination of seawater through a
reverse osmosis membrane to produce drinking water. The porous media offers a
resistance to the transport of mass. Differences in resistance between chemical
species allow for separation: one component may be unimpeded or even
accelerated, while another is impeded. For example, the reverse osmosis membrane
is designed to transport water quite efficiently but transport salt quite
inefficiently, leading to the production of purified drinking water. To optimize
design, engineering transport models of flow through porous media generally
treat the system using macroscopic length scales and average resistances, but
generally neglect both spatial variations and specific fluid-surface
interactions on the molecular scale. Molecular-scale interactions become quite
pronounced when a fluid molecule is confined in a pore that is of similar
molecular dimension. Models that account for molecular interactions incorporate
forcefields, but have not adequately predicted experimental observations. This
project will perform an experimental validation of molecular-level transport
through a porous material with strong fluid-pore interactions, and for the first
time, there will be a one-to-one length scale correspondence between the
experimental and theoretical studies which will probe discrepancies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, desalination of seawater through a
zeolite membrane is the probe system, due to strong water-zeolite electrostatic
interactions that are enhanced upon confinement in sub-nanometer (~0.56 nm)
pores. MFI zeolites with varying aluminum composition and thickness (varying
from nano- to micro-scale) will be experimentally synthesized and characterized,
then transferred onto a support surface to create membranes for transport
measurements in a custom-built experimental apparatus. MD simulations will be
simultaneously performed for the same zeolites with varying forcefields. The
aluminum content will be varied in both techniques to alter the water-zeolite
interaction. The experimentally validated molecular models will provide
fundamental understanding of water interaction in confined pores, and assist in
the development of predictive modeling of thermodynamic properties and transport
behavior of water in nano-porous materials. The project includes several
outreach components, including undergraduate research projects that target
under-represented minorities, a workshop for middle school female students, and
a short course in computational methods for undergraduates at Syracuse
University.