* 1705490
* Collaborative Research: Zeolite catalysts for biomass upgrading
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Stephanie Wettstein, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 247,000.00

Manufacturing of plastics and other industrial chemicals depends on key chemical
building blocks sourced primarily from petroleum and natural gas feedstocks.
Increasingly, renewable resources such as biomass are used to make the same
product or drop-in substitutes. This biomass is typically made up of crop
residues or purposely grown plants that are not competitors for food
agriculture. Current biobased chemicals such as hydoxymethylfurfural, furfural,
and their derivatives are promising drop-in replacements for chemicals made from
fossil fuels and have been identified as top platform chemicals from biorefining
processes. This research project studies the manufacture of these biomass-
derived platform chemicals using catalysts that can promote higher product
yields and a lower environmental footprint. Parallel objectives of this project
are to integrate the research activities with education and outreach programs to
provide significant educational opportunities at the undergraduate and graduate
education levels and to the general public. The educational outreach includes a
joint course between Montana State University and the Colorado School of Mines
designed as website modules and Skype-based lectures. The results of this
project are being disseminated to the scientific community and implemented in
course material lectures to benefit the student body at both institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of this collaborative project is to
demonstrate that rationally designing nanocrystalline zeolites with tailored
properties can lead to effective catalysts exhibiting high catalytic activity
for biomass and sugar conversion into commercially useful platform chemicals.
The specific objectives of this work are to: (1) develop chemical synthesis
strategies to rationally design nanocrystalline zeolite catalysts, (2)
understand the basic formation mechanisms governing the transformation of
precursor solutions into zeolites, (3) evaluate catalytic performance of
nanocrystalline zeolite catalysts for the catalytic conversion of sugars and
biomass into furfural and derivatives, and (4) elucidate fundamental
structure/catalytic relationships of microporous nanocrystalline catalysts in
the conversion of sugars into hydoxymethylfurfural, furfural, and their
derivatives. This fundamental research ties understanding of synthesis
conditions to properties of the zeolite, including crystal size distribution,
pore size, surface area and acid site distribution, to catalytic activity and to
product yield of targeted dehydration products. The research also aims to
establish novel self-assembly concepts as general synthesis methods for a broad
range of zeolite catalysts that will have tunable properties and convert biomass
into industrial relevant chemicals.