* 1705423
* SusChEM: An integrated framework for process design, control and scheduling [PAROC]
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Efstratios Pistikopoulos, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 295,182.00

This research project aims for an innovative shift in addressing three common
tasks performed by process engineers: design, scheduling, and control of process
systems. These tasks are typically performed independently of each other,
without taking into consideration the interactions and trade-offs amongst them.
The development and use of novel strategies, procedures, and tools for decision
making for process system engineering has the potential, as part of smart
manufacturing and process improvement efforts, to contribute significantly to a
sustainable future. The primary aim of this research project is to provide a
useful conceptual framework and software tool for the integration of design,
control and scheduling tasks. The framework and software platform is being
applied to the optimization of a residential combined cooling, heating and power
generation network system. The project findings are being incorporated into
graduate courses at Texas A&amp;M University. The developed tool is being
deployed as an open access software tool for the benefit of the academic and
industrial communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The integration of process design,
control and scheduling remains an open grand challenge in process systems
engineering. While significant research efforts have been made in the last
twenty years to sequentially integrate design with control, and more recently
control with scheduling, a generally accepted methodology to unify the field is
still lacking. The multi-scale framework being developed features (1) a high-
fidelity dynamic model representation, also involving global sensitivity
analysis, parameter estimation and mixed integer dynamic optimization
capabilities; (2) a suite/toolbox of model approximation methods; (3) a host of
multi-parametric programming solvers for mixed continuous/integer problems; (4)
a state-space modeling representation capability for scheduling and control
problems; and (5) an advanced toolkit for multi-parametric/explicit Model
Predictive Control and moving horizon reactive scheduling problems. The
intellectual merit of the activity lies in the integration of the three tasks
(design, control and scheduling) within a unified multiscale framework and in
the ability to acquire optimal operation policies, optimal model based
controllers and optimal designs of process systems through a single optimization
formulation. Additionally, there is merit in the capability to close the loop
with a cross validation of the outcomes with the original model, ensuring
optimal and stable operation.