* 1705852
* 3D Bioprinting of Complex Tissue Structures Using Nanoengineered Ionic-Covalent Entanglement (NICE) Bioinks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Akhilesh Gaharwar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Gaharwar, Akhilesh K.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:
1705852&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering complex tissues that can mimic,
augment, or replace native tissue functions holds enormous potential for
treating organ failures resulting from injuries, aging, and diseases. 3D
bioprinting is an emerging approach for rapid fabrication of complex tissue
structures using cell-loaded hydrogels, called bioinks. However, 3D bioprinting
has hit a bottleneck in progress due to the lack of suitable bioinks that are
printable and can guide cell functions. This project focuses on designing a
novel family of nanoengineered ionic-covalent entanglement (NICE) bioinks for
3D-printing. The NICE bioink combines two approaches - nanocomposites using 2D
nanosilicates and ICE networks formed from gelatin methacrylate (a collagen
based bioink often used in bioprinting) and k-carrageenan (a polysaccharide
based gel often used for thickening and stabiliazation) - to achieve mechanical
properties superior to either approach alone. This work will lead to a novel
platform technology to selectively control and pattern cell behavior that will
have broad scientific impact on human health; specifically, regenerative
engineering and therapeutic delivery. The development of a new family of bioinks
will also spur growth in biofabrication, leading to positive impacts on society
and the national economy. The integrated multidisciplinary research platform
will provide a unique environment to attract, motivate, and retain students,
particularly underrepresented groups, in science and engineering education. The
project will provide educational and outreach opportunities through a diverse
array of K-12 activities, including: development of educational screencasts;
training teachers; engaging local schools in after-school programs; and hosting
high school students for research. Specifically, a range of educational and
research screencasts will be developed to engage and promote awareness about
nanomaterials, and bioprinting. Outreach will be extended by sharing and
distributing the screencasts via popular social media sites (including blogs,
Facebook, Flickr, Pinterest, SlideShare, Twitter, Vimeo, and YouTube) and by
interacting with online K-12 video portals such as Khan
Academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a key challenge in
biomedical engineering - how to engineering three-dimensional complex structures
consisting of biomolecules, cells, and scaffolds - by designing a novel family
of nanoengineered ionic-covalent entanglement (NICE) bioinks for 3D-printing to
control and pattern cell behavior. The approach taken will elucidate key
fundamental properties of ionic covalent entanglement (ICE) networks loaded with
unique, two-dimensional (2D) nanosilicates. The research will reveal the
interactions among nanomaterials, growth factors, and human cells, paving the
way for novel nanoengineered approaches to harness and augment these
interactions. Intellectual contributions include: 1) introducing a novel
material design (NICE) to form shear-thinning bioinks, using 2D nanomaterials
and ionic-covalent entanglement (ICE), will enable deposition of cells in
complex 3D structures which in turn will advance understanding and knowledge of
cell-biomaterial interactions in complex microenvironments; 2) Elucidating
interactions between 2D nanosilicates and the ICE network will advance
fundamental understanding for leveraging non-covalent interactions to
mechanically reinforce hydrogel networks; 3) establishing 2D nanosilicates as a
modular approach for plug-and-play types of therapeutics delivery will be
facilitated by eliminating complex chemical modification of labile therapeutics.
Understanding the interactions between 2D nanomaterials and biomolecules will
provide insight into retaining bioactivity of labile therapeutics for prolonged
durations and will lead to discovery of new phenomena; and 4) establishing a new
paradigm for sustained and effective delivery of therapeutics to modulate the
cellular function will ultimately lead to development of more effective delivery
systems.