* 1705503
* Engineering Atomically Precise Nanochannels Using Layered 2D Sheets to Enable Chemical Separation Membranes with Exceptional Permeance and Size-Selectivity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The separation of air into its components, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide,
water vapor, and other trace gases such as helium, is a billion dollar industry.
Examples include: use of purified nitrogen in high performance tires and
infusion into specialty coffee; use of purified oxygen for healthcare and the
launch space shuttles; use of helium for balloons. Separation of any mixture
requires both energy and a strategy to isolate one component. Size selective
membranes provide one such strategy, allowing molecules to permeate through
internal channels at rates that are dictated by their ability to fit within a
membrane channel, their diffusivity, and the strength by which they interact
with the surface. Decreasing this surface interaction increases permeation,
which translates to an increased production rate at lower energy consumption.
One candidate for frictionless transport are membrane channels comprised of
carbon atoms, such as cylindrical carbon nanotubes or stacked planar graphene
sheets. As weak surface interactions provide little impediment to flow, the
permeation of water through carbon nanotubes has been experimentally shown to be
1000 times greater than that predicted from classical models. Yet, homogenous
channels of closely packed carbon nanotubes have been difficult to synthesize in
large quantities. Propped graphene sheets show more promise for large scale
synthesis, but are currently derived from graphite via a highly oxidative
delamination process, which imparts significant residual oxygen atoms that
invalidate frictionless transport. This project will utilize a bottoms-up
nonoxidative approach to create propped graphene membranes with controlled
channels optimized for size selective transport of small molecules, such as
oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, helium, and water.

This project will use molecular spacers as proppants to synthesize controlled
nanochannels between pristine unoxidized parallel graphene sheets. Robust
chemistries will be developed for precisely fabricating nanochannels with sub-
nanometer gaps that range from 2-8 Angstroms to impart size selectivity.
Candidate spacer molecules include para substituted benzene derivatives,
functional groups grafted via [2+2] cycloaddition, and non-covalently adsorbed
planar and non-planar aromatic hydrocarbons. Both isolated bilayer channels and
multilayered laminate membranes will be fabricated. The isolated channels will
afford fundamental surface science measurements of structure and properties
whereas the multilayered membranes will enable macroscopic measurements of
transport to validate the theoretical prediction of frictionless, ultrahigh
permeance transport. Microstructural characterization data, in conjunction with
transport measurements, will guide design of increasingly effective membrane
materials. Both graduate and undergraduate students will perform laboratory
research for this project, with an effort to target underrepresented groups. The
research will inform interactive lessons targeted at high school level students,
accompanied by dissemination of training videos to teachers.