* 1705918
* SusChem:  New Methodologies in Biocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Jon Stewart, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2023
* USD 648,852.00

Using traditional chemistry, the production and purification of high value
molecules (fragrances, flavors, dyes, antibiotics) often uses a lot of energy,
has low yield of product, and generates significant quantities of hazardous
wastes. The goal of this project is to make commercially important molecules
using strategies that minimize waste and maximize yield, so that industry can
employ these approaches and thereby improve chemical processes. Enzymes -
Nature's protein catalysts - will be used instead of traditional methods, since
they are produced from renewable resources, they work in water instead of
organic solvents, and they are completely biodegradable. In addition to
developing new reaction strategies, the three-dimensional structures of the
enzymes will be determined. Computer modeling will indicate how their shapes
change, which can dramatically impact their behavior. This knowledge will be put
to use to improve the enzymes, making them better-suited to the needs of
chemical synthesis. If successful, these efforts could result in a much more
sustainable and environmentally-friendly chemical industry. The PI's active
involvement with the Science for Life (S4L) program at the University of Florida
will contribute directly to the development of a highly capable STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this project focuses on
modifying enzymes to catalyze thio-Claisen condensation and beta-keto acid
decarboxylation, in order to create a chiral alpha-amino-beta-hydroxy ketone in
a simple, single-reactor system. Enantioselective functional group
interconversion is the subject of the second part. This focuses on a family of
enzymes (Old Yellow Enzymes, OYEs) that stereoselectively reduce electron-
deficient alkenes. Members of this family have highly conserved amino acid
sequences and essentially identical x-ray crystal structures, yet exhibit widely
varying stereoselectivities that appears to be related to a protein loop that
changes structure during the catalytic cycle. Molecular dynamics calculations
revealed that the loops have very different dynamic properties from enzyme to
enzyme, which may be isolated to a single amino acid in the loop. Site-
saturation mutagenesis at this position will generate mutants that will be
examined both experimentally (regarding substrate acceptance and
stereoselectivity) and computationally (to identify differences in dynamic
properties). Additional positions in this loop will be characterized by both
experiment and computation to better define how this important structural
feature constrols substrate binding. A fundamental understanding of the role
that structural dynamics plays in the regulation of enzyme activity would
dramatically expand the ability to design proteins with desired functionality,
contributing to a sustainable biomanufacturing industry.