* 1705739
* Understanding 3D hydrodynamics of active electroelastic materials in complex multimodal motion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 466,028.00

Man-made devices for underwater locomotion still cannot match the ability of
fishes to swim quickly with great agility. Fish leverage distributed flexibility
of their active body and fins to swim and navigate, which is difficult to
achieve using conventional actuator-based designs. Macro-fiber composite
piezoelectric materials enable distributed actuation movement which may mimic
complex fish motions. These efficient active materials can be tailored and
actuated to create various structural motions, thereby offering a unique
approach to systematically explore the complex three-dimensional hydrodynamic
flows generated by active structures. This project will employ experiments and
computational modeling to understand how active piezoelectric materials can be
harnessed in designing biomimetic underwater propulsors. The project will
advance undergraduate and graduate engineering education through new and
existing courses and engagement in research. Graduate students participating in
the project will obtain unique experimental and theoretical skills and acquire
fundamental knowledge on fluid dynamics, structural dynamics and vibrations,
electromechanical systems, smart structures, and numerical methods.

This project seeks to gain a fundamental understanding of unsteady hydrodynamic
flows generated by active elastic plates with internal piezoelectric actuation
that undergo complex multimodal oscillations in a viscous fluid. The project
hypothesis is that, by combining bending and twisting modes of internal
actuation, it is possible to generate fluid flows with tailored magnitude and
direction of the resultant hydrodynamic force. Fully-coupled three-dimensional
simulations will be integrated with experiments using piezoelectric macro-fiber
composite structures to explore the novel multimodal hydrodynamics of
internally-actuated electroelastic plates in laminar flow regimes. Specifically
the research will focus on the hydrodynamics of resonance oscillations leading
to large-amplitude structural deformations. Flexible piezoelectric composite
plates will be developed, tested, and characterized to effectively operate at
different bending and combined bending-twisting modes. The hydroelastic behavior
of these internally actuated composites will be thoroughly investigated to
establish the connection between the actuation modes and resulting hydrodynamic
forces and flow patterns. The project will identify physical mechanisms
governing momentum transfer and energy losses associated with hydroelastic
coupling. The results of this study will advance the current knowledge on the
elastohydrodynamics of internally actuated elastic materials for applications in
bio-inspired locomotion, morphing, flow control, sensing, and energy harvesting
by extending the state of the art to complex structural motions coupled with
three-dimensional fluid dynamics simulations. In particular, the results will
provide fundamental knowledge enabling the development of unprecedented aquatic
robot fins employing multimodal motions. Since piezoelectricity is a reversible
process, the results of this project will have an impact on other emerging areas
such as energy harvesting and sensing in unsteady flows.