* 1705923
* Engineering a new family of consensus repeat proteins based on nucleoporins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Bradley Olsen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Inside all of our cells, DNA is protected by a barrier that allows certain
necessary molecules to pass through pores that open and close to regulate
passage. Recently, these protein pores have been produced in bacteria, where
they retain the same ability to regulate the passage of molecules. To understand
how the pores operate, examples of these will be taken from several different
types of cells and compared and contrasted. Once the operating principles are
identified, these pores will be engineered help purify new biological drugs,
remove toxins from liquid samples, and possibly even develop tests to estimate
how quickly drugs are taken up in the body. Outreach to a diverse community is
accomplished through participation of the PI in the ACCESS Program to promote
URM graduate study, and the CMSE community college research program to provide
summer research experiences to community college students. Research will be
integrated into new teaching materials through international outreach and
teaching exchanges with UNICAMP in Brazil. Teaching materials will be prepared
in digital form, including online videos, in multiple languages for U.S. and
Latin American communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous minimal consensus
repeat (MCR) sequences from proteins have been identified, leading to modular
protein design and advances in technologies such as stimuli-responsive drug
delivery materials and biomimetic tissue engineering matrices. Recently, a MCR
has been derived from yeast nucleoporin, a protein that regulates transport into
and out of the nucleus. When polymerized into a gel, this MCR exhibits the high
rate and high selectivity filtration of the natural nucleoporin. Rational design
will be used to explore mutations to understand function and modify the
selectivity of the protein. The physical properties (diffusion, solubility, and
protein binding energies) of mutants will be characterized, and transport and
barrier properties will be benchmarked against full recombinant proteins using
quantitative transport models. MCR sequences will also be extracted from human
nucleoporins to explore the breadth of sequence space that can lead to selective
transport properties and provide human-similar in vitro tools for modeling
nuclear transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering and
Transport Division with cofounding from the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.