* 1705273
* Non-Invasive Personalized Normative Messaging Intervention for the Reduction of Household Energy Consumption
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Kaitlin Raimi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 329,998.00

1705273 (Lee). Household fossil fuel consumption in the U.S. is responsible for
approximately 22% of primary energy consumption and CO2 equivalent emissions.
Consequently, it is an objective of this project to identify widely applicable
intervention methods potentially capable of promoting environmentally
responsible behaviors. The goal of this research is to advance understanding of
how personalized normative comparison groups influence the effectiveness of
normative feedback interventions through the development and validation of a
non-invasive data mining-based behavior intervention framework, with field
experiments conducted in homes in Holland, Michigan. Successful implementation
of the research would significantly contribute to reducing harmful emissions
from the built environment through the enhancement of pro-environmental feedback
intervention design by providing a detailed first look into personalized
normative feedback. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research objectives are: 1)
to classify households into several meaningful groups sharing similar
consumption patterns on the basis of hourly energy usage data, using non-
invasive techniques; and 2) to generate and then empirically evaluate the
effectiveness of personalized normative energy use feedback created with the use
of readily available consumption data. The research is targeted to provide an
in-depth understanding of both the reliability of personalized normative
messages, and how and where energy use behavior changes. Further, it seeks to
discover long-term effects of personalized normative feedback on household
energy consumption and identify the effect of descriptive norm reference groups
on energy consumption norm adherence and energy use. All of these could
contribute to residential energy use reduction by advancing the theories for
normative energy feedback. The findings on how and where personalized normative
messaging changes occupant behavior in both the short and long term have
important implications for energy reporting, policy making, and meeting of state
and national energy reduction goals. In addition, lessons learned on
personalized normative messaging on energy use can be readily applied to other
pro-environmental behaviors (e.g., water consumption). Particularly, the
proposed non-intrusive personalized feedback messaging framework may be capable
of wide-scale deployment in advanced utility networks.