* 1705180
* SusChEM: GOALI: A Membrane Contactor Based Reactive Separation Process for Fuel Alcohol Production for Distributed-Type Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Theodore Tsotsis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 312,000.00

The conversion of distributed biomass resources from agricultural waste into
liquid transportation fuels can have significant potential economic benefits to
rural communities and also can improve global environmental sustainability. The
proposed project aims to develop a novel process for converting waste biomass to
alcohol fuels that is suitable for small-scale operations, employs fewer
processing steps than existing methods, and produces higher yields with improved
energy efficiency and inherent safety. The team of researchers collaborates with
an industrial partner, Sheeta Global Technology Co., to develop and test the
proposed biomass to alcohol conversion technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project focuses on the development of a novel membrane contactor
reactor that integrates methanol synthesis with in situ separation of the
product using an inorganic membrane and an ionic liquid stream. The main
research objective is to develop a simple, safer, high-yield alcohol synthesis
process that utilizes biomass as a feedstock and has the advantage of using
fewer processing steps than existing methods, minimizing product separation
requirements, needing less expensive reactors, managing heat more effectively,
and requiring less expensive feed gas. The design of the membrane contactor
reactor prevents direct contact of the ionic liquid with the catalyst by
separating the two components with an inorganic membrane. The membrane is
designed to allow only the product methanol to pass through while preventing
passage other gaseous compounds. Therefore, any potential loss of the ionic
liquid through reaction with the catalyst is minimized, and the liquid stream
that carries the product is not contaminated with catalytic particle fines.
Successful completion of the project may lead to pilot-plant scale testing in
collaboration with the industrial partner. In addition to training graduate and
undergraduate students in research, there is a plan to engage undergraduate
students in the development of hands-on teaching modules that will be used for
outreach to middle schools. These outreach activities would serve students from
underrepresented and disadvantaged groups in collaboration with USC's
Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) program.