* 1705901
* WERF: Enhanced evaluation of the removal of contaminants of emerging concern in decentralized water reuse systems by non-targeted analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Nathan Dodder, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 397,660.00

PI: Natalie Mladenov&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1705901 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
wastewater infrastructure in the United States and many developed countries is
largely centralized and many systems are reaching the end of their design life.
As an alternative to replacing thousands of miles of failing sewer pipe,
decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS) coupled with membrane
filtration and other advanced treatment technologies can meet water supply needs
at the community-level. One important challenge in water reuse and recycling
systems is the persistence of multiple types of contaminants, including
contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) such as pharmaceutically active
compounds that potentially number in the thousands and have frequently been
detected in wastewater effluent and receiving waters. The contaminants and their
potential byproducts generated during the treatment process pose an unclear risk
to human health, and the mechanisms by which these chemicals are removed or
transformed in DEWATS are key issues this project seeks to address. This
research will employ a systematic non-targeted analytical approach to
comprehensively identify both known and unexpected contaminants and byproducts
in lab-scale membrane treatment systems. This project will also advance
education and diversity through development of a Water Reuse Demo and
Competition activity to convey themes dealing with water scarcity and reuse to
middle school girls in the all-female We Are STEM Enrichment Program at San
Diego State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEWATS that utilize aerobic and
anaerobic membrane bioreactor technology (MBR and AnMBR, respectively),
especially if coupled to additional polishing steps, have the potential to
provide treatment at levels comparable to or better than conventional
centralized treatment plants and will have a role in augmenting non-potable and
potable water supplies. A key to the implementation of membrane reactors in
DEWATS is ensuring that these systems meet current water quality standards and
offer superior treatment for multiple classes of contaminants, including CECs
that are detected in treated waters and the environment. For anaerobic treatment
via DEWATS, the current understanding of the fate of contaminants, which has
been developed around conventional large-scale aerobic treatment systems, is
incomplete, and research on this front is needed to advance the use of anaerobic
systems. There is a diversity of parent compounds as well as metabolites of
unknown toxicity that are formed during MBR and AnMBR treatment. The goals of
this research are to 1) evaluate the removal and transformation mechanisms for
contaminants in aerobic and anaerobic membrane bioreactor systems and 2) enhance
the identification of parent compounds as well as byproducts in MBR and AnMBR
systems. This research will employ a non-targeted analysis based on gas
chromatography coupled to time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GCÃ—GC/TOF-MS) in
order to comprehensively identify both known and unknown chemicals and their
bio-transformation and photo-transformation products. The research will also
investigate how photolysis, which is critical in pond or wetland treatment
systems that tend to follow anaerobic treatment, contributes to chemical removal
and transformation. The impact of this work will be far reaching for the water
reuse field because this more exhaustive evaluation of chemicals and their
transformation in small-scale membrane treatment systems will inform the growing
decentralized movement in the US and abroad.