* 1705707
* Spectroscopic Study of New, Effective Up-Conversion Charging Process in Persistent Phosphors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Peter Kner, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 04/30/2021
* USD 387,724.00

Non-technical Description: Afterglow (i.e. persistent luminescence) is a self-
sustained luminescence phenomenon whereby a material (i.e. persistent phosphor)
glows in the dark for hours after the excitation light source has been switched
off. Nowadays persistent phosphors emitting in the visible and near-infrared
spectral ranges are being used in daily life, e.g., security signs, emergency
route signs, traffic signage, dials and displays, and medical research. However,
the widespread use of persistent phosphors is greatly hindered because of the
need of high-energy excitation light, mostly ultraviolet light, to charge the
materials. Therefore, solutions to achieving effective excitation with low-
energy light, particularly the visible light, are in demand. This project
investigates a new charging process that enables low-energy visible-light
sources (e.g. laser diodes) to be as effective as the commonly used high-energy
ultraviolet light sources (e.g. ultraviolet lamps) in charging persistent
phosphors. The outcomes of this research have a potential to open new strategies
for studying and utilizing persistent phosphors. The project provides an
interdisciplinary training experience to graduate, undergraduate and K-12
students in luminescent materials research and applications. The undergraduate
and K-12 education is implemented through the existing programs at University of
Georgia, such as the NSF-sponsored Peach State-Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation program, NSF-sponsored Research Experiences for
Undergraduates sites, and Young Dawgs program (for K-12
education).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: It is a general
knowledge in persistent luminescence that high-energy ultraviolet light is
usually necessary in order to effectively charge a persistent phosphor. However,
the need of high-energy excitation compromises some applications where the
ultraviolet light is unavailable or unsuitable. This project aims to tackle this
limitation by investigating a new, two-photon up-conversion charging (UCC)
process where low-energy visible-light sources (e.g. laser diodes) are as
effective as the commonly used high-energy ultraviolet light sources (e.g.
ultraviolet lamps) in charging persistent phosphors. In the UCC concept, two
visible photons from a visible-light laser diode are successively absorbed by a
UCC enabling ion (e.g. trivalent chromium ion) so that the high-energy
delocalization state of the ion is reached and the electron traps in the
phosphor are filled. The UCC enabling ions include trivalent chromium, divalent
manganese, quadrivalent manganese, trivalent praseodymium, and trivalent
neodymium. Several power-tunable visible-light laser diodes with wavelengths in
the range of 400-700 nm are used as the excitation sources. New optical
measurement techniques for UCC, such as UCC excitation spectroscopy, are under
development in order to acquire spectral data that are essential for
understanding the energy absorption, electron transfer, electron trapping and
de-trapping processes involved in the UCC.