* 1705813
* Resolving Source Contributions to Atmospheric Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kristina Wagstrom, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,990.00

The primary objective of this research project is to improve understanding of
how pollutants containing nitrogen deposit into water bodies from the
atmosphere. This project directly benefits society by addressing water quality
and ecosystem health concerns. These water quality concerns include low oxygen
levels and acidic conditions that can result in loss of life in aquatic
systems.Â  This research provides a beneficial tool for improving watershed
management. The researchers are seeking to confirm that the emission source for
these pollutants can be hundreds of miles away from the water body that is
affected. This project supports the training of a Ph.D. student and also engages
undergraduate chemical engineering students in research and community outreach
activities. In addition, undergraduate students participate in undergraduate
research experiences and service-learning projects through partnerships with
Connecticut state parks and technical high schools. The project engages the
community through monitoring activities that take place at several high schools
and state parks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An atmospheric chemical transport model
coupled with a watershed model will account for source-resolved pollutant
transport across multiple components of the watershed system. The researchers
are studying deposition estimates to different watersheds and regional linking
with a watershed model over the Connecticut River Watershed. A goal of this
research project is to transform watershed and ecosystem management by creating
an essential source-resolved bridge between two interacting earth systems: the
atmosphere and hydrosphere. This research represents a substantial step forward
by providing a comprehensive evaluation of impacts to watersheds throughout the
country and developing overarching estimates of the impacts of air pollution on
soil and water quality. Results of this project provide societal benefits by
addressing water quality and ecosystem health concerns. These water quality
concerns include hypoxia which negatively impacts fisheries and acidification
which can result in loss of life in aquatic systems. This research also provides
a beneficial tool for improving watershed management plan
development.&lt;br/&gt;