* 1705086
* CSR: NeTS: Medium: Achieving High-Availability in the Face of Rapid Network Evolution in Large Content Providers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Samee Khan
* 04/30/2018
* USD 438,561.00

Global Internet services, such as web search, social networking, video
dissemination, and cloud computing are built on data centers that are large
warehouses full of computers. The computers in the data centers are connected
together, and to the Internet, by a network. If that network goes down then the
computers it connects and the Internet services they support also go down. This
project aims to decrease, by one to two orders of magnitude, how long those
networks are down each month.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore the
design of two components that can contribute significantly towards decreasing
network downtime. One component will be a new highly-available control plane
that will include a new replication protocol that provides strong consistency
and resilience to the failure of an external failure detector while retaining as
many of the desirable properties of current less-available designs (e.g., small
resource footprint) as possible. The other component will be an automated
management plane that will raise the level of abstraction of specifying a
management operation (MOp) on the network, thereby allowing automated software
to synthesize and manage the sequence of steps necessary to achieve a complex
network MOp such as upgrading software on a large
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global Internet services are an integral part of
modern life and increasing their availability will benefit society. The project
plans include developing software prototypes and working closely with large
Internet services to increase the likelihood of technology transfer. The
research in the project will be conducted by graduate students and undergraduate
students that will learn how networks work, how to build and improve them, and
how to build and improve the computer systems that control them. Each of these
skills is likely to be increasingly important in the coming years.