* 1705864
* SusChEM: Ultrafine Particle Formation in Advanced Low Carbon Combustion Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Pratim Biswas, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2021
* USD 499,841.00

1705864 &lt;br/&gt;Biswas, Pratim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One area that is critical
to advancement of carbon capture technologies is understanding ultrafine
particle formation under combustion conditions associated with next-generation
low-carbon combustion technologies, such as pressurized oxy-combustion. Another
area where ultrafine particle formation is of interest is that of co-firing coal
with natural gas (NG), as this can reduce the carbon intensity of existing coal-
fired power plants. A thorough understanding of ultrafine particle formation is
essential to both predict and control radiation in boilers and to avoid the
deleterious effects of fine particles on fouling in the boilers and emissions in
the atmosphere. To this end, three universities have joined forces to utilize
their unique capabilities in the fields of aerosol and combustion science to
address this topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address the following
hypotheses, which are focused on particle formation, evolution, and measurement
in environments conducive to advanced low-carbon combustion processes: (1)The
high CO2 concentrations, elevated pressures and high oxygen concentrations of
these processes, relative to conventional combustion, will affect the heating
rate, temperature and environment of the fuel during pyrolysis and char
combustion, thus affecting the volatilization of inorganic mineral species and
the subsequent ultrafine particle formation and growth; (2) The interaction of
organic constituents with the inorganic mineral matter in pressurized
oxycombustion systems will affect the chemical reaction pathways and resultant
formation, growth and transformation of soot and organic aerosols; (3) During NG
co-firing with coal, the change in the local chemical environment of the fuel
particle will affect ultrafine particle formation; (4) Multiscale models ranging
from ab-initio to meso- to full-scale can be validated with a range of
instrumentation used in controlled experiments, and will aid in the overall
understanding of ultrafine particle formation in advanced combustion processes.
This award is co-funded by the CBET Environmental Sustainability program and the
Office of International Science and Engineering.