* 1705464
* Biomanufacturing next generation T cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Navin Varadarajan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 509,523.00

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common acute leukemia affecting adults
and is responsible for more than 10,000 deaths annually in the United States.
Immunotherapy has revolutionized the treatment of cancers. T-cell based therapy
involving the infusion of genetically modified cells has the potential to
deliver long-lasting remissions, eventually leading to cures. Despite this
promise, treatments remain unpredictable, so newer methods are required to
assist the biomanufacturing of immune cells with defined properties. This
research project aims to deliver on data-driven engineering methods to rapidly
engineer the potency of T cells for the treatment of AML and to test these in
mice. Additionally, students at all levels will be trained through the
development and delivery of animation-based tutorials and interactive games that
teach immunotherapy, cell metabolism, T-cell function, and cellular responses to
cancer. The educational outreach is also advancing student engagement in
immunotherapy through research experiences for K-12, undergraduate and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adoptive cell therapy (ACT) based on the
transfer of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells has demonstrated significant
anti-tumor effects in patients with refractory B-cell malignancies. The
remarkable clinical success of CAR+ T cells has spurred the development of this
approach for other leukemias and solid tumors. In spite of the clinical
potential of ACT, its efficacy remains unpredictable, and newer approaches are
required to define the key components of the efficacy of CAR+ T cells. The
incomplete understanding of the role of metabolism in the anti-tumor efficacy of
cells has severely limited the biomanufacturing T cells with predictable
potency, and this is a fundamental limitation. The objective of this research
project is to quantify the dynamic metabolic profile, the complete
transcriptome, and the functional competency of CAR+ T cells targeting the
sialoadhesin receptor 3 (CD33), at single-cell resolution, and to determine if
directly altering T-cell metabolism provides new avenues to immunotherapeutic
treatment or treatment enhancement. A suite of innovative high-throughput
single-cell methodologies that have been developed and implemented, including
real-time metabolic profiling, Timelapse Imaging Microscopy in Nanowell Grids
(TIMING), and single-cell RNA-seq, are being utilized. The ability of these
engineered CAR+ T-cell populations to control the growth of human tumors is
being tested in immunodeficient mice. This work will establish the heterogeneity
and correlation between fundamental T-cell processes like metabolism, function,
and phenotype, and thus will have a broad impact on T-cell immunology.