* 1705837
* Genesis and Dynamics of very-large-scale Motions in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer and their Interactions with Utility-scale Wind Turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Giacomo Valerio Iungo, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 298,093.00

In wind energy technology, predicting the evolution of wind turbine wakes under
different atmospheric conditions is important for optimizing power production
from a wind farm and mitigating damaging loads on the turbines due to
detrimental wake interactions. This project aims to investigate the origin,
evolution and regeneration of what are called very-large-scale motions (VLSMs)
that evolve in the layer of air near the blade surface, termed the atmospheric
boundary layer (ABL), and their interactions with utility-scale wind turbines.
As the scale of wind farms continues to grow and as wind turbines increase in
size, VLSMs are expected to profoundly influence wind power production and the
downstream evolution of wind turbine wakes. However, the origin and dynamics of
VLSMs are not well understood in some cases, and therefore their effects and
interactions with utility-scale wind turbines are difficult to predict. This
project advances numerical simulations and proof-of-concept laboratory
experiments on this topic. Additionally, undergraduate students are being
trained to measure wind velocities at the University of Texas Dallas mobile
LIDAR (Light Imaging, Detection, And Ranging) station, which is a unique
facility for education and outreach activities. This training impact students
from a wide range of backgrounds and makes them aware of important topics, such
as meteorology, extreme weather phenomena, anthropogenic effects on the
environment and renewable energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
research project are to: 1) better understand the physical mechanisms generating
VLSMs and their variability as a consequence of the daily cycle of atmospheric
stability, different topography and land cover; 2) explore how VLSMs affect
downstream evolution of wakes produced by utility-scale wind turbines; 3)
develop numerical tools that will enable thorough and timely predictions of wind
turbine wakes by reproducing modulations of the Reynolds stresses induced by
VLSMs. This research project is comprised of three interrelated tasks. First,
there are two LIDAR measurement campaigns, the first one for a site over a
relatively flat terrain in North Texas and a second one over a complex terrain.
The third task uses the resulting experimental data for modeling VLSM-induced
modulations on wind turbine wakes through optimal tuning of turbulence closure
models within an adjoint Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes framework. This
research project is helping to answer a number of key questions related to the
morphology and energy content of VLSMs and how variable are they under different
regimes of the atmospheric stability, the physical mechanisms governing
generation of VLSMs and energy transport among coherent structures with
different length-scales for ABL flows, and the role of land cover and topography
in VLSM genesis and dynamics. The research project also aims to quantify the
effects of the amplitude modulations induced by VLSMs on aerodynamic performance
of utility-scale wind turbines and downstream evolution of wind turbine wakes.