* 1705331
* Collaborative Research: Superparamagnetic Cellulose and Lignin Nanoparticles as Recyclable Additives to Enhance the Liquid/Liquid Extraction of Ethanol from Aqueous Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Erick Vasquez, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2021
* USD 149,932.00

1704897 / 1705331 Urena-Benavides / Vasquez&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofuels are
the one renewable carbon-neutral energy source that have the potential to
directly displace petroleum in our automobiles without a significant change to
the engine and our infrastructure. Next generation pyrolysis oils provide an
alternative to biological fermentation, but will inevitably also have a high
water content, as the high number of oxygen atoms in the biological molecules
are converted to water during pyrolysis. Separations of hydrocarbons (such as
ethanol) from water to produce a fuel requires almost 100% removal, as water has
deleterious effects in the engine. Similarly, any fuels lost in the water stream
lead to low product recovery, which increases costs and emissions, and creates a
waste stream that must be treated. Thus, separation of ethanol, or any other
hydrocarbons, from water is highly energy intensive process with little margin
for error, and this is a significant hurdle to overcome to displace petroleum
with biofuels. In the case of ethanol, the energy required to purify it from
water is particularly high as ethanol-water mixtures form an azeotrope, meaning
that the vapor and liquid concentrations become equal such that they cannot be
fully purified via distillation, and require a secondary separation step that
utilizes a desiccant. This project seeks to explore a novel separation route
that will bypass thermal azeotropic distillation of an ethanol-water mixture,
and thus has the potential to significantly decrease the energy consumption of
conversion of biologically derived hydrocarbons, such as ethanol, to
biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative project, magnetic
nanoparticles will be developed by incorporation of iron oxide into lignin and
cellulose biopolymers. The magnetic nanoparticles will be utilized to form a
particle-stabilized emulsion with added castor oil, which will be used to
extract the ethanol from the mixture. The nanoparticles will facilitate mass
transfer within the emulsion to form two clearly defined phases, comprised of
ethanol/castor oil, and water. The magnetic iron oxide will be used to
facilitate mass transfer, as well as induce phase separation. Castor oil,
lignin, and cellulose were chosen as they are renewable materials that are
widely available at low cost. The project will study various ways to control
nanoparticle shape and magnetic properties, which will affect the phase
interface in the emulsion. The stability of the emulsions after incorporation of
the nanoparticles will be explored, as will the effect of the magnetic field on
stability and phase separation. A bench scale separation prototype will be
developed to evaluate the ultimate efficiency of the castor oil extraction. Once
ethanol is extracted from water by castor oil, it requires much less energy to
separate castor oil from ethanol via distillation due to their highly dissimilar
boiling points. If successful, the project will have significant impact on the
energy intensity of azeotropic ethanol-water separations, and thus have a large
impact on the viability of biologically derived fuels. As the nanoparticles
utilize lignin and cellulose, there is potential impact on the forestry industry
in Mississippi and Ohio, the home states of the PIs. A number of outreach
activities are planned that include creation of sustainability modules for
middle school teachers and engineering summer camps that target women and
underrepresented minorities. Both undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in the research project.