* 1705656
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Clustering and Rheology of Magnetic Janus Particles with Shifted Dipoles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ubaldo Cordova, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,580.00

The goal of the project is to engineer the flowability of a fluid, i.e., the
ease with which a fluid flows, by addition of active magnetic particles with
unique magnetic properties. These particles can be manipulated by a combination
of an external magnetic field and an internal chemical gradient. Fluids with
varying flowability are important for common technologies, such as printers,
fluid shock absorbers, fluid property sensors, biomedical devices, and body
armor. Control of the flowability will enable longer lifetimes, broader
applicability, reduced cost, and increased stability of the fluids and devices.
The proposed research will investigate the assembly properties of active
magnetic colloids using experimental and computational techniques. Additional
benefits of these studies are the creation of a toolbox for the design of fluids
that have their flowability tailored to a particular application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses the need for an in-depth
understanding of the assembly behavior of active magnetic Janus particles with
shifted dipoles. In systems with shifted dipoles, the magnetic dipole axis is
shifted away from the center of mass of the particle, thereby providing
additional control over particle orientation and response. In combination with
on-board propulsion, particles with shifted dipoles represent a new and exciting
class of active materials. The research described will advance our understanding
of magnetic particle interaction, active matter, and the rheology of complex
magnetic fluids. This work will enable future studies in which, for example,
Brownian Dynamics simulations are used to predict long-time dynamics and to
discover novel structures that are difficult to accomplish or detect
experimentally. More broadly, research described in the proposal will advance
our understanding of the intrinsic role of forces and torques in the structure
of complex fluids, thus providing important insights into the statistical
physics of out-of-equilibrium systems and enabling researchers to better
engineer and utilize many body dynamics in the microscopic regime. The
educational goals of this proposal will leverage the collaborative environment
between the two participating institutions to enhance student education at
various stages and thereby strengthen the diversity of the STEM workforce
pipeline.