* 1705346
* UNS:   Collaborative Research:   Effects of Nano-Bio Interactions on Nanoparticle Fate and Transport in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Natalie Capiro, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2021
* USD 272,268.00

Despite dramatic increases in the production and use of engineered nanomaterials
in industrial and consumer products, very little is known about the fate and
transport of nanoparticles following their release into the environment. The
overall goal of this project is to better understand the interactions between
engineered nanoparticles and microbial communities, and to use this information
to improve predictions of nanoparticle accumulation and mobility in soils,
groundwater, and water treatment systems. To broaden the educational outreach
and practical implications of this work, the project includes research
experiences for undergraduate students and the development of interactive,
multi-media instructional tools that will be incorporated into educational and
training programs run by the Center for Engineering Education and Outreach and
Center for Science, Technology, Engineering and Math Diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted over the past ten years has greatly
improved our knowledge of nanoparticle aggregation and mobility over a range of
environmentally-relevant conditions, and has informed the development of
mathematical models capable of describing nanoparticle transport and retention
in membranes, filter beds and aquifer materials. At the same time, numerous
studies have explored the impacts of nanoparticles on cellular systems, aquatic
invertebrates, fish, and microorganisms. The overall goal of this research
project is to combine these two lines of research to investigate the role of
nano-bio interactions on nanoparticle fate and transport in porous media. The
research project is coupling nanoparticle characterization and biotic
experiments with dynamic transport studies to quantify the effects of nano-bio
interactions on the mobility and fate of representative engineered nanomaterials
(iron oxide and magnesium oxide) in aquifer materials and natural soils.
Research activities are being structured around three tasks, (1) determination
of nanoparticle deposition and release as a function of surface coating aging,
biopolymers, and solution composition using a quartz crystal microbalance, (2)
assessment of the effects of biopolymers on nanomaterial mobility and retention
in abiotic columns, and (3) measurement of nanoparticle transport, deposition,
and aging in aerobic and anaerobic bio-active soil columns. Novel aspects of the
research include the direct coupling of microbial-particle interactions with
transport, assessment of bio-related deposition, direct observation of
nanoparticle behavior using flow-through scanning electron microscopy and cryo-
transmission electron microscopy techniques. Results obtained from this work are
being used to explore the role of microbial communities in the aging
nanoparticle surface coatings, and the impacts of filter ripening and site
blocking on nanoparticle attachment processes and mobility in the environment.
To extend the impact of this work beyond traditional academic boundaries,
research outcomes are being incorporated into model-based tutorials, short
instructional videos, and illustrative case studies and modeling tools that will
be disseminated through collaborations and participation in initiatives with the
Center for Science Technology, Engineering and Math Diversity, the Bridge to
Engineering Success at Tufts, and the Center for Engineering Education and
Outreach at Brown.