* 1705444
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Surface Reaction of Oxygenates on Lewis Acidic Metal Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Carsten Sievers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,463.00

The overall goal of the project is to enable the design of Lewis acid catalysts
for conversion of sugars (readily obtained from fermentation of biorenewables)
to value-added chemicals. Metal oxide catalysts, such as titanium dioxide and
molybdenum oxides, are active for a number of reactions of sugars, but
understanding is lacking regarding relationships between the composition and
structure of various catalysts and the products they produce. The project will
identify the reasons why different catalysts produce different products, and
thus facilitate the design of catalysts that are optimized for the production of
specific target compounds, including high-value biorenewable products such as
ethylene glycol and lactic acid. The project will utilize low-cost catalyst
materials that will pave the way to economically viable routes for enabling
sustainable production of valuable chemical
feedstocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has shown that the relative rates
for key isomerization and retro aldol pathways are strongly influenced by the
catalyst composition. A combination of surface science experiments on model
surfaces, spectroscopic and kinetic studies of high-surface area oxides, and
density functional theory calculations will be employed to identify how surface
structure and composition affect the rates of individual elementary reaction
steps. Specifically, the research will focus on how elementary reactions for
sugar conversion are affected by various surface properties, including
electronic properties (such as Lewis acid strength and orbital filling) and
geometric factors (such as steric hindrance or proximity of cooperative active
centers). Isolation of key elementary steps, which include activation or
formation of O-H, C-H, C-O, and C-C bonds in carbohydrates, will be enabled by
studying the surface reactions of appropriate probe reactants across the
research approaches. Experimental surface science studies will provide new
information on elementary step barriers and reaction intermediates on different
surfaces. Computation will assist in mechanism development, but more importantly
will be used to assess how trends in surface intermediate adsorption energies
and barriers for their reactions are related to electronic properties. Operando
spectroscopy investigations will provide a new understanding of how
complexities, such as non-ideal surfaces and the presence of a solvent, perturb
the structure and stability of surface intermediates, providing key feedback for
refinement of reaction models that will ultimately be used to design improved
catalysts. The project will build on the investigators' track record of training
graduate and undergraduate students including students from traditionally
underrepresented groups. The project will allow both PhD and undergraduate
students to participate in rotations among the different laboratories to develop
an ability to address the same overall problem from different angles. Community
outreach activities include engagement with an Atlanta-area museum and programs
for K-12 students.