* 1705432
* Marangoni Transport Synergism in Mixed Surfactant Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Todd Przybycien, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 353,071.00

Surfactants are compounds that lower the surface tension between two phases (for
example, oil and water) and are important for a range of complex fluid products,
such as laundry detergents, flooding fluids for enhanced oil recovery, and many
food, pharmaceutical and consumer products. Fluid flows driven by gradients in
surface tension are called "Marangoni flows" and have been well-studied in
systems containing a single surfactant. However, industrially important products
typically contain mixtures of surfactants. This research project considers how
surfactant mixtures may produce strong cooperative or synergistic effects on
these Marangoni flows. Experiments to measure these flows and the effects of the
surfactants on the interfaces are being performed and compared to theories
modified for these multi-component systems. While building on existing knowledge
and methods, this research expands into fundamentally interesting and
commercially important areas. Understanding the interactions between surfactants
is a potentially powerful aid to product formulation across a host of
industries. STEM human resource infrastructure is benefitting from the research
training of graduate and undergraduate students. Additionally, middle school
students are being mentored through the Carnegie Mellon University Physics
Concepts Outreach Program in a project in which student-designed experiments
reveal interfacial engineering concepts underlying liquid commercial product
formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marangoni synergism is the creation of
stronger Marangoni transport in the presence of two surfactants than is obtained
from either of the two on their own, at the same interfacial tension. This
synergism results from the coupled effects of thermodynamics, diffusion, flow
conditions, and kinetic rate constants on Marangoni transport. This research
project demonstrates this synergism and identifies the conditions that produce
it. Experiments are focusing on two-component surfactants in aqueous solutions
flowing past a pure oil layer and single-surfactant aqueous solutions flowing
past a surfactant-containing oil film. Transient interfacial velocities are
being measured as the bulk composition is changed to drive the system out of
equilibrium. These transport experiments are being complemented by equilibrium
interfacial tension measurements and theoretical transport modeling to identify
the influence of dynamic parameters on surfactant compositions that yield
Marangoni synergism. The knowledge generated by this research fills a
significant knowledge gap in the literature and enables new interfacial
approaches for complex fluid formulation.