* 1705804
* SusChEM: Advancing Biocatalytic Technology for the  Treatment of Emerging Contaminants in Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Julie Zilles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 334,236.00

PI: Zilles&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1705804&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging drinking
water contaminants, such as antibiotics and hormones, affect people's health at
extremely low concentrations, making it challenging to remove them and provide
safe drinking water. The overarching goal of this work is to protect public
health by removing emerging contaminants from drinking water using a new
approach: biological catalysts. The engineering benefits and technical
feasibility of this approach have been demonstrated, but it is currently too
expensive to implement. This project will investigate different strategies for
retaining or recovering biological catalysts so they can be reused many times.
Achieving biological catalyst reuse has the potential to greatly reduce the
costs for public utilities to remove emerging contaminants and provide safe
drinking water to consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A biocatalytic (i.e., enzyme-
based) approach would allow environmental engineers to draw on the unparalleled
specificity and affinity of biological enzymes for the degradation of emerging
contaminants under mild conditions. A major barrier to the application of
biocatalysts in high volume, low value product industries like drinking water
has been their high cost. To reduce costs, biocatalyst reuse has been identified
as a key research priority. To address this need, the PIs will investigate
pathways for retaining or recovering biocatalysts in a drinking water treatment
process. The approach integrates molecular biology, experimental measurements,
process modeling, and quantitative sustainable design to provide a comprehensive
foundation advancing the development of biocatalytic technologies for drinking
water treatment. The hypotheses being tested are that biocatalyst immobilization
i) can be accomplished and ii) will allow sufficient rounds of reuse to make
biocatalyst acquisition costs financially viable for drinking water utilities.
To test these hypotheses, perchlorate-degrading biocatalysts will be immobilized
using three different strategies, followed by measurements of their activity and
reuse potential in batch and column experiments. The experimental results will
be used to develop process models for biocatalytic treatment of perchlorate, and
these models will be integrated into a sustainable design framework leveraging
life cycle assessment (LCA), life cycle costing (LCC), and techno-economic
analysis (TEA). Results from this project will provide a firm foundation for the
application of biocatalytic technologies in water treatment by investigating the
effects of different immobilization strategies on biocatalyst activity and
longevity, integrating that understanding into process-scale models, and
applying quantitative sustainable design to evaluate the economic and
environmental tradeoffs associated with different immobilization strategies and
process designs. Overall, this work will contribute to safe drinking water by
developing a biocatalytic treatment technology that specifically targets
perchlorate and chlorite. More generally, this work could transform our approach
to emerging contaminants by providing proof of concept for the overall
feasibility of biocatalytic approaches in water treatment, providing a vast new
toolbox to environmental engineers and facilitating safe water reuse.
Interdisciplinary education of undergraduate and graduate students is embedded
in the project, and specific educational objectives are designed to increase
awareness of emerging contaminants and biological treatment processes, recruit a
diverse student population, and improve the communication skills of
undergraduate and graduate engineering students.