* 1705409
* SusChEM: Biological Auto-Enhancement of CO2 Absorption for Improved Cyanobacterial Growth and Biofuel Production
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 04/30/2022
* USD 353,881.00

Phototrophic microorganisms, which use sunlight to make chemicals for their
nutrition, possess potential as "microbial chemical factories" to make
sustainable fuels and chemicals directly from atmospheric CO2, using sunlight
and water for energy. One technical challenge to this approach is poor CO2
absorption into the aqueous solution containing the microbes. In other
industrial processes that convert CO2, use of alkanolamine solvents such as
monoethanolamine (MEA), can be used to enhance aqueous CO2 solubility and, in
turn, the rate and efficiency of its absorption from gas streams. This project
seeks to engineer a model cyanobacterium organism to produce MEA directly via
photosynthesis. In the presence of produced MEA, the rate and efficiency of CO2
absorption into the organism's culture medium will be significantly enhanced
and, as a result, so too will be rates of cell growth and biofuel production. In
addition, a multi-faceted approach to research, education, and outreach will
also be included. This project will serve as the basis for several high school
and undergraduate student research projects involving the Fulton Undergraduate
Research Initiative (FURI), School of Life Sciences Undergraduate Research
(SOLUR), and the SCience and ENgineering Experience (SCENE) programs to recruit
women and under-represented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel
metabolic pathway will be engineered to enable MEA biosynthesis from endogenous
precursors in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. This will be achieved by deregulating
a native precursor biosynthesis pathway, followed by the introduction and
optimized expression of the heterologous pathway steps. Within the aqueous
culture, CO2 will react with produced MEA and then, through a series of
subsequent reactions, will ultimately be rendered as bicarbonate. Cellular
assimilation of bicarbonate will promote further regeneration of produced MEA,
thereby returning it to react again with additional CO2 molecules. To facilitate
the biological regeneration of MEA, the project will include strategies to
enhance bicarbonate uptake. In the end, enhanced CO2 absorption will support
higher growth rates of the microbes, increased growth will support higher rates
of MEA production, greater MEA availability will support further improved CO2
absorption, ultimately resulting in an auto-catalytic effect. These strategies
will be investigated in both wild-type Synechocystis as well as a previously-
engineered laurate-producing strain, thereby allowing the effects of MEA
biosynthesis on the production of this important fatty acid biofuel precursor to
be explored.