* 1705825
* Elucidating Solvent Effects in Biomass Conversion Reactions by means of Operando Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* George Tsilomelekis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 292,193.00

The research aims at elucidating the underlying principles behind solvation
effects that govern the reaction rates, selectivity and stability of catalysts
in biomass conversion reactions. The interest in understanding solvation effects
during biomass processing arises from the fact that the conversion of highly
reactive and functionalized molecules, such as biomass derived intermediates,
can be influenced by the solvent surrounding the homogeneous and/or
heterogeneous active site(s). The complexity of these systems demands a paradigm
shift and a transformative approach towards greater flexibility, where catalysts
and solvents are studied simultaneously in one single optical reactor in a time-
and spatially-resolved manner under realistic operating conditions. The proposed
integrated framework focuses on the glucose isomerization reaction, which is
considered the major bottleneck in the catalytic conversion of cellulosic
biomass to biofuels and chemicals. The development of this framework can render
solvent and catalyst selection rational and predictable and will have a
tremendous impact on various disciplines and
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective of this project is
to investigate the active site(s) in a catalyst and elucidate the underlying
mechanisms in biomass reactions by means of operando spectroscopy. The proposal
aims to address the fundamental challenges associated with implementing the
concept of catalytic bio-refineries. Despite their profound effect on catalyst
performance, solvent-solute-catalyst interactions are currently poorly
understood. The proposed work will focus on the design and development of a
versatile prototype multi-spectroscopic optical cell-reactor that allows the
generation of catalytic performance data similar to those achieved with
conventional catalytic liquid phase reactors. This reactor will be utilized to
study glucose isomerization reaction under real working conditions by coupling,
for the first time in biomass processing, Reaction Induced Difference Infrared
Spectroscopy (RIDIS) and Raman spectroscopy. The proposed research may provide
molecular-level information on structure-function relationships in biomass
conversion reactions. The proposed integration of research and education aims at
creating an intellectually stimulating environment for training students on
catalysis ad reaction engineering. The proposed outreach plan is targeting
students from diverse backgrounds and underrepresented populations in STEM
fields.