* 1705703
* Probing 2-D Coalescence and Aggregation with Tunable Paramagnetic Colloidal Clusters
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Sibani Biswal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2020
* USD 357,127.00

CBET - 1705703 PI: Biswal, Sibani L.

Coalescence of liquid droplets and aggregation of colloidal particles are
important in materials processing applications and in naturally-occurring
processes. Coalescence and aggregation have been studied extensively for
droplets and particles that are freely suspended in bulk liquids. This award
will support research into aggregation of colloidal particles that are confined
to a surface. The dynamics of aggregation in this case are expected to be
fundamentally different than aggregation of particles in the bulk. The key
challenge in studying aggregation is to control the forces between particles
that can lead to aggregation. In this project, that challenge will be addressed
by using clusters of superparamagnetic particles and placing the system in a
rotating magnetic field. The aggregation of the colloidal clusters will be
examined under conditions where the forces between the clusters can be tuned and
are known at all times. The dynamics of cluster aggregation, changes in the
arrangement of particles within the clusters, and the resulting structure that
is obtained after aggregation will be studied. The results will be useful to
material scientists and process engineers who are developing new two-dimensional
materials that have unique electronic, optical, or catalytic properties. It will
also provide new insight into other engineered materials that have interfaces or
grain boundaries that can affect materials processing and reliability. The
project will engage students at various academic levels, including community
college students who participate in a summer program at Rice. Demonstrations of
the unique properties of magnetic colloidal suspensions will be developed for
local high-school students.

This award will support an experimental study of coalescence and aggregation of
two-dimensional colloidal clusters. The clusters will consist of micron-sized
superparamagnetic colloidal particles dispersed in aqueous solution. A high
frequency rotating magnetic field will be applied, resulting in a long-range,
isotropic attractive interaction potential between the paramagnetic colloids
that can be precisely tuned from 3kBT to 40kBT by varying the strength of the
magnetic field. The experiments will determine how the interactional potential
influences properties such as line tension and interfacial thickness. The
experiment will be designed to monitor coalescence and aggregation as a function
of interaction potential and to understand how void spaces are annealed during
the assembly of clusters. Finally, the project will focus on the formation of
disclinations and defects in two-dimensional systems and their implications on
two-dimensional cluster dynamics.