* 1705384
* Correlating Nanoparticle-Induced Biomembrane Perturbation with Heterogeneous Surface Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Yan Yu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Engineered nanoparticles (particles of inorganic matter with a diameter on the
order of tens of nanometers) have made inroads into many technology and industry
sectors, from food, electronics, manufacture, consumer products, to medicine. As
the use of nanoparticles continues to surge, it is critical to assess how the
exposure to nanoparticles impacts human health. One major challenge, among many,
is to understand the potential toxicity introduced by the surface coatings on
the nanoparticles. To tackle this challenge, this research project is
specifically designed to reveal the effect of non-uniform surface coatings of
nanoparticles on the structure and function of biomembranes. Nanoparticles are
created to display non-uniform surface coatings that resemble engineered
nanoparticles found in the environment. Investigations on the interactions
between the nanoparticles and the biomembranes will provide guidelines to better
predict the biological impact of industrial particles. This knowledge will also
enable the design of nanoparticles with controlled surface properties, achieving
desirable biological impacts. Educational and outreach activities implemented by
the researchers will popularize sciences at the interface of nanotechnology and
biology. The use of a "Nano-Bio Ambassadors" program, in particular, will bring
nano-bioscience to students in rural communities in Indiana as well as to the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is
to establish a quantitative understanding of how nanoparticles with
heterogeneous surface chemistry influence the structure and function of
biological membranes. Towards that goal, the researchers propose to focus on
heterogeneous surfaces comprised of hydrophobic and charged groups, because this
resembles the surface chemistry of industrial nanoparticles in water. Three
specific aims are pursued. First, a series of amphiphilic nanoparticles that
vary over a range of sizes and in hydrophilic-lipophilic balance are
synthesized. Second, the disruption of such nanoparticles to the integrity and
function of supported lipid bilayers is investigated and the underlying
molecular mechanisms are determined. Third, the effects of membrane properties,
including curvature, composition, and lipid raft formation, on interactions
between amphiphilic nanoparticles and biomembranes is elucidated using the giant
lipid vesicle system. Changes in lipid membranes induced by nanoparticles is
mostly quantified using advanced optical and electron microscopies. Findings
from this research establishes a direct connection between heterogeneous surface
chemistry in nanoparticles and their perturbation to biomembranes. This study
provides knowledge that is much needed but currently non-existent: a
quantitative understanding of how a heterogeneous surface chemistry impacts
interactions between nanoparticles and biomembranes.