* 1705084
* Breakdown of Rotational Invariance in Quantum Hall Systems with Anisotropic Interaction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Orion Ciftja, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Human Resource Development contribute funds to this award. It
supports fundamental theoretical and computational research on two-dimensional
systems of electrons that interact strongly with each other leading to novel
electronic states that spontaneously develop a preferred direction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional systems of electrons can be created at the
interface of two semiconductors, and they manifest intriguing properties in the
presence of a strong perpendicular magnetic field. In that situation, electrons
are predicted to form a liquid-like state of matter, exhibiting properties that
appear the same in all directions, that is, they are isotropic. However, the
presence of an anisotropic or direction-dependent interaction between electrons
may drastically change the system's properties, resulting in quantum mechanical
states of electrons that are analogous to the states of long molecules in liquid
crystals, which form the basis of modern liquid-crystal displays. The PI and his
team will use analytical and computational methods to understand the nature of
the anisotropy in a system of electrons that interact with an anisotropic
interaction potential. The research will contribute to the intellectual
foundations that lead to new electronic and optical device
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate, and often minority, students
at the Historically Black Prairie View A &amp; M University will be trained in
applying analytical methods and in carrying out numerical simulations. The
students will gain important research experience that can help them in their
pursuit of future graduate studies, and will help enhance the research and
education infrastructure of the institution. The PI will carry out outreach
activities that aim to increase interest in science topics at local communities
and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the emergence of anisotropic orders in strongly correlated quantum
Hall systems of electrons in the presence of an anisotropic interaction
potential. An anisotropic interaction potential may naturally lead to
anisotropic order at regimes where only an isotropic liquid was previously
thought possible. These novel quantum phases may possess unconventional
properties of great interest to the broad field of theoretical condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a framework to understand
the emergence of anisotropic order in quantum Hall systems in the presence of an
anisotropic interaction potential in the extreme quantum limit. The research
aims to explore outstanding issues such as: i) the stability of novel
anisotropic quantum Hall liquid phases at odd-denominator filling factors of the
lowest Landau level driven by an anisotropic Coulomb interaction potential
between electrons, and ii) the stability of novel anisotropic Fermi liquid
phases at even-denominator filling factors of the lowest Landau level driven by
an anisotropic Coulomb interaction potential between electrons. The PI and his
research team will use a combination of analytical and computational methods to
carry out the research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate, and often
minority, students at the Historically Black Prairie View A &amp; M University
will be trained in applying analytical methods and in carrying out numerical
simulations. The students will gain important research experience that can help
them in their pursuit of future graduate studies, and will help enhance the
research and education infrastructure of the institution. The PI will carry out
outreach activities that aim to increase interest in science topics at local
communities and high schools.