* 1705538
* Mild hyperthermia to enhance delivery of therapeutic nanocarriers in tumors: imaging, in vivo study, and simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ronghui Ma, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,061.00

In the United States, more than one-half million people die from cancer each
year. Although considerable progress has been made in the fight against some
forms of the disease using advanced surgical techniques, radiation, and new
classes of drugs, effective treatments are still needed. In recent years
nanoparticles, particles with a diameter on the order of several tens of
nanometers, have been explored as a new medium for cancer treatment.
Nanoparticles can be constructed from a variety of biocompatible materials and
can be made hollow so that they can be loaded with drugs. Biomarkers can be
placed on their surfaces so that the nanoparticles can specifically target a
tumor and then release the drugs. Nanoparticle-based therapies, therefore, have
the potential to reduce the debilitating side effects that accompany many cancer
drugs and to increase their potency in killing cancer cells. However, little is
understood about of how nanoparticles exit blood vessels and accumulate in
tumors. In this project, researchers are exploring the use of local, mild
heating to increase the accumulation of nanoparticles in a tumor. The transport
and distribution of nanoparticles in a mouse model of human prostate cancer is
being studied, and the accumulation of nanoparticles inside the tumor is being
quantified via micro-computed tomography (microCT) imaging. Using the
measurements obtained from actual tumors, a computational model is being
developed to explain how the nanoparticles get out of the blood vessels and into
the tumor tissue. The computational model will help researchers predict how
increased temperature might work in tumors of different sizes and shapes. In
addition to training graduate student and undergraduate students, the
researchers are engaging in STEM outreach activities at the University of
Maryland Baltimore County and STEM alliance programs WISE (Women in Science and
Engineering), WSAS (Women Serious about Science), and SEED (summer program for
economically disadvantaged high school students). They are developing a web-
based, user-friendly interface for use by the scientific community to illustrate
the nanoparticle spreading process in tumors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though
advancements in nanotechnology have revolutionized cancer treatment by
conjugating therapeutic drugs onto nanocarriers for targeted delivery into
tumors while reducing systemic toxicity, nanostructure transport from tumor
capillaries to tumor interstitial space and diffusion to the entire tumor region
is still difficult to achieve. Barriers to accomplishing this goal are largely
due to the large flow resistance caused by small pores in the capillary and high
interstitial pressure in tumors. The goal of this project is to overcome these
two barriers by using mild hyperthermia to facilitate nanostructure transport to
tumors. The three parts of this research project involve 1) performing in vivo
experimental studies to evaluate the effects of whole body and local mild
hyperthermia on the deposition of nanocarriers in human prostate cancer
xenograft tumors in mice, and to measure temperatures, tumor interstitial
pressure, and local blood perfusion rate during experiments; 2) using microCT to
scan all the tumors resected after the experiments to quantify both the 3-D
nanoparticle distribution and the total amount of nanoparticle deposition in the
tumors; and 3) developing a 3-D theoretical model to quantify nanoparticle
transport across tumor capillaries and nanoparticle diffusion and advection in
the tumor interstitial tissue space, using experimentally measured parameters as
inputs. In the long term, it is anticipated that the experimental data and
computer models can be used to test assumptions and simplifications of multi-
scale modeling, to extract transport properties and distribution, and to
ultimately advance understanding of nanoparticle delivery in tumors with
heterogeneous porous structures.