* 1705649
* GOALI:   Dynamics of Reacting Jets in Cross-Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Tim Lieuwen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 06/30/2020
* USD 276,001.00

Gas turbine power plants are a major enabler for both land-based power
generation and air-breathing aircraft propulsion. These power plants consist of
several components, at the heart of which is the combustor. In a combustor,
rapid mixing of air and fuel is required for efficient combustion and cooling of
combustor parts. This critical feature constitutes the use of the fluid dynamic
benefits of a jet-in-crossflow configuration. In this configuration, a jet is
injected in a perpendicular direction to a crossflow, resulting in complex fluid
mechanic characteristics that can be leveraged for the above applications. Thus,
the broad focus on this project is the fundamental physics in the fluid
mechanics and combustion of a jet-in-crossflow configuration. Understanding
these physics is critical to the design of the next generation clean and
efficient gas turbines for the U.S. aerospace and power generation
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of the proposed work is
to improve the understanding of the dynamics of reacting jets in crossflow. Jets
in crossflow are an important fundamental problem that incorporates partially
premixed flame propagation in highly strained flows, non-premixed flame
autoignition, edge flame propagation, and hydrodynamic stability in reacting
flows. It is an important canonical problem where chemical kinetics and
hydrodynamic stability of the flow are tightly coupled. This project will focus
on two major thrusts. The first thrust will address the question of the impacts
of exothermicity and kinetics on the topology and hydrodynamic stability. In
particular it will address the question of whether the basic topological flow
picture that has been developed in non-reacting flows remain, perhaps with some
quantitative adjustments, or whether and when fundamentally new flow dynamics
emerge. The second thrust will address flame stabilization processes. This
focuses on elucidating the relative roles of flame propagation and autoignition
on flame stabilization and spreading in high temperature crossflows. This work
will utilize a suite of high frequency planar laser diagnostics at high frame
rates. In addition, the research team will also leverage various on-campus
programs to promote STEM education and outreach activities.