* 1705372
* GOALI: Optimal Design and Operation of Reliable Process Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jose Pinto, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 352,372.00

An air separation plant separates atmospheric air into its primary gas
components: nitrogen, oxygen, argon and other less abundant gases. Air
separation plants are also primary source providers for a number of important
industries, such as hospitals, steel mills, and chemical refineries. A major
issue that air separation plants face is the potential for disruption in the
deliveries of their products due to equipment breakdown. The current state of
the art for increasing reliability of these plants and other related chemical
processes is to use simulation tools to assess different design alternatives in
terms of equipment redundancy, additional inventory and preventive maintenance.
Given the very large number of design alternatives, there is a clear need for
developing systematic tools based on optimization that can address these
problems. Furthermore, the study of interactions with other objectives, such as
minimum cost, minimum environmental impact, and maximum safety, is essential if
the ultimate goal is to design sustainable process systems. The proposed
collaboration between an academic research group and an industrial partner,
Praxair, aims to address the problem of how to incorporate reliability in the
optimal design and operation of process systems, a problem that has received
little attention in the literature. This research project will involve summer
internships at Praxair for participating graduate students. The basic
methodologies and findings from this project are being disseminated to
petroleum, chemical and engineering/software companies through the website of
the Center for Advanced Process Decision-making at Carnegie Mellon.
Undergraduate students are involved in this research project, and the research
team is pursuing engineering-based outreach activities targeted towards high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept behind this research project
is based on a general multi-objective optimization framework in which the
minimization of cost and maximization of availability, defined as the percentage
of plant uptime, are included as major objectives. This research project focuses
on mathematical modeling based on mixed-integer nonlinear programming for the
maximization of the availability objective, since reliability is the major
concern in this project. Models that rely on a probability based approach and
are mostly aimed at determining the optimal level of redundancy of process
equipment are being addressed first. These models are useful for the synthesis
stage of a process system. Next, the development of models based on Markov
processes are being considered. These models are more general and well suited
for detailed designs and retrofits, because they handle time dependent
probabilities and inventories and process flows (although they are
computationally expensive, since they work explicitly with discrete states of
the system). The extension of these models for maintenance scheduling and spare
parts inventory is also considered, with objectives such as environmental
impact, safety, flexibility and resiliency. The proposed multi-objective
optimization framework will allow consideration of other objectives such as
safety, environmental impact, flexibility and resiliency.