* 1705653
* Quantification of the pH of Aerosol Droplets via Nanoprobe Based Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Peter Vikesland, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

PI Name: Vikesland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1705653&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric aerosol droplets are well recognized
for their capacity to affect both local-scale as well as global air quality. To
date, efforts to measure the acidity (or basicity) of aerosols at the individual
droplet level have been largely unsuccessful. This effort supports research
conducted to quantify droplet acidity (or basicity) using nanotechnology and
laser-enabled spectroscopy. The expected results will provide an improved
understanding of aerosol droplet chemistry and will thus enhance societal
appreciation of the complexity of aerosol interactions. Both undergraduate and
graduate students will receive training in advanced spectroscopic methods, and
an extensive K-12 outreach effort will be initiated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary research goal of this effort is to quantify the pH of micron-scale
aerosol droplets and evaluate how it affects droplet chemistry. pH is a defining
characteristic of all natural waters; however, the pH of individual aerosolized
droplets has not been well established through direct measurements. In this
effort recently developed novel nanoprobes will be used to probe pH inside
individual micron-scale droplets as well as to investigate the influence of
reactive gases on droplet pH. The PIs will take advantage of the spatial
sensitivity enabled by gold nanoparticle (AuNP) based probes that are entrained
within the confined environment of a 15-40 ìm diameter droplet. By utilizing a
nanoscale optical technique--surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)--the PIs
expect to spectroscopically detect differences in pH in both 2-D and 3-D with
~300 nm resolution. The following three research objectives will be met:
Objective 1: Determine the spatial distribution of pH inside micron-scale
droplets. Objective 2: Determine how pH changes with relative humidity (RH) as
an aerosol is subjected to cycles of efflorescence and deliquescence. Objective
3: Quantify the effect of reactive gases (CO2, SO2, NH3) on droplet pH. Previous
studies have established that gaseous pollutants undergo transformations inside
aerosol droplets. Many such reactions are pH sensitive, and if the preliminary
pH results are correct, these reactions could be either accelerated or
decelerated relative to bulk phase expectations. Such an outcome would have a
major impact on our understanding of aerosol interactions across many
ecosystems. The diverse individuals engaged with this project will contribute to
the scientific workforce, but more importantly they will interact with K-12 and
other groups via outreach activities organized by the Virginia Tech Sustainable
Nanotechnology (VTSuN) program and the NSF-funded NanoEarth Center.