* 1705262
* TWC: Small: Techniques and Tools for General-Purpose Secure Computing and Outsourcing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Marina Blanton, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Susanne Wetzel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 116,513.00

The rapid advancement of techniques for secure computation on protected data
offers a major incentive for development of tools for general-purpose secure
computation that protects data privacy, as opposed to computation of specialized
tasks. The recent emergence of cloud computing and the need to protect privacy
of sensitive data used in outsourced computation serves as another major
motivation for this work. With this in mind, this project targets at developing
a compiler suitable for privacy-preserving execution of any functionality
specified by a user program. Our compiler transforms a program written in an
extension of the C programming language, where data to be protected are marked
as private, into its secure distributed implementation in C, which can be
consecutively compiled into a binary executable by a native compiler. The goal
of the project is to preserve all features of the programming language and
enable efficient implementation of user programs using a number of optimization
techniques. The secure distributed computation is implemented using secure
multi-party techniques on secret-shared data and is suitable for secure
collaborative computation and secure computation
outsourcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These techniques will allow for more secure
cloud computing, even in the presence of attackers. Other broader impacts
include outreach to female middle school girls to increase interest in computer
science, a summer school program for graduate students on secure computation in
the cloud, and involving students from a nearby predominantly African-American
university in the research program.