* 1705287
* Nanofluidics Foundation for Shale Gas Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Rui Qiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 305,724.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the gas recovery and fracking
fluid migration in shale formations. Natural gas trapped in shale formations is
an abundant energy resource. Enabled by production technologies such as
hydraulic fracturing, the recent shale gas boom has transformed the natural gas
market in the U.S. Nevertheless, shale gas production faces many challenges:
profitable production is often hindered by the rapid decline of the gas recovery
rate and the difficulties in managing the hydraulic fracturing fluids ("fracking
fluids") in shale formations. In this project, these challenges are addressed by
developing a fundamental understanding of the transport of gas and fracking
fluids in shale formations at the nanopore scale. The insights gained here will
help improve the production of shale gas and management of fracking fluids,
thereby benefiting both the shale gas industry and the society. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in interdisciplinary research covering
fluid dynamics, interfacial chemistry, and computational engineering.
Newsletters summarizing recent pore-scale research in the shale gas field will
be compiled and sent to simulation practitioners in the industry. A YouTube
channel will be created and maintained to help increase the awareness of the
role of chemistry in fluid dynamics by the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shale
gas recovery is ultimately controlled by gas and fracking fluid transport at the
nanopore level and reliable simulation of shale gas recovery at field-scale must
be built upon sound understanding of transport at the nanopore scale. In this
project, the recovery of single- and multi-component gas from nanopores and the
imbibition of fracking fluids into nanopores will be studied using molecular and
continuum simulations. The study of gas recovery at the pore level will
elucidate the synergistic effects of confinement and gas-wall interactions on
the gas recovery. The study of fracking fluid transport at the pore scale will
clarify how fracking fluid imbibition and gas transport are affected by the
solution chemistry of fracking fluids as well as the size, surface chemistry,
and partial saturation of nanopores. These studies will help further advance the
modeling and simulation of gas recovery and fracking fluid migration in shale
formations. In particular, the gas recovery study will provide theoretical basis
and guidelines for selecting and parameterizing semi-phenomenological pore-scale
gas recovery models; the multiphase transport study will break new ground for
research on the simulation of multiphase transport in shale formations to move
beyond the prevailing framework, which is based mostly on the classical
capillary flows.