* 1705830
* EPRI: Collaborative Research: Hydrogen Production via Electrochemical Reforming of Ethanol in a Proton Exchange Membrane Cell
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Nathaniel Deskins, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 130,139.00

Production of hydrogen from biomass and/or biofuels has been proposed as an
interim method between the current hydrogen production from fossil fuels, such
as methane and coal, and hydrogen production using renewable sources (e.g.,
solar and wind). This project aims to develop a highly energy-efficient process
for hydrogen production in a proton exchange membrane (PEM) cell via the ethanol
electrochemical reforming reaction (EER). Ethanol is an attractive feedstock for
hydrogen production because of the existing infrastructure for its large-scale
production from biomass. The proposed work will investigate the use of partially
oxidized noble metal catalysts as a new group of anode catalysts enabling fast
reaction kinetics (rapid charge transfer) and high efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of hydrogen by the EER process will be
studied in a PEM cell, where the hydrogen evolution reaction happens at the
cathode and the rate-limiting ethanol oxidation reaction happens at the anode.
The hypotheses are: (1) Lattice oxygen from partially oxidized noble metals
(MOx) will be more active to remove poisoning species than adsorbed OH (the
dissociative product of water acting as a common oxidant in electro-catalysis);
(2) The ensemble effect, associated with particular arrangements of the noble
metal (M) and O constituents, may play an important role towards the C-C
splitting of ethanol. The hypotheses will be tested by a combination of
theoretical and experimental investigations: Density functional theory (DFT)
calculations will be performed to study the stability and reactivity towards C-C
splitting on partially oxidized noble metals (MOx, M: Pt, Rh, Ir, Pd and Ru) in
slab and nanoparticle forms. Solution phase synthesis of MOx clusters, predicted
by DFT calculations to have high effectiveness for complete oxidation of
ethanol, will be performed. Structural characterization of the clusters will be
performed using a variety of techniques, including aberration-corrected scanning
transmission electronic microscopy and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) at
National Laboratories. EER kinetics will be evaluated in both half-cells and
single-cells, from which energy efficiency, hydrogen and carbon dioxide
generation rates, and selectivity will be calculated and used to evaluate the
performance of the proposed MOx catalysts