* 1705761
* Fusion of Micro-Array Flow Sensor Data for Smart Cerebral Spinal Fluid Drainage Shunts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Rein Anton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,078.00

Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) shunting is a long-term treatment option for
hydrocephalus, a congenital condition associated with accumulation of cerebral-
spinal fluid in the brain. If left untreated, hydrocephalus leads to
developmental disabilities and death. Implanted cerebrospinal fluid shunts have
been in use since the 1950's; however approximately 39% of shunts fail within
the first year, 53% fail within the first two years, and about 80% fail at some
point after implantation. The goal of this research project is to develop a
"smart" CSF flow sensor, capable of reporting the amount of CSF drained from the
brain after implantation. The proposed solution is based on the combined use of
ultra-sensitive magnetoresistance sensors, radio-frequency identification
technology, and advances in the manufacturing of super paramagnetic micro-
structures. This research is expected to significantly improve the quality of
life of individuals with hydrocephalus, as pending shunt failure can be detected
early to allow correction before adverse health or cognitive effects occur. The
research team also plans to integrate this research into undergraduate and
graduate educational activities and, based on a common goal of developing low
cost medical sensors, develop an undergraduate design program that integrates
business practices into the design process to improve the likelihood of
successful application of the designed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific objective of this proposal is to demonstrate the feasibility of using
giant magneto-resistance sensors in the detection of very slow-moving fluids,
such as cerebral spinal fluid. The latest generation of these sensors, known as
magneto tunneling junction devices, will be used to detect flow-induced motion
of a cilia-like structure inside the lumen of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
Realization of such non-contact measurements requires new sensor architectures
immune to low-frequency noise (sensor drift), rejection of ambient magnetic
interference, and development of an ultra-low power sensor interrogation scheme
allowing for wireless operation. The present effort will investigate the low-
frequency noise sources in MTJ sensors, indirect methods for re-calibration of
the sensor, and will develop an inductively powered flow sensor capable of
resolving CSF flow with 1mL/hr resolution. The knowledge gained will be
applicable not only to hydrocephalus shunts, but to measurement of low-flow
volume systems more generally. In addition, it is expected that there will be a
significant advancement in knowledge regarding magneto tunneling junction
devices themselves.