* 1705058
* RI: Medium: An Interaction Manager for Language and Force Exhanges in Human-Robot Physical Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Barbara DiEugenio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,048,618.00

This project will develop a computational and data-driven framework for a robot
assistant to collaborate with humans in everyday tasks that involve physical
interaction, such as handing over or moving an object together. Using models
learned from observing humans perform such tasks, the robot will engage in back-
and-forth communication, where turns can be both spoken utterances and force
exchanges. Robots that can collaborate to perform physical tasks could provide
assistance in a variety of settings, such as performing household chores,
supporting the elderly to remain independent, and assisting human workers on the
factory floor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformative idea of the proposal is
to generalize the methodology of dialog processing to include physical
interaction. The fundamental challenge is how to bridge the gap between the
symbolic processing of language and the low-level control of force exchanges.
The concept of interaction primitives (IPs) is introduced to model physical
interactions. Further, a planning and execution framework in the form of an
interaction manager is proposed. The proposed interaction manager broadens the
traditional dialogue modeling paradigm so that information can flow from more
abstract to lower levels, and vice versa: language affects physical interaction,
and physical interaction affects what is said. To build the interaction manager,
a targeted data collection where humans perform tasks of interest will be
performed. Since physical interaction data is invariably sparse, statistical
learning on the data will be complemented by model-based generalizations,
allowing robots to collaborate with humans in highly variable and unstructured
environments. The research will inform new course development, and involve
several undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;