* 1705620
* Molecular Simulation Study of Rock-Water-Oil Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Jeffrey Errington, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Oil recovery is an important world-wide enterprise with significant social,
economic, and environmental impacts. When oil is extracted from an underground
reservoir, only about 10% is removed via pressure and pumping. Secondary and
tertiary recovery methods are used to extract the remainder of the oil, and
these involve physical and chemical stimulation of the oil well, respectively.
One such stimulation technique is the injection of a high salinity brine or
surfactants (soaps) into the subsurface. These chemicals not only displace the
oil, but also alter the chemical interaction, or "wetting", of the oil with
subsurface rock. Decreasing the chemical interaction by which the rock "holds
onto" the oil facilitates oil recovery. How wetting behavior evolves with
changing reservoir conditions is not fully understood. This project uses
computational tools to probe molecular interactions that dictate the wetting
behavior and to elucidate the connection between the larger environment of the
reservoir with the microscopic details of the rock, oil and brine/surfactant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses molecular simulations to probe
wetting phenomena, including molecular interactions at the brine-oil and brine-
mineral interface. These interfacial properties are known to affect capillary
pressure, which is the key determinant in the wettability of porous rock. The
project also quantifies the extent to which acids, bases, and asphaltenes adsorb
onto the rock surface, and the potential of this adsorption to change both rock
surface chemistry and rock-brine-oil interfacial interactions. The extent to
which wettability evolves with temperature, surface concentration, and the
chemical identity of the surface will elucidate how wettability evolves with
changing reservoir conditions. The role of surfactants in altering interfacial
interactions is also being explored. As this system is quite complex, the
project goal is to develop quantitative relationships that connect macroscopic
properties to microscopic structure. These relationships will enable the
rational design of safe, efficient, and environmentally friendly solutions for
oil extraction. Students are being trained on surface thermodynamics,
statistical mechanics, and computer simulations. Outreach activities to area
high schools are educating students about the impact of engineering studies on
society and everyday life.