* 1705139
* Chaotic Dynamics of Inner Ear Hair Cells
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Dolores Bozovic, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2020
* USD 539,855.00

Hearing loss affects about 30 million patients in United States. Since loss or
damage to hair cells of the inner ear can lead to profound deafness, it is
important to understand the mechanisms of their proper functioning, as a
prerequisite to progress in future clinical treatments. This study is aimed at
elucidating how this biological sensor works, knowing which can hence aid in
future studies of how it fails. Nonlinear processes and active amplification
have been shown to be key to the extreme sensitivity of audition. While many
studies have explored the various potential mechanisms of amplification, the
role of either deterministic or stochastic noise has received comparatively
little attention. This project is hence complementary to most of the work
currently performed in the field, and could provide some of the missing
information on how the auditory and vestibular systems achieve the sensitivity
in the presence of fluctuations. This approach requires a combination of
experimental and theoretical studies to address this long-open problem. The PI
proposes to combine educational efforts with the research program, to teach
undergraduate students topics of relevance for the physics of living systems.
Building on prior courses, she will introduce a new class that will expose
students to the applications of statistical mechanics and nonlinear dynamics to
a broad range of open questions in biology. She also proposes to launch new
workshops, aimed at bringing together scientists from different fields of
theoretical physics and biologists studying the auditory
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hair cells of the inner ear are the biological
sensors that detect displacements induced by air-borne or ground-borne
vibrations and transduce them into electrical signals. Their responsiveness is
crucially dependent on an active process that amplifies oscillations induced by
the incoming sound. One of the signatures of the active process, hair cell
bundles, have been shown to exhibit limit cycle oscillations, spontaneous motion
in the absence of any input. The PI hypothesizes that the innate motility
exhibits chaotic behavior, and proposes to test how chaos impacts the
sensitivity of detection. Long recordings of hair cells of the bullfrog sacculus
will be obtained in vitro, and analytic tools from dynamic systems theory will
be applied to extract the Lyapunov exponents, construct Poincare maps, and
estimate the Kolmogorov entropy characterizing the motion. The hair cells will
then be subject to mechanical stimulation of varying intensity and duration, to
observe how the chaotic regime is impacted by external signals. Pharmacological
and electrical manipulation will also be used to poise the cells in different
dynamical states. The goal is to determine whether and how this biological
system harnesses chaos to enhance its detection sensitivity. Estimates of the
passive mechanical properties of a hair bundle indicate that its thermal
fluctuations in water should be almost an order of magnitude higher than the
detection threshold. The PI proposes to study the role of noise in the response
of hair bundles, and specifically whether it can aid in the detection of applied
signals. She aims to explain how sensitive mechanical detection could be
performed in a system immersed in an aqueous medium, maintained at room or
higher temperatures, and hence subject to significant thermal fluctuations. The
study will provide insight into the fundamental mechanism of hearing, as well as
providing a general model for the role of chaos in the sensitivity of detection
by an active system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics
and the Neural Cluster in the Integrative Organismal Systems Division.