* 1705924
* RUI:   Restoration of lead (Pb) contaminated soils through chemically enhanced phytoextraction by switchgrass (Panicum virgatum)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Thomas McElroy, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 160,453.00

Despite great progress in limiting new lead (Pb) sources of emissions, chronic
lead hazards remain particularly in urban areas.Â  In U.S. cities, diffuse lead
in soils (lead that has been dispersed in soils from a source such as leaded
gasoline combustion exhaust) is a persistent reservoir of lead, contributing to
long term chronic exposure. Efforts to develop efficient lead removal techniques
have included a number of biological and geochemical manipulations that each,
alone, has produced significant incremental improvements. A goal of this project
is to combine the individual factors affecting lead uptake to increase the
efficiency of lead removal from soils in a common, fast growing model plant
(switchgrass). The project researchers are investigating a series of soil
amendments, including a fungicide, metal chelator, and plant growth regulator,
for improving lead removal from the soil and concentrating it into the above-
ground parts of the plant. The plants could then be removed and disposed of in a
safe manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to develop efficient lead
phytoremediation techniques have included soil fungicide (benomyl) treatments to
down-regulate the metal exclusion actions of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF)
and the application of lead chelating agents, such as citric acid, in soil to
mobilize lead and enhance its uptake to plant biomass. In such cases, however,
the phytotoxicity of lead limits plant life and creates a limit on uptake
capacity. The project researchers are studying whether phytoextraction of lead
can be enhanced further by a coordinated application of foliar iron (Fe), plant
growth regulator and exogenous nitric oxide donors. These manipulations may
serve to increase the phytoextraction efficiency of the high biomass producing
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum). The research team is using state-of-the-art
experimental greenhouse facilities at Kennesaw State University, along with
contaminated soils sampled from urban Atlanta and a former Superfund site in
Cedertown, GA. Experimental conditions are being systematically varied among
soil fungicide, chelate, and foliar application of iron, plant growth regulator
and exogenous nitric oxide (NO) donor, singly and in combination, to optimize
each and test for synergistic effects. High throughput DNA sequences of AMF
assemblages in lead-contaminated and non-contaminated soils will be extracted
and analyzed to characterize AMF species composition. The chemical analysis of
lead, iron, phosphorous (P), and the full suite of macro- and micro-nutrients
are being determined in soil and plant tissue samples. The research project has
the potential for contributing to scientific knowledge on phytoremediation while
also training undergraduate student researchers in high level research. Results
of this project have the potential to dramatically improve phytoextraction rates
and guide the development of a soil restoration technique appropriate for
technology transfer.