* 1705135
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Privacy-Aware Trustworthy Control as a Service for the Internet of Things (IoT)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mani Srivastava, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 850,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) includes a variety of devices such as smart
appliances, cars, and other physical systems that are deeply embedded in our
everyday lives and that are at risk from new kinds of threats to security and
privacy from hackers or state actors. In IoT systems, sensors are used to probe
the physical state of the system (e.g., temperature in a building or rotational
speed of a wheel of a car) and then software control systems use algorithms to
determine appropriate adjustments to the system (e.g., run the air conditioning
for 5 minutes or apply the brakes). The project is focused on protecting those
control systems and algorithms to ensure security and privacy for
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses trustworthy and privacy-aware
control architectures for IoT through mechanisms drawn from control,
cryptography, software, and hardware. These include: (i) A framework for
formally reasoning about safety and privacy properties of control software in
conjunction with dynamical models of the physical world and associated sensing
and actuation channels; (ii) Lightweight domain-specific mechanisms, for
policing flow of information through software applications, while leveraging the
semantics of machine learning and control algorithms, physics of the system, and
numerical properties; (iii) Enforcing desired safety and information leakage
properties via a combination of principled sensor data perturbation, control
algorithms optimized for efficient computation over encrypted data, and a
hardware-supported trusted computing base tailored to protecting sensed data and
control algorithm parameters; (iv) A resilient control and timing infrastructure
that protects against attacks on timing information through a hybrid use of edge
and cloud resources and physical models. The success of the mechanisms is being
assessed on experimental testbeds for smart home, industrial automation and
smart vehicles, but have broader applicability to many other IoT applications.
The project team is also creating a new graduate class on IoT security and
developing educational material on IoT security for high-schoolers through the
Los Angeles Computing Circle initiative at the University of California - Los
Angeles.