* 1705728
* GOALI: WERF: WRF: Mainstream Nitritation and Polyhydroxybutyrate-co-valerate Synthesis in a Next-generation Water Resource Recovery Facility (WRRF)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Erik Coats, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 423,721.00

PI Name: Erik R. Coats&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1705728&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resource recovery from waste has been advocated for
decades. Intensified resource recovery is now being advocated by and within the
wastewater industry; wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) have even been re-
branded as water resource recovery facilities (WRRFs) in an effort to emphasize
resource value. Linked with resource recovery processes is the need to improve
WRRF efficiency -- specifically in the use of energy and removal of nitrogen (N)
and phosphorus (P). This project will advance a deeper understanding and
knowledge of how bacteria present in WRRFs convert ammonia to nitrite; by
stopping the biological reaction at nitrite (in contrast to the more
conventional conversion fully to nitrate), energy savings can be realized. The
PIs will investigate this process within the context of achieving maximum
biological removal of wastewater N and P. Complementing the wastewater nutrient
removal research, investigations will be conducted to recover wastewater carbon
as a commercially viable plastic; this resource recovery alternative could
enhance the overall economics of WRRFs. The research project will engage two
graduate students with both an environmental engineering professor and
practicing engineers; the combined experience will provide students with
significant depth and breadth in the analysis and design of wastewater resource
recovery systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the following
research questions: (i) Post-anoxic biological nutrient removal (BNR) with
nitritation: What operational conditions must be applied to sustain this
enrichment and maintain nitritation? How robust/resilient is the nitritating
post-anoxic BNR process? What is the relative speciation of Nitrobacter spp. and
Nitrospira spp. under sustained nitritation, and how is mainstream nitritation
sustained with nitrite oxidizing bacteria (NOB) present? (ii)
Polyhydroxybutyrate-co-valerate (PHBV) synthesis: How do interactions between
carbon/electron pathways (in particular the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) cycle
and PHBV synthesis) affect how mixed microbial consortia (MMC) maximize volatile
fatty acid (VFA) conversion to PHBV? What is the relationship between these
interactions and substrate addition/bulk solution VFA concentrations under
maximum PHBV synthesis conditions? How can metabolomics data inform process
operations? The following hypotheses address the research questions: (1) Stable
and resilient mainstream nitritation can be sustained with an enrichment of
Nitrobacter spp. over Nitrospira spp. The targeted enrichment and outcome
(nitritation) can be achieved through the control of the aeration period. (2) By
controlling bulk-solution VFA concentrations in the PHBV batch reactor, maximum
conversion of VFAs to PHBV can be achieved. This study will generate knowledge
to advance a new technology such that enhanced N and P removal can be more
reliably accomplished through sustainable biological means with a reduced energy
footprint. Collaboration with the city and an industrial partner will achieve
proper vetting of the research through critical review of laboratory and pilot-
scale operations.