* 1705050
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Large-Scale Characterization of DNS Abuse
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Stefan Savage, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,200,000.00

The domain name system (DNS) is one of the most critical pieces of Internet
infrastructure in use today. It underlies how we name nearly all Internet
resources, such as "nsf.gov", and its correct operation is implicitly assumed
both by end users and in the design of many important applications such as email
and the World Wide Web. Unfortunately, DNS is also abused in a wide variety of
ways to support criminal activities such as spam, phishing, fraud, and host
compromise. The goal of this research is to develop infrastructure for the
comprehensive and frequent auditing of the domain name system as a basis for
discovering and understanding the impact of abuse and attacks on the health of
the DNS and the Internet as a whole, and how changes in the domain name system
facilitate new kinds of abuse and attacks. Given the indiscriminate nature of
Internet abuse, ensuring the vitality of the DNS ecosystem can positively
benefit virtually all Internet users. The project itself will also create
educational opportunities for students at a variety of levels, expanding the
research skills of postdoc, graduate, and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will perform large-scale
measurement of many sources of data which, when combined, will provide a global
perspective on the health of the DNS, and develop analysis techniques for
scalably identifying and characterizing the nature of DNS abuse. We will
comprehensively survey DNS to capture the bindings of all key records. We will
crawl registered domains in all top-level domains for which we can obtain data,
and regularly repeat this survey over time to look for changes. We will scan
resources linked to domains, including Web sites, mail servers, login and
application servers, any certificates that they provide, linked registration
records, results of search engine queries and contemporaneous data from both a
range of threat intelligence and passive DNS feeds. We will perform such
measurements from a variety of geographically diverse IP addresses to capture
differences due to national DNS infrastructure and cache poisoning attacks. We
will build tools to process this considerable amount of data to efficiently
identify changes in DNS mapping state and characterize abusive behavior.
Finally, we will produce an overall analysis of DNS abuse Internet-wide, as
revealed by our measurements, in which we capture the prevalence of different
kinds of abuse, and what the abusers are using it for.