* 1705687
* GOALI:  Ultra-selective Molecular Sieve Membranes: Novel Synthesis and Performance at Refinery Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Tsapatsis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

An estimated 10-15% of the U.S. energy consumption is devoted to industrial
chemical separations. Petroleum refining fractionates crude oil to make
gasoline, diesel, fuel oil, as well as chemical precursors that serve as the
feedstocks for the majority of consumer goods. Among these petroleum-derived
chemical feedstocks is a chemical intermediate, called para-xylene, that is
mainly used for the production of poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) plastic
fibers, films, bottles and packaging materials. With the widespread use of PET,
the demand for para-xylene will exceed 60 million tons, with a market value
exceeding 60 billion US dollars, by 2022. Prior to its conversion to textiles
and packaging plastics, para-xylene must be separated other very similar
molecules, called isomers, that differ only by the positioning of a few atoms
within the molecule. Given their near-identical chemical structure, it is
impractical to separate para-xylene and its isomers from each other by
distillation, as their volatilities are very similar. The current state of the
art to purify para-xylene is to utilize adsorption and/or crystallization, but
both processes are energy intensive. This research project is developing new
membranes with high permeance and selectivity that allow continuous separation
of para-xylene from its isomers with improved energy efficiency compared with
the current state-of-the-art. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zeolites are hydrated
aluminosilicates that are commonly used as cation exchange resins, catalysts,
and due to their highly controlled pore size, molecular sieves. Zeolites are
stable in organic liquids and vapors at high temperatures and pressures, but
until recently, were found only as three-dimensional crystals, which are
unsuitable for making thin membrane films. Current zeolite membranes remain too
thick to allow high flux of a target molecule and are thus not cost-competitive
with other technologies. This research projects is exploring fundamental
research on zeolite nanosheet synthesis to make the zeolite crystal ultra thin,
which will enable a 10-fold reduction in membrane thickness and a corresponding
10-fold increase in permeance through the membrane. Simultaneously, the research
is seeking to reduce membrane defects which is anticipated to increase the
separation-factor of para-xylene relative to its isomers 20-fold. Through
collaboration with the GOALI industrial partner, Exxon-Mobil, the first-ever
systematic permeation measurements are being conducted at the high temperatures
and high xylene pressures found at industrially relevant conditions and being
coupled with membrane microstructure analysis and quantitative permeation
modeling. The work is using electronic structure calculations and molecular
simulations to aid in the characterization of the membranes and to predict
accurate adsorption-diffusion properties, which will aid in further material
design and process optimization. This research on alternative separation
technologies is being incorporated as examples in the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum and as projects in the process and product design senior
undergraduate courses at the University of Minnesota.