* 1705255
* Collaborative Research: Novel Materials and Reactor Design for Coupled Electrolytic Hydrogen Production and Nitrate Removal with Resource Recovery from Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* David Cwiertny, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 145,444.00

1706797 / 1705255&lt;br/&gt;PIs : Werth, Charles J. / Jawahar Hussaini, Syed
Mubeen &lt;br/&gt;Institutions: University of Texas at Austin / University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Novel Materials and Reactor Design
for Coupled Electrolytic Hydrogen Production and Nitrate Removal With Resource
Recovery from Drinking Water&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrate is the world's most
ubiquitous groundwater pollutant, and its management is recognized as one of the
Grand Challenges by the National Academy of Engineering. Catalytic treatment has
emerged as a more sustainable option for nitrate removal from drinking water,
but its implementation has been stymied by a lack of scientific knowledge and
innovation in new materials that directly address challenges in reactor
performance and scale-up. Specifically, nitrate treatment in scalable reactors
is limited by hydrogen delivery to reactive catalysts sites. The PIs propose a
high risk/high reward approach that is based on generating adsorbed atomic
hydrogen in situ via electroactive catalyst supports. The overriding hypothesis
is that atomic hydrogen can be electrolytically generated at the same (or
directly adjacent to) site where nitrate reduction occurs, and this generation
can be balanced with nitrate reduction to eliminate hydrogen mass transfer
limitations, optimize hydrogen use, minimize energy consumption, and recover
value added resources ammonium and chlorine. The specific objectives of the
proposed work are: 1) To identify the fundamental bulk material and surface
chemical properties responsible for the synthesis of carbon-based catalyst
supports with high- electrical conductivity, metal dispersion, water
permeability, and strength. 2) To elucidate reaction mechanisms and kinetics of
coupled electrolytic hydrogen generation and nitrate reduction processes in
batch and flow-through reactors, and to identify the fundamental properties of
new catalytic materials that optimize these processes. 3) To evaluate the
economic and environmental sustainability of a hybrid ion exchange -
electrochemical reactor for nitrate removal from drinking
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach involves novel synthesis and
electro/catalytic experiments that aim to elucidate structure/property
correlations, reaction mechanisms, and optimal reactor conditions for efficient
nitrate removal coupled with ammonia recovery from simulated drinking water, and
an economic and environmental life cycle analyses of the technology coupled to
ion exchange waste brine treatment and reuse that will serve as feedback for
process optimization. The proposed approach for hydrogen delivery required for
nitrate reduction that eliminates hydrogen gas to liquid mass transfer
limitations is innovative. Potential scientific advancements include: (i)
foundational insights and structure-activity relationships to guide synthesis of
new cathodic materials that efficiently generate hydrogen and reduce nitrate at
catalytically reactive sites; (ii) the design of a novel electrolytic- based
reactor that integrates these robust cathodic materials into a packed-bed flow
system; (iii) integrated resource recovery of agriculturally valuable ammonium,
as well as chlorine for catalyst fouling mitigation and water disinfection; and
(iv) the development and dissemination of an integrated model that allows scale
up for a cost and environmental impact assessment for new technology
development. Proposed educational, outreach and engagement activities include:
(i) the recruitment and education of minority and women undergraduate
engineering students in the laboratories of the PIs; (ii) interdisciplinary
training of graduate students at Iowa in a program designed to address food,
energy, and water (FEW) resource sustainability; (iii) the exposure of junior
high and high school students to engineering design for water treatment through
engineering open houses at UT Austin; and (iv) the development of a new teaching
modules and dissemination to water utilities through an industry collaborator.