* 1705630
* Computational Investigation of the Effects of Surfactants on Bubble Dynamics, Bubble Swarm Interactions and Turbulent Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Samuel W. Welch, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2021
* USD 333,746.00

Surface active materials or surfactants in two-phase, bubbly flow mixtures are
used in a number of areas of important scientific and technological interest,
including those in chemical, bio-molecular, power and petroleum engineering
applications. They can significantly change the interfacial dynamics, fluid
motion and structure of macroscale bubble aggregates, and are known to cause
clustering of bubbles and turbulence suppression near walls. However, the
fundamental details of the underlying physical mechanisms associated with such
observations are not yet completely known, and elucidation through modeling will
have direct impact on the design and scale-up and the operation of engineering
systems. Such complex fluid systems involve both bulk and molecular effects,
which are mediated by the interfacial dynamics and driven by the fluid motion
present major challenges. Their understanding, especially for bubble swarm
interactions in the inertia dominated flow regimes, is generally limited to
experimental visualization results and empirical data. This project aims to
perform large scale simulations using innovative computational techniques at the
forefront in their development for the investigation and elucidation of the
underlying processes in prototypical flows of surfactant-laden two-phase bubbly
systems and swarms. Successful implementation of this research will yield new
tools, rich sets of data and physical insights under unprecedented conditions
that will be of interest to a wide community of researchers. The project will
impact the education in a number of ways, including interdisciplinary training
and research participation of graduate and undergraduate students. The results
of this proposed research, which lies at the borderline between
mechanical/chemical engineering, and physics and computational science, will be
disseminated broadly in journal papers and conferences, and the new methods and
codes developed under this project will be readily available as open sources.

This project has the potential to transform the way the surfactant effects are
modeled, qualitative and quantitative understanding of the surfactant-laden
bubbly flows in various nonlinear flow regimes. The application of a three-
dimensional multiphase flow model using a cascaded lattice Boltzmann (LB)
formulation is at the cutting edge of current research and will potentially make
fundamental advances in the modeling and simulation capabilities to study the
role of surfactant effects on convection dominated bubble dynamics and swarm
interactions. Its kinetic origins facilitate incorporation of mesoscopic models
and the LB method is remarkably successful in complex fluid flow applications
with natural parallelization capabilities. The surfactants and the bulk fluids
are represented as dipoles and van der Waals fluids, respectively, which, in
turn, generate surfactant-fluid, surfactant-surfactant mean-field force
interactions at mesoscopic scales that govern the alignment of the surface
agents, phase segregation and surface tension effects. The use of a central
moment formulation in the cascaded LB method offers enhanced physical and
numerical simulation capabilities. This innovative computational approach will
be brought to bear on performing a systematic study of the effect of the
characteristic parameters to elucidate physical understanding for the following
prototypical cases: surfactant-laden bubble breakup processes in homogeneous
turbulence, surfactant effects on the motion of a single bubble in a shear-
driven turbulent channel flow, and buoyancy-driven motion of a single and a pair
of surfactant-laden bubbles to study their path instabilities, rise velocities,
drag and lift forces and wake structures. This will offer researchers
fundamental insights into the underlying mechanisms involved, including the role
of surfactants on cluster formation in swarms and phase diagrams based on
characteristic parameters delineating the various regimes of bubble paths and
deformations thereby clarifying the role of surfactants on path instabilities
(Leonardo's paradox). Another major outcome will be in the development of
predictive closure relations incorporating surfactant effects for mixture
models.