* 1705578
* Physical principles of magnetic extraction from microfluidic droplets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Eric Brouzes, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,830.00

New treatments for disease are enabled by technological advances that create,
isolate, characterize, and test novel therapeutic agents and cellular reagents.
To accelerate testing of millions of candidate therapeutics, researchers have
miniaturized typical laboratory techniques onto small chips called microfluidic
devices. Microfluidics control and handle extremely small volumes of fluids in
networks of micron-size conduits. A sample of interest is immersed in a tiny
droplet of highly stable carrier oil to be precisely controlled through the
conduits at high speed. This approach has enabled millions of parallel tests to
study treatments for cancer, autoimmune disorders, and many other diseases.
However, recovery of the sample of interest from the oil is difficult, and is
often essential for additional analysis or processing. To enable this
technology, this project will use tiny magnets to extract the samples of
interest from the oil carrier droplets, and elucidate the fundamental physics
that govern the behavior of droplets in a magnetic field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extract and capture molecules from
droplets using functionalized magnetic beads. The beads will be concentrated
into a corner of the droplet with an external magnetic field. Then, the droplet
will be split to concentrate the beads into a smaller, daughter droplet. This
project will provide a fundamental understanding of the complex hydrodynamic,
magnetic, and capillary forces in this extraction process. The coupling between
hydrodynamic and magnetic forces in flowing droplets will be correlated to bead
dispersion. The capillary number will be related to non-parallel droplet
splitting. The developed theory will be validated by magnetic extraction of
messenger ribonucleic acid (RNA) from cell lysates, followed by quantification.
This project will use microfluidics as a teaching tool to demonstrate physics
fundamentals and engineering design, with outreach to underrepresented minority
students and educators who drive statewide curriculum.