* 1705746
* First-Principles Design of Coke-Resistant Dehydrogenation Catalysts for Valorization of Light Hydrocarbon Feedstocks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Fuat Celik, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The project will study the mechanism of poisoning of catalysts used to convert
light hydrocarbon gases to higher value products. Specifically it will address
coke formation - the process by which the hydrocarbons break down on the surface
of the catalysts to form carbonaceous deposits that deactivate the catalyst.
Mechanistic understanding will be derived from both theoretical predictions and
experimental measurements, and will be used to predict, synthesize, and evaluate
new catalyst formulations that are resistant to deactivation via coke formation.
Poison-resistant dehydrogenation catalysts are needed to ensure effective
utilization of the huge gas reserves associated with the Nation's shale
resources. Efficient, durable, and economically attractive catalysts are
essential for upgrading the light-gases to feedstocks of value to the energy and
chemical sectors of the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
fundamental understanding of the interaction between surface species and Pt-
alloy dehydrogenation catalysts that give rise to their selectivity towards
alkenes and for coke deposition during the high-temperature dehydrogenation of
light alkanes. While the formation of the alkene has been studied, the mechanism
of coke formation is unknown. Density Functional Theory (DFT) will be used to
generate potential energy surfaces and kinetic activation barriers for the
dissociation of alkanes to form carbonaceous surface species, thereby revealing
how this mechanism is influenced by the electronic and geometric structure of
the catalyst. Corresponding experimental studies will be carried out to
understand the coking mechanism via analysis of the molecular fragments
deposited on the catalyst surface. The insights from DFT and experimental
characterization will be exploited to design new catalyst alloy structures and
compositions with enhanced resistance to deactivation. Predicted designs will be
experimentally validated by synthesizing the novel catalysts and testing their
catalytic performance. Light alkanes, such as ethane and propane, produced as
byproducts of hydrocarbon processing, and found naturally as minority components
of natural gas, have little commercial value, and are sometime flared or burned
only for their caloric value. Dehydrogenation of these hydrocarbons to their
corresponding alkenes would produce higher-value intermediates especially
attractive as chemical and polymer precursors. The results from this work will
serve to build a diverse future chemical industry workforce through
undergraduate chemical engineering curricula and recruiting of researchers from
the diverse Rutgers undergraduate student body to contribute to the project.