* 1705321
* High Resolution 4D In-Operando Imaging of High Energy Density Battery Electrode Cycling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Shawn Litster, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,489.00

This research addresses the challenges faced with advanced anodes for next
generation lithium batteries for transportation applications, using a
combination of advanced imaging and diagnostics. The research will establish and
utilize an ultra-high spatial and temporal resolution test bed for 4D (3D space
+ time) in-operando imaging of batteries using nano-scale X-ray computed
tomography (nano-CT). The scientific objective is to elucidate the failure
mechanisms of the most promising anode chemistries for electric and hybrid
vehicles, including Li metal, tin (Sn), and silicon (Si) alloying anodes. The
results of this research could have significant benefits to advance battery
technologies with Li metal, Si, and Sn anodes, which have the potential to
significantly surpass current Li-ion battery technologies in terms of
performance and cost. If successful, these batteries could rapidly advance the
adoption of electric vehicles for reduced emissions, greater efficiency, and
increased domestic energy security. The PI will support the research experiences
of graduate and undergraduate students, integrate the research with courses, and
communicate the work to the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Li metal
anodes, the in-operando imaging experiments are focused on dendrite nucleation
and initial growth at high resolution in standard electrolytes. The imaging will
utilize the laboratory-scale nano-scale resolution (50 nm) X-ray computed
tomography (nano-CT) instrument. The instrument features Zernike phase contrast
optics for imaging low Z materials like Li. A key advantage of nano-CT versus
transmission or scanning electron microscopy is there is no need for vacuum and
standard electrolytes can be used. In addition, the nano-CT images large volumes
that match electrode length scales rather than the thin slices of liquid TEM
cells. The experiments focus on the controlled introduction of micro/nano-scale
physical and chemical features and characterizing their impact on problematic
electroplating and the control of alloying in Si and Sn anodes. A key goal is to
identify the surface and particle features that destabilize electrodes and yield
dendrite nucleation and Li-alloying particle fracture. The 4D mapping of alloy
phase nucleation and propagation will offer new insight into the stable phases
of those systems, the particle/electrode morphology effects, and particle-
particle interactions. The fundamental knowledge extracted from this imaging can
then be applied to advancing the performance and safety of these electrodes.