* 1705706
* Model predictive control under model structure uncertainty for stochastic systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ali Mesbah, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,492.00

Model uncertainty due to inadequate model structure and/or parameters is
prevalent in model-based control. In various control applications, the time-
varying nature of system dynamics (due to changes in plant and/or disturbance
dynamics, or occurrence of system faults and failures) typically increases the
uncertainty associated with a system model identified during controller
commissioning. The increased model uncertainty over time can eventually lead to
degradation of the closed-loop control performance, which will often necessitate
some form of model maintenance to restore the control performance. The
overarching goal of this research is to develop a framework for integrated
stochastic optimal control and active learning of uncertain systems to
facilitate online model structure adaptation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
research objective of this project is to investigate two different classes of
model structure uncertainty problems: Class I-several rival model structures
exist for a system (e.g., due to unknown reaction kinetics, or occurrence of
system faults) and it is unknown which model structure provides the most
accurate description of system dynamics; and Class II-the dynamics of an
intrinsically stochastic system are described by a series of models across an
operating region (e.g., each model represents a different operating mode) and it
is unknown when the transition between the system models occurs. The proposed
research will focus on the development of stochastic model predictive control
(SMPC) formulations with integrated learning capability for active model
structure adaptation for both Classes I and II. Inspired by the dual control
paradigm, three research tasks will be pursued: 1. Development of a
computationally tractable framework for stochastic optimal control with
integrated input design for active model structure discrimination; 2.
Development of a SMPC framework that actively switches between different model
structures as a stochastic system transitions between different modes/behaviors;
and 3. Demonstration of the effectiveness of the SMPC approaches for real-time
control of an atmospheric-pressure plasma jet (APPJ) through closed-loop
experiments. Prototypical examples of applications of the plasma jet under study
include treatment of heat-sensitive (bio)materials and medical therapy. The
proposed educational and outreach activities include mentoring undergraduate
students, curriculum development for outreach purposes, and conducting science
lessons in an underserved school district.