* 1705958
* Elucidating the True Role of Surface Microtexturing in Friction Reduction and Enhanced Convective Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Carlos Hidrovo Chavez, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 308,860.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate the role that surface microtexturing
(roughness) has on friction reduction and convective (flow-based) heat transfer.
Understanding flow behavior and heat transfer interactions with microtexturing
will have significant impact on the general area of superhydrophobic (water
repelling) surfaces, particularly for friction reduction and thermal management
purposes. The results of this research should have major implications for
microscopic flow systems used in electronics cooling and portable biochemical
diagnostics applications, as well as larger scale flow systems used in climate
control and power generation applications. This project also provides new
classroom materials for courses that the researchers teach as well as outreach
activities geared towards elementary school audiences. An undergraduate summer
internship program aimed Northeastern University freshmen and sophomores from
groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields is being established to prepare
them for future careers in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The governing
physics behind the flow within surface microgeometry for different wetting
degrees, gas-liquid interface immobilization, and Re conditions is being studied
and analyzed. A multi-task research program is in place that includes thermo-
hydraulic and optical diagnostics characterization of microtextured samples,
numerical simulations of single and two-phase flow with different boundary
conditions, and microgeometry optimization of the microtexturing. The project is
comprised of the following specific thrusts: (1) Development of an experimental
infrastructure to characterize pressure-flow rate behavior, slip velocity,
fluid/wall temperature, and wall heat flux for different wetting and thermal
conditions. These results are being validated against numerical simulations and
analysis; (2) Assessment of the friction reduction characteristics of the
microtextured samples under varying degrees of wetting due to pressure and
temperature effects, and under different degrees of gas-liquid interface
immobilization; and (3) Characterization of friction reduction on the convective
heat transfer of the microtextured microchannels, addressing the tradeoffs
between reduced thermal diffusion in the gap space and enhanced thermal
advection due to the friction reduction brought about by said gap spaces.