* 1705397
* Collaborative Research: Combining Models and Experiment for Quantitative Characterization of Electrocatalytic Carbon Dioxide Reduction on Doped Ceria
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* David Mebane, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 311,904.00

The project investigates a high-temperature electrochemical approach for
converting the carbon in carbon dioxide (CO2) gas to higher value carbon-
containing products such as hydrocarbon fuels, thereby serving as a critical
component in eventual closed carbon-cycle processes for renewable energy
generation. Specifically, the project will investigate the reduction of carbon
dioxide to carbon monoxide (CO) on high-temperature cerium oxide based
electrodes utilizing a combination of experimental techniques, theoretical
models, and statistical methods to distinguish between various reaction
mechanisms that have been proposed but remain unverified. The resulting
understanding will provide guidance for designing solid oxide electrodes with
improved efficiency and durability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin-film test cells
with ceria working electrodes on yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) electrolytes
will be fabricated, exposed to CO and CO2-containing gases and polarized at high
temperature. The potential gradient in the film caused by the polarization
yields a gradient in the surface potential as a function of distance from the
current collector. These changes in surface potential - a quantity closely
related to the concentrations of active intermediates on the ceria surface -
will be measured, during cell operation, with sub-100 nm lateral resolution
utilizing in-operando high-temperature scanning surface potential microscopy
(HT-SSPM). These data, along with full-cell electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy data (EIS), will be collected for a matrix of different
experimental conditions including changes in gas composition, temperature,
applied cell potential, dopant concentration, and thermal aging.
Electrocatalytic phase-field modeling (EPFM), which couples mechanistic models
of the catalytic reaction with the material behavior of the ceria electrode,
will be quantitatively calibrated to the entire experimental dataset using
Bayesian model-based analysis (BMA). Models generated and conclusions drawn
during the course of this project will be useful for further development of
high-temperature, mixed ionic-electronic conducting catalysts. The unique
coupling of state-of-the-art in-operando HT-SSPM and EPFM methods is made
possible by Bayesian calibration, which quantitatively links large experimental
datasets and complex models, leading to estimates of model parameters (with
uncertainty quantification) along with assessments of the model fitness in light
of the data. BMA also affords the opportunity to incorporate existing
measurements or calculations (including quantum calculations) of key parameters
in the analysis. In addition to the technical elements, the project will include
a lab activity for high school physics students that will be developed in the
researchers' local communities and publicized nationally.