* 1705968
* Probing Anomalous Nanoparticle Dynamics in Polymer Solutions with Simulation and Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Jacinta Conrad, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2021
* USD 329,953.00

Nanoparticles are used as additives to make composite materials with specific
mechanical, thermal, and optical properties. Controlling the transport and
distribution of the nanoparticles during processing is critical to obtaining
desired properties. This award will support research into the transport and
distribution of nanoparticles in polymeric fluids. The project will focus on the
diffusion and flow-driven transport of nanoparticles in the case where the
nanoparticles are comparable in size to the size of the polymer molecules in the
fluid. The research will combine experiments that image particle motions in
polymeric fluids with computer simulations that reveal various mechanisms of
nanoparticle dynamics and interactions between nanoparticles and polymers.
Results of the research will lead to improved predictions of nanoparticle
transport, which will enhance a variety of important technological applications,
including wastewater reuse, drug delivery, and advanced materials processing for
energy storage and generation. The research team will participate in several
activities that engage K-12 students and the general public in science and
engineering, including a hands-on team-based design program for students in
grades 7-10, the GRADE summer camp for women and students from underrepresented
groups, and Energy Day and Earth Day festivals for the general public in
Houston. In addition, the researchers will disseminate results of the project to
local industrial scientists and engineers at the Texas Soft Matter
Meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deploy particle-imaging
experiments and computational models to understand coupling between particle-
polymer dynamics in solution. To achieve this objective, advanced simulation
techniques will be integrated with imaging and particle synthesis to identify
physical mechanisms dictating coupling between particles and similarly-sized
polymers in solution, and to determine effects of particle anisotropy on
particle-polymer dynamics. Stochastic rotational dynamics simulations will be
used to measure the structure and dynamics of particles and polymers on
experimentally relevant time scales. Simulation predictions for dynamics will be
tested against experimental measurements in carefully chosen nanoparticle-
polymer mixtures. This combination of simulation and experiment will elucidate
the effects of particle shape, size, and anisotropy on the dynamics of these
mixtures and thereby transform understanding of the physical processes
controlling coupled transport in multicomponent complex fluids. Results will
lead to modifications of existing theories to account for changes in dynamical
coupling on these scales and provides the necessary strong foundation for future
studies of flow-driven nanoparticle transport