* 1705007
* CIF: Medium: Anonymous Broadcasting over Networks: Fundamental Limits and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Rayadurgam Srikant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

In a free society, people have the right to live without being unduly monitored
or surveilled. When that right is violated, anonymity-preserving technologies
can provide a safety net. Anonymity-preserving systems are specifically designed
to prevent adversaries from linking users to their actions within the system;
most online services today are not designed to protect
anonymity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the anonymity properties of
networked systems in which users broadcast sensitive information over a network.
It considers two representative applications: anonymous microblogging and
cryptocurrencies. Anonymous microblogging refers to social networks where users
broadcast messages over a social graph; examples include Yik Yak and Whisper.
Cryptocurrencies are distributed, digital currencies that allow a community to
collectively, cryptographically verify the legitimacy of transactions; Bitcoin
is the most successful example. Both anonymous microblogging platforms and
cryptocurrencies broadcast sensitive messages over a network and are generally
perceived as systems that protect user anonymity. This project aims to
understand, from first principles, the vulnerabilities of existing broadcasting
protocols against statistical deanonymization attacks, and whether such attacks
can be prevented by carefully designing new protocols. Additionally, the project
will develop open-source implementations to demonstrate the key theory including
a distributed anonymous messaging application and a lightweight upgrade to
Bitcoin's networking stack. The project also includes training of graduate and
undergraduate students in this important research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is conducted in three steps. The first step is model-building which
extracts simple, canonical mathematical models that capture the essence of these
complex systems. The second step is source detection, where an adversary
performing statistical inference to deanonymize the source of a broadcast is
considered, and the mathematical models from step 1 are used to analyze the
vulnerability of current protocols. The final step focuses on source hiding
where the aim is to design novel broadcasting and network-management protocols
that give provably-optimal anonymity guarantees while maintaining high utility
for the target applications.