* 1705854
* Imaging and Modeling Fluid Mechanics of Metabolite Transport in the Brain Interstitium
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Patrick Drew, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

In the course of its normal function, the brain produces toxic substances that
accumulate and are transported from the space between brain cells. If these
substances are not cleared, their accumulation is thought to yield crippling
results such as Alzheimer's disease and migraines. The mechanics of this
clearance is poorly understood, so this research project aim to study and
characterize this process. Experimental techniques and computational approaches
are being combined to produce a predictive clearance model based on fundamental
mechanics principles of fluid flow and diffusion. The experimental study is
being conducted in vivo, which will allow for a physiologically-relevant match
between brain function and the corresponding deformation of brain tissue and the
associated flow of the fluid in-between cells. This study is relevant for
advancing the state of the art in neurophysiology and for future development of
therapeutic interventions, both pharmacological and surgical, for addressing
pathologies including Alzheimer's disease, hydrocephalus, and migraine. This
project has an educational component aiming at training graduate and
undergraduate students in advanced neuroscience research and in biomedical
engineering. Specifically, the researchers and developing and offering a level-
appropriate laboratory and computational projects for undergraduates with a
focus on the merging of experimental techniques and mechanics in neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on delivering the first mechanics-
based model of the effects of neurovasculature coupling on transport in the
brain. A theoretical and computational framework is being created to model
multiple concurrent transport mechanisms in a computational framework that
integrates empirical in vivo observations of the brain micromechanical
neurovascular response to chosen stimuli. The biomedical problem motivating the
proposed research is the comparative assessment of convective and diffusive
mechanisms for toxic metabolite clearance from the brain interstitium. Buildup
of these compounds can be strongly neurotoxic and can trigger neuronal
functional instabilities with severe, if not lethal, consequences---from
spreading depolarization to epilepsy to Alzheimer's disease to mental illnesses.
While vital for brain function, metabolite transport and clearance remains
poorly understood. The specific project goals are: 1) To model brain tissue as a
deformable porous medium with embedded vasculature, and to apply a numerical
scheme developed by the PIs for predicting transport driven by blood
vasodilation; 2) To identify sets of relevant physiological conditions from the
experiments, and, from these, to define corresponding metabolite transport
boundary value problems. Pulsation (heart-gated blood vessel dilation) and
functional hyperemia (neurovascular coupling driven vessel dilation) will be
considered. Anatomical, material, and loading parameters will be inferred using
in vivo two-photon microscopy in the brains of living mice with cranial windows.
Fluorescence-based digital image correlation will deliver microscale deformation
maps of brain tissue. Fluid flow in the brain will be visualized by infusing
fluorescent dyes; 3) To numerically solve the problems in goal 2 to determine
interstitial fluid flow and metabolite transport through deformable tissue with
convection and diffusion as concurrent mechanisms. Ranges of physiological
conditions and constitutive parameters are being tested, and fluid-structure
interaction between tissue and fluid-filled paravascular space are being
explicitly modeled. The high selectivity of the blood-brain barrier remains a
major challenge in developing effective drug delivery methods for brain cancer,
dementia, spreading depolarization, and epilepsy. By focusing on metabolite
transport in brain, this research project will contribute to advancing
pharmacological and surgical therapies for many brain pathologies.