* 1705895
* Development of dielectrophoresis chromatography employing asymmetric insulating structures and electric fields
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Blanca Lapizco-Encinas, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,611.00

A lab-on-a-chip is capable of automatically performing multiple complex chemical
diagnostics in an electronic device that will easily fit on your thumb. As a
lab-on-a chip manipulates an extremely small volume of fluid, it is also termed
a microfluidic device. Miniaturization enables portability and accessibility,
and opens the door for taking the chemical laboratory to where it is needed, be
that a production line, a remote medical clinic, a sensitive environment, or
real time monitoring of food and water safety. From a technical standpoint,
miniaturization leads to higher resolution and sensitivity, improved
integration, lower cost, and an extremely rapid processing time. To manipulate
and sort biological particles, such as cells and complex macromolecules,
dielectrophoresis is one of the most common techniques, as it relies on
differences in particle response to an applied electric field. Living and dead
cells respond differently to a nonuniform electric field than dead cells, as do
cells from different organisms. Insulator-based dielectrophoresis adds another
"knob" for particle sorting, with the placement of three-dimensional insulating
structures as obstacles in the path of particle migration which "squeeze" the
electric field. Theory predicts that using asymmetric obstacles provides yet
another "knob" to sort particles. This project will experimentally validate the
use of asymmetric insulating structures and nonuniform electric fields to sort
and isolate biological particles in a microfluidic device.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asymmetric insulating dielectrophoresis will induce
acceleration in some biological particles, and deceleration in others, with
instantaneous velocity determined by particle geometry and charge. Differences
in acceleration will lead to different residence times, creating a separation
that is similar to a chromatographic process, creating the first demonstration
of dielectrophoretic chromatography. A combination of carefully designed
insulating post geometries with customized DC-biased, low frequency AC electric
signals in insulator-based dielectrophoresis will be used to screen various
bioparticles of interest, with variations in size, shape, and charge. The
chromatographic effect will lead to distinct interaction with the stationary
phase, and differential migration of the particles through the device. Particles
will be eluted from the stationary phase as a ?peak? of concentrated particles
and directed to a specific reservoir within the device for collection. This
project will advance the state of the art in microfluidics by developing a new
technique to sort and isolate particles. The present project will provide a
premier research opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students, and will
also assist in providing research opportunities for female students through the
Women in Engineering programs.