* 1705592
* SusChEM: Machine learning blueprints for greener chelants
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

1705592 (Keith). Chelating agents have recently been identified as a key
category of chemical products that are ripe for greener design. It is
hypothesized that identifying better alternatives will require far broader
explorations of chemical compound space than what is possible with conventional
trial and error experimentation. In this project, accurate quantum chemistry
calculations will be used to train state-of-the-art machine learning methods
that will allow prediction of structures of greener chelating
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The machine learning method that will be developed
promises a novel route to rapidly predict properties of chelant/metal complexes,
not only with higher accuracy but with six orders of magnitude less
computational time than conventional predictive quantum chemistry methods (e.g.
Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory). With this computational tool, it will be
possible to rapidly screen through about 100,000 hypothetical chelant structures
to predict those that would bind strongly to different metal ions. The project
will also screen these complexes to see which have high propensities to degrade
in reasonable timeframes, and which have low probabilities of being toxic. The
top candidates from this novel screening approach will then be experimentally
synthesized and tested. This will validate if quantum chemistry-based machine
learning would be a transformative tool for environmental sustainability and
green chemical design by being a more predictive supplement and/or alternative
to conventional QSAR models. Four basic scientific questions will be addressed
by the project. First, state-of-the-art computational quantum chemistry will be
used to develop a quantitative understanding of which chelant/metal complex
properties (bond energies, pKas, etc.) best correlate with overall chelant
stability constants in aqueous solutions. Second, machine learning methods will
be developed to be used to drive in silico searches for non-traditional
molecular structures that would be able to bind as strong (or stronger) to
different metal ions as EDTA. Third, additional computational screening
procedures will then be used to find which of these promising chelant structures
are unlikely to be non-toxic and nonpersistent in nature. Finally, it will be
experimentally validated which of the novel chelants identified via computation
would be industrially synthesized and economically viable for widespread use. If
successful, this research effort would signify a paradigm shift for computer-
aided design of greener chelants used in detergents, treatments of heavy metal
poisoning, metal extraction for soil treatments, waste remediation, sequestering
normally occurring radioactive materials from hydraulic fracturing sites, and
water purification. This project will lay important foundational work that is
needed to introduce new state-of-the-art computational modeling tools with
greater predictive capacity than widely used QSAR models. All developed computer
programs and accompanying tutorials for how to use the programs will be made
freely available on the website of the PI. The educational component of this
project will develop a computer game, "Chelate-it", which will allow students to
quantify different fundamental chemical bonding concepts involved in chelation
and then use that knowledge to design novel chelant structures on their own. The
computer game will be tested in a summer school program at the University of
Pittsburgh for underrepresented 10th grade students. The capacity for the
computer game to educate students about chemical bonding, environmental
sustainability engineering, and research will be assessed.