* 1705024
* SaTC: CORE: Large: Collaborative: Investigating the Susceptibility of the Internet  Topology to Country-level Connectivity Disruption and Manipulation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Amogh Dhamdhere, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,058,666.00

Malicious actors such as hackers, terrorists or nation-states can disrupt,
intercept or manipulate the Internet traffic of entire countries or regions by
targeting structural weaknesses of the Internet. Strategic physical locations
exist in the Internet topology. Despite much recent interest and a large body of
research on cyber-attack vectors and mechanisms, we lack rigorous tools to
reason about how the Internet topology of a country or region exposes its
critical communication infrastructure to compromise through targeted attacks.
This project develops methodologies to identify potential topological weaknesses
of the Internet infrastructure, especially from the perspective of an attacker,
and to quantify the potential impact if attackers were to compromise these
critical elements. The broader impacts of this project are substantial:
understanding structural weaknesses in the Internet topology of countries or
regions is of significant interest not just to the research and operational
communities, but also to everyday Internet users and policy bodies. More
generally, it will secure the critical Internet infrastructure on which our
daily activities depend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a two-phase
project. In the first phase, the goal is identifying important components of the
Internet topology of a country and region --- Autonomous Systems, Internet
Exchange Points, colocation facilities, and physical cable systems that
represent key locations of the Internet. The project will undertake a novel
multi-layer mapping effort, developing measurement and analysis techniques to
discover these components and the relationships between them. The second phase
of the project utilizes the multi-layer map and develops methods to identify
components that represent potential topological weaknesses, i.e., compromising a
few such components would allow an attacker to disrupt, manipulate, or eavesdrop
on a large fraction of Internet traffic of that country. The multi-layer view of
the system will enable an assessment of weaknesses holistically as well as at
specific layers, under various assumptions about the capabilities and knowledge
of attackers. Geographic annotations will enable a consideration of risks
related to the geographic distribution of critical components of the
communication infrastructure.