* 1705052
* The Fifth Symposium on Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals - Science in Support of Sustainable and Resilient Communities: Communicating your research to a broader audience
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Thomas Theis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2018
* USD 49,935.00

CBET - 1705052 - PI: Theis, Thomas L. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is in
partial support of the Fifth Symposium on Industrial Ecology for Young
Professionals (SIEYP V). SIEYP V is organized by the Student Community Board of
the International Society for Industrial Ecology (ISIE), and focuses on
communication and networking among young professionals (graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers). The main goal of the symposium is to provide an
opportunity for young professionals who perform research in industrial ecology
(IE) to present and discuss their novel research ideas and experiences, receive
constructive feedback, and network with senior professionals in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of SIEYP V is "Communicating your research to a
broader audience." To move the scientific discussion beyond the academic realm,
and make a difference in the real world, there is a need to engage a broader
public. SIEYP V focuses on developing communication skills, in order to better
deliver scientific findings to different group targets: peers, policy makers,
industrialists, and the general public. SIEYP V will be held in conjunction with
the joint conference of ISIE and the International Symposium on Sustainable
Systems and Technology (ISSST) to be held in Chicago in June, 2017. The theme of
ISIE/ISSST 2017 is "Science in Support of Sustainable and Resilient Communities"
and will bring together engineers, environmental and social scientists, industry
representatives, and policy and decision makers from the public and private
sectors to discuss how their findings can be used to advance the development of
more sustainable and resilient societies. Attending both SIEYP V and ISIE/ISSST
2017 provides an excellent opportunity for young IE professionals to present
their ideas to the international community, be updated on the latest scientific
findings, and establish a network of researchers for future collaborations.