* 1705874
* CuO NP bioactivity in the wheat rhizosphere: Interplay of soil chemistry, root exudation, and biofilms
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Anne Anderson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2022
* USD 308,162.00

This research project explores copper oxide nanoparticle activity at the plant-
root interface. Copper oxide is a widely-used nanoparticle (a particle with a
diameter below 100 nm) in fungicidal and fertilizer applications; however, plant
responses to this material span from toxicity to plant health over a very narrow
concentration range. The association of roots with beneficial microbes, both as
internal, or endophytic, and external, or epiphytic, colonizers, will influence
nanoparticle bioactivity in this zone. A systems approach is employed in this
research to identify and elucidate key aspects of nanoparticle-microbe-plant-
soil component interactions to better predict the environmental and health
implications of this broadly used class of nanoparticles. Detailing the
interaction and impact of nanoparticles in the plant root zone colonized with
defined bacteria commonly associated with field-grown plants will improve the
understanding of the important role of the plant microbiome as well as
contribute to guidelines for the safe handling, management, and utilization of
engineered nanoparticles. While focusing on a plant system, this research
project relates to the essential roles that beneficial microbes play in the
health and survival of many organisms, thus the research and associated outreach
will augment the growing network of microbiome studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this research project is to identify
the combined roles of three major factors, the plant, colonizing microbes, and
soil components, that interplay to condition the bioactivity of nanoparticles in
the rhizosphere, the zone vital to plant health that exists around a plant root.
Two model systems that mimic key elements governing this interplay are being
employed. The first system uses a solid growth matrix of silica sand amended
with characterized soil pore-waters in order to replicate a key feature of the
complex soil solution environment, including inorganic and organic components.
Wheat grown in this system will be colonized by microbial isolates from field-
grown wheat: A bacillus endophyte isolated from seeds, and a pseudomonad root
surface colonizer. These microbes are typical of many isolates that induce plant
tolerance to abiotic and biotic stress, such as drought and pathogens. The
second system is a root-mimetic, hollow fiber membrane on which microbe
colonization, metabolite production, and biofilm formation are being
investigated in response to defined ?rhizosolutions? delivered through the fiber
lumen. Rhizosolutions constructed from characterized root metabolites permit
identification of root metabolites and soil components influencing biofilm
formation, bacterial resilience to nanoparticle exposure, and metabolite
production in response to the copper oxide nanoparticles, contrasted with
responses from bulk copper oxide as well as copper salts. This interdisciplinary
project, which merges engineering with chemical and biological sciences, is
supporting graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, and
underrepresented students from the Utah State University regional campuses
through the Native American Summer Mentorship Program (NASMP) in place in the
investigators? laboratories. STEM outreach to the general public and K-12
students is involving collaboration with an ARTsySTEM initiative, designed to
better link art with science.