* 1706346
* Relaminarization and Turbulence Suppression in Rotating Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sean Bailey, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 432,648.00

Swirling flows are an important class of flows because of their relevance to
many industrial technologies and processes, such as combustion, heat exchangers,
cyclone separation, and mixing. In order to design the next generation of
efficient cars, aircraft and energy systems, it is important to understand the
effect of swirl and rotation on turbulent flows to better predict performance.
Swirling and rotating flows display complicated flow behavior and interactions.
Specifically, it has been observed that swirling and rotating turbulent flows
(unorganized or chaotic) can develop well-organized flow features to the extent
that they may be considered laminar (organized). Laminar flows are generally
preferred over turbulent flows, because the latter display higher flow
resistance that, in turn, increases drag and energy losses. The overall focus of
this research project is to study the effect of rotation and swirl on the
character of the flow field and how it can lead to a re-organization of the
flow. The objectives are to gain an understanding of the physical mechanisms
embedded within swirling and rotating flows and to improve prediction
capabilities for these types of flows. Consequently, the results of this
research could impact key industries where swirling and rotating flows appear in
their processes, such as oil and gas, biomedical, energy harvesting, and
aerospace. In addition, this collaborative project with researchers at Oxford
University adds an international dimension to the training of graduate students
and also enables continued efforts to promote undergraduate and high school
student participation in computational and experimental laboratory research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to examine the complex
turbulent flow physics involved in rotating flows. Carefully designed
experiments in conjunction with high-fidelity direct numerical simulations are
being used to obtain detailed insight about the ongoing flow physics over a wide
range of these parameters. The entire reverse transition process in rotating
pipe flows is being simulated at an unprecedented grid resolution allowing the
researchers to capture the wide range of relevant turbulent scales. State-of-
the-art particle image velocimetry and hot-wire anemometry measurements are
being employed to characterize the unsteady flow features and to validate the
direct numerical simulations. The experimental and simulation results are being
integrated through the examination of turbulence budgets as well as the
application of several data reduction techniques, including higher-order
spectral analysis and modal decomposition. Specifically, the research project is
studying how helical flow structures far from the wall interact with the near
wall structures to mitigate the near-wall turbulence producing structures and to
act to relaminarize the flow. Moreover, possible connections between the
stability characteristics of the rotating flow (both laminar and turbulent) and
the relaminarization process are being examined.