* 1706046
* SusChEM: Continuous Flow Lignin Deconstruction in Supercritical Solvent Mixtures and Conversion to Renewable Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Xianglan Bai, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2020
* USD 340,000.00

Lignocellulosic biomass from agricultural waste and non-edible plants represents
an abundant, inexpensive, and renewable source of carbon for the production of
bio-based fuels, chemicals, and polymers. To be truly sustainable, new
conversion processes that favor the use of green solvents, non-precious metal
catalysts, and offer optimal biomass utilization need to be explored. The
research objective of this project is to investigate the deconstruction of
lignin, an underutilized biopolymer which accounts for up to 30% of
lignocellulosic biomass, and its conversion to high value-added bio-based
phenolic precursors for the industrial production of drugs, cosmetics, flavoring
agents, and epoxy resins. The process combines the depolymerization of lignin in
supercritical solvents and the catalytic upgrading of the resulting fragments to
desired bio-based products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore new
processes to convert lignin, an industrial waste product that is currently burnt
as low value boiler fuel, to high value-added chemicals of industrial
significance. Specifically, the deconstruction and fractionation of industrial
lignin in flow reactors using supercritical solvent mixtures will be studied in
order to understand the involved mechanisms and identify conditions that favor
high selectivity, thus benefiting the economics of the conversion process and
the environment by reducing waste. High value building blocks such as p-coumaric
acid and ferulic acid will be recovered while fractions with lower value
monomers and oligomers will be further converted over nanostructured catalysts
to bio-based phenolic platform chemicals. The outreach program primarily targets
grades 7-12 high school teachers with the objective of generating excitement and
interest in pursuing careers in STEM fields among their students.