* 1706633
* Controlled Growth and Optoelectronic Characterization of Crystalline Oriented Organic P-N Junction Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Alejandro Briseno, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2022
* USD 414,218.00

Organic semiconductors and their use in electronic devices such as solar cells
are in high demand due to low cost fabrication, mechanical flexibility, and use
of commonly sourced materials. Organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) have already
demonstrated power conversion efficiencies of 10%. However, to continue
producing highly efficient devices, it will be critical to understand and
control molecular orientation and microstructure at the interfaces of the device
at the material level. The outcome from this program will have a broad impact in
research areas striving to understand crystal chemistry, molecular packing, and
charge/energy transport at molecular interfaces. This project will result in
fundamental knowledge to impact the design of future OPVs that could not be
gained through study of conventional devices. The PIs will also leverage their
extensive track records of communicating the excitement of interdisciplinary
research to a broad scientific community and to the general public. The PIs will
encourage broadening participation in STEM by leveraging and participating in a
multifaceted internship/mentoring program that targets STEM-major students from
Springfield Technical Community College to fortify the number of
underrepresented students in chemistry and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of organic semiconductors with controlled crystallinity at the nanoscale
will have a major impact in accelerating the emerging area of organic
electronics, as these highly ordered systems will enable researchers to extract
intrinsic charge carrier transport phenomena that cannot be accurately
determined from disordered systems common to amorphous and/or polycrystalline
films used in mainstream devices. In addition, understanding crystallization
mechanisms will enable researchers to produce a variety of architectures for
solar cell device applications. The goal of the research project is to grow
discrete, oriented, crystalline organic P-N junctions, correlate
nanomorphologies to optoelectronic properties and establish experimental methods
for probing charge and exciton transport phenomena in these semiconductor
nanodevices. Single nanowire level measurements will also define the fundamental
limits of performance in these 1-D nanostructured systems. The project will
enable one to bridge fundamental science with applied research that will be
central to the discovery of potentially new device concepts in areas of
nanoscale electronics, such as solar cells, vertical transistors, batteries, and
sensors.