* 1706283
* Engineered Metal Functionalized TiO2 Nanotube Sensing Platform for Assessment of Pneumonia Volatile Biomarkers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Swomitra Mohanty, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2021
* USD 427,143.00

A major challenge for global health is the development of portable, low-cost,
and non-invasive technologies for the diagnosis of diseases, because the
availability of such devices could reduce the number of mortalities caused by
infection. For example, pneumonia is a disease that annually takes the lives of
approximately one million children under the age of five due to poor access to
health care or tools that can rapidly diagnose the disease. The goal of this
research project is to develop innovative, non-invasive biosensing methods to
detect compounds emitted in the breath of individuals suffering from pneumonia.
The researchers will create small tubes of a ceramic material, titanium dioxide,
that have diameters on the order of several nanometers and then attach a metal
layer to the exterior of the tubes. They will then study how the electrical
resistance of the tube changes as a function of its exposure to vapors of
compounds that are emitted by microorganisms that cause pneumonia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will leverage known specific
molecular interactions between metals and volatile organic biomarkers (VOBs).
Such compounds are given off by microorganisms that cause diseases, such as
pneumonia, and are found in the breath of infected individuals. Previous
research has shown a clear link between VOBs from patient breath and
pathological conditions such as diabetes, tuberculous, colorectal cancer, and
pneumonia. The research approach uses metals deposited on a titanium dioxide
nanotube substrate as a binding element for VOBs of interest. Binding events
cause a measurable change in current in the sensor which will be characterized.
The project will focus on creating a pneumonia sensor by (1) using computational
modeling to understand the interactions between metals or combination of metals
with known VOBs associated with pneumonia; (2) creating a metal-modified
titanium dioxide nanotube sensing platform capable of detecting VOBs associated
with pneumonia; (3) studying the limit of detection of the sensor for the VOBs
associated with pneumonia; and (4) developing a sensor for examining the
biological relationship between bacterial load in a culture and the amount of
VOB generated using Streptococcus pneumonia, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Haemophilus influenza (organisms commonly found in pneumonia with known VOBs).
These research efforts will demonstrate the utility of the proposed approach and
lay the foundation for building a breath-based sensor for assessing pneumonia.