* 1706757
* Hyperspectral Extinction and Emission Spectroscopy of Nascent Soot: Insight into Electronic Structure and Morphology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* J. Houston Miller, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2022
* USD 333,147.00

Approximately 80% of the energy consumed in the United States annually is
produced through combustion processes, and soot (or black carbon) is a by-
product of incomplete combustion. Soot is known to have harmful impacts on the
earth's climate and human health, and climate scientists have found that black
carbon is the second most important man-made climate-forcing agent, falling
between carbon dioxide and methane. Small-sized particles, of which soot is a
dominant contributor, are thought to be responsible for a range of
cardiovascular and respiratory problems and may act as a carrier for toxic
combustion by-products, introducing further health effects. Thus, reducing
emissions of soot from combustion processes is a critically important goal, and
developing a fundamental understanding of the chemical and physical processes in
combustion systems that lead to soot will be necessary. In this project,
researchers are performing laser-based optical diagnostic studies aimed at
understanding a critical phase in the soot formation process. These experiments
are being complemented and informed by computational chemistry calculations. The
results of the project will include data that will be of relevance to the
combustion research community, as well as other scientists exploring the role of
black carbon precursors in interstellar space and their potential use here on
Earth in electronics and solar energy conversion. Finally, this project is
helping to train and prepare graduate students for careers in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is based upon the hypothesis that
soot inception begins with the agglomeration of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH) species that are large enough to "stick" at flame temperatures. This
project involves several new experiments designed to address this idea as well
as competing models for particulate inception, and they are: (1) Broadband,
cavity-enhanced absorption/extinction measurements in the near infrared spectral
region for both molecular and particulate species. (2) Two-dimensional
excitation/emission studies through the ultraviolet and visible to gain insight
in aromatic electronic structure. (3) Wavelength-agile, angle-resolved
scattering measurements to define particle fractal morphology. (4) Extension of
the computational chemistry to evaluate electronic structure's role in
thermodynamic stability, band gaps, and spectroscopic properties of PAH and
their aggregates. (5) Application of a suite of solid-state diagnostics to
thermophoretically sampled particulate including infrared and Raman
spectroscopies and optical and electron microscopies.