* 1706575
* GOALI:  WERF, WRF:  Collaborative Research:  Quantifying the Contribution of DBPs to the Toxicity of Wastewaters Purified for Potable Reuse:  Which Byproduct Classes Matter?
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Michael Plewa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 161,991.00

Collaborative Proposal Numbers: 1706154/1706575&lt;br/&gt;PI Names: William
Mitch/Michael Plewa &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing populations in
arid regions of the US and recent droughts in Texas and California are
increasing interest in purifying municipal wastewater as a local, secure supply
for drinking water. A critical roadblock for potable reuse projects is lingering
uncertainty among utilities, regulators, and the public regarding the human
health impacts of chemicals in the purified wastewater. The PIs will compare the
overall toxicity of wastewaters purified for potable reuse to the toxicity of
conventional drinking waters. The National Research Council has indicated that
byproducts of water and purified wastewater disinfection (disinfection
byproducts or DBPs) are the predominant drivers of human health risks; however,
the contribution to toxicity of DBPs as a whole and the relative importance of
different DBP classes has not been quantified. In this project the PIs will
quantify the contributions of different DBP classes to the toxicity of
disinfected purified wastewaters to determine which classes are the most
significant drivers of toxicity. Results from this project will provide critical
data to enable regulators to evaluate potable reuse projects and to prioritize
chemical contaminant classes (particularly DBPs) for regulatory
oversight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the main hypothesis is that
advanced treated municipal wastewaters exhibit lower overall toxicity than
conventional drinking waters employing wastewater-impacted (i.e., de facto
reuse), or even pristine source waters. To test this hypothesis, the PIs will
quantitatively compare the toxicity of a series of representative conventional
drinking waters using either pristine or wastewater-impacted source waters with
waters associated with potable reuse operations. The comparison will employ
quantitative in vitro bioassays targeting a range of relevant endpoints
(cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, and oxidative stress).&lt;br/&gt;To quantify the
contributions of different DBP classes to the toxicity of disinfected potable
reuse waters, the PIs will compare the in vitro bioassay responses of
disinfected potable reuse waters to those of deionized water spiked with the
concentrations of either all the DBPs measured in these waters, or all of the
members of specific DBP classes. DBP research has focused on individual chemical
classes (e.g., nitrosamines), with chemists and toxicologists often working
separately. By integrating chemical analysis of a broad range of DBP classes
with quantitative toxicology to identify the classes driving toxic responses,
the PIs expect that results from this work could transform the approach to DBP
research. This work will also address two long-standing questions for DBP
research. First, is the toxicity associated with DBP mixtures additive or is
there synergism or antagonism? This question will be answered by comparing the
bioassay responses for individual DBP classes against their mixtures. Second,
DBP research has focused on low molecular weight species, generally accounting
for only ~30-40% of total organic halogen (TOX). To what extent do high
molecular weight DBPs contribute to toxicity? With disinfectants applied
upstream of reverse osmosis (RO) units, potable reuse trains are ideal for
answering this question. In addition to the research opportunities afforded to
graduate and undergraduate students, a high school science teacher and
underrepresented high school student will assist in summer research, with an eye
to incorporating this material into the high school curriculum over the
following year.