* 1706370
* Rational Design of Barrier Films to Enable Rechargeable Mg-S Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jennifer Schaefer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2021
* USD 298,894.00

Magnesium-sulfur (Mg-S) rechargeable batteries are a potentially cost-effective
and high energy density solution for use in electric transportation. One
technical barrier to this technology is that the electrolyte requirements for
rechargeable Mg metal batteries have thus far limited cycle life when used with
sulfur cathodes. In this project, the PI will conduct fundamental research on UV
light-curable polymeric barrier films for the electrolyte-cathode interface to
enable capacity retention of the battery. The functional polymeric films will
prevent cross-over of certain reactive species, thus mitigating deleterious
reactions and maintaining chemical integrity of the anode, electrolyte, and
cathode of the battery. The fundamental scientific knowledge generated by this
work could enable advances in new materials for other applications where
performance characteristics are influenced by ion transport and ion rejection.
Additionally, the number, diversity, and training of the next generation of
researchers in the chemical sciences and engineering will be enhanced by the
further development of an outreach module for high schools and by the broadening
participation of women and underrepresented minority undergraduate and graduate
students in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two
fundamental limitations in Mg-S battery development: breakdown of active cathode
material by reaction with electrolyte species and passivation of the anode by
cathode intermediates. Both issues may be mitigated by preventing the transport
of undesirable species across the electrolyte-cathode interface. Structure-
property relationships of polymeric barrier films to enable Mg-S battery cycling
will be interrogated. In the first theme of the project, self-supporting films
will be created by crosslinking of a highly dissociable magnesium-titrated ionic
monomer with a variety of difunctional oligomeric monomers of varying chemistry
and length. Ex-situ studies will evaluate the efficacy of the films in
conducting magnesium cations and excluding anionic polysulfides and/or
nucleophilic complexes. The mechanisms of steric, dielectric, and electrostatic
exclusion will be independently probed. In the second theme, the UV-curable
barrier films will be blade coated directly onto sulfur cathode sheets. Effects
of thickness, conformity, and chemistry of the films on full cell Mg-S battery
performance will be investigated. The performance of the cells will be linked
with the fundamental characteristics of the films.