* 1706003
* INVESTIGATION OF THE PRIMARY MECHANISMS OF  CAVITATION-INDUCED DAMAGES
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kevin Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 420,221.00

Cavitation consists of the formation, growth, and implosion of bubbles in a
liquid when exposed to rapid pressure drop. The final step of the bubble
implosion consists of a rapid compression of the internal gases, much faster
than the thermal exchanges, which results in high amplitude pressure pulses that
cause some damage on nearby solid surfaces. This project focuses on the small-
scale mechanisms of this process, called cavitation erosion. More specifically,
it is intended to characterize the complex interaction between the fluid and the
material response, and to clarify the primary causes of the impacts experienced
by a material located close to bubble collapses. For that purpose, joint
numerical and experimental works will be performed: (i) A novel and advanced
multiphysics computational framework capable of predicting the dynamic
interaction of collapsing cavitation bubbles with a nearby deformable material
will be developed, (ii) Experiments combining the imaging of the bubble
evolution with measurements of the velocity and temperature fields in the
liquid, and local efforts on the solid surface will be conducted. Both
approaches will focus on the collapse of a single bubble near the material
surface. Completion of this project will potentially lead to controllable
cavitation bubble collapse, which is a major challenge for the optimization of
various medical and industrial processes. The project will also enable teaching
the cross-disciplinary science of cavitation to both ocean and biomedical
engineers; and to engage K-12 students to learn about the interesting phenomenon
of cavitation and its broader impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bubble-material
interaction problem related to the collapse of cavitation bubbles close to a
solid surface is a challenging multiphysics and multiscale problem involving a
strong coupling between the fluid dynamics and the wall deformation. The dynamic
process is highly nonlinear, featuring shock waves, high speed flows, large
deformation and topological change of liquid-gas interface, and shock-induced
fracture. The effects of the bubble size, distance to the wall and
characteristic time of the collapse on the effects on the wall are currently an
open question. More specifically, the respective impacts of the microjet and the
shock waves, according to these different parameters, in terms of local efforts,
elastic or plastic deformation, and potential mass loss have to be clarified.
Both the effects of a single bubble collapse and the cumulative effects of the
collapses are of interest, to eventually determine the primary mechanisms that
are responsible for the damages. In the present project, this problem is
investigated by a joint numerical and experimental approach. The computational
framework will incorporate high-fidelity models to capture the propagation of
shock waves across material interfaces, large deformation of bubbles and solid
materials, and shock-induced material failure. After validation, it will enable,
for the first time, to explicitly and quantitatively explore the two-way fluid-
solid coupling, that is, both (i) the stress, deformation, and failure of the
solid material induced by the pulsatile high velocities, pressures, and
temperatures resulting from bubble collapse; and (ii) the reciprocal impact of
the acoustic and elastic properties of the solid material to the shock-dominated
two-phase fluid flow. The experiments will use high speed optical and X-ray
imaging, cold wires for high frequency temperature measurements, and innovative
array sensor based on PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride) coating for local effort
measurement.