* 1706938
* Controlling Cross-shore Sediment Transport by Integrating Pile Breakwaters with Wave Energy Converters for Sustainable Coastal Management
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Zhenhua Huang, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 276,822.00

1706938 (Huang). This research aims at solving two important problems, shoreline
erosion and utilization of wave energy. The research explores the potential of
an innovative breakwater design for shore protection and electricity generated
by wave action. The long-term goal of this research is to promote the concept of
coastal management with sustainable technologies.

Relying on recent developments in two-phase flow simulations, this research will
improve understanding of hydrodynamic and sediment processes in the vicinity of
bottom-sitting coastal structures of complex geometry. It will enable better
prediction of shoreline evolution protected by an Oscillating Water Column
(OWC)-pile breakwater. The project brings together two distinct research areas:
wave energy utilization and shore protection. The marine energy industry is
seeking ways to lower the deployment costs of wave power farms and the coastal
engineering industry is seeking innovative ideas that can potentially
revolutionize traditional coastal management practices. The outcomes of the
proposed research have the potential to build a bridge between these two
industries so that they can work together to make both of them profitable from
sustainable shore-protection projects. The ability to generate electricity from
shore-protection structures also makes a contribution to efforts to reduce
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. The DesignSafe CI is an end-to-end data
management, analysis and publication platform supported by NSF. All experimental
and numerical data as well as the algorithms and numerical codes developed in
this work will be deposited in the DesignSafe Data Depot and made available for
researchers. To promote public awareness of research findings and the concept of
sustainable coastal management, the PI will make use of online platforms such as
YouTube and ThinkTech Hawaii to reach a larger public audience.