* 1706939
* GOALI: Collaborative Proposal: Novel approaches to model travel behavior and sustainability impacts of e-bike use
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Paul Frymier, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2022
* USD 285,000.00

1706939 (Cherry)/ 1706695 (MacAuthur). Electric bicycles (e-bikes) are bicycles
with a small battery-powered electric motor to assist the rider. Over 150
million e-bikes have been sold in Europe and Asia in the past ten years--in
China's case, resulting in truly transformative transportation. This is the
world's largest adoption of an alternative fuel vehicle. E-bikes are becoming
more important in North America. However, there is little empirical evidence on
the behavior of e-bike users and environmental sustainability impacts. The
investigator team will refine and deploy a research study, using a combination
of emerging hardware and software capabilities, to collect behavioral data from
e-bike riders. The collected data will then be used to evaluate how large shifts
in e-bike use will affect sustainability. The research in this GOALI project is
enabled by an industry partner (Bosch). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
objective of this research is to refine an instrumentation system (physical
hardware and a mobile device application) tailored for e-bike users. This system
includes a mix of onboard hardware and smartphone software to collect a host of
data on energy and other vehicle telematics. The data collected by the
instrumentation and mobile application will be sent to a platform with little to
no input required by the user. Using that data, the second objective is to
assess the riding behavior of e-bike users and the performance of e-bikes in
meeting travel needs. The research team will conduct an empirical study,
starting with at least 150-200 participants for one year. This collaboration
with industry partners will collect vehicle telematics and rider behavior
metrics with an aim toward modeling net travel changes between modes (mode shift
and vehicle kilometers traveled). This objective will identify how e-bike use
behaviors differ from relatively well known incumbent modes. The third objective
is to investigate the life-cycle environmental impacts of e-bike ownership and
use, relying on the Department of Energy's GREET LCA model. Coupling the
behavioral models with LCA models will provide a methodologically novel
assessment of the impact of this new mode. This study will inform local and
state policy and planning efforts related to the growth of e-bikes and their
influence on environmental policy goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.