* 1706252
* Multi-Component Reactive Pressure-dependent Chemistry Verified by Multi-Scale Uncertainty Quantification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Michael Burke, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

Emerging combustion engine technologies show promise for improved fuel economy
and reduced environmental pollution. However, engineers face design challenges
because these improved engines require unprecedentedly precise control of fuel
combustion chemistry. Optimal design now requires scientific descriptions of
combustion chemistry to be unprecedentedly precise. This is especially true for
engineers using computer models. To serve these needs, the project goal is to
create and validate predictive combustion chemistry models. This project will
create descriptions of combustion chemistry at the molecular level and then
validate these descriptions against combustion measurements. The fundamental
chemical behavior characterized in this research will also lead to a greater
understanding of planetary atmospheres. Finally, this project will bring
research discoveries to students in the classroom, train graduate students in
state-of-the-art computer modeling, and share the scientific thought process
with local K-12 students in school visits and lab
tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of the proposed research is
to create a multi-scale, uncertainty-quantified model of H2/CO/CH2O combustion
that is consistent with both first principles and combustion experiments. A
primary focus is establishing the types of phenomenological reactions and rate
laws of highly reactive engine environments, especially for non-thermal kinetic
sequences that have complex dependences on temperature, pressure, and mixture
composition. The PI proposes to 1) perform state-of-the-art first principles
calculations for important non-thermal kinetic sequences; 2) construct a multi-
scale combustion model that directly bridges molecular behavior, calculable from
first principles, to macroscopic behavior, measurable in combustion experiments;
and 3) test model consistency with both first principles and combustion
experiments to validate the model via inverse uncertainty quantification. By the
project end, the established reaction types and rate laws will serve as
prototypes for other reactions in combustion and atmospheres, and the produced
high-accuracy model will be ready to use in other scientific and engineering
applications.