* 1706723
* SusChem: Development and fundamental investigation of high capacity cathode materials for high energy and low cost Na-ion batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Hailong Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 339,267.00

This project addresses energy storage systems for the transportation and the
intermittent supply of electricity generated by wind and solar power
technologies. One potential solution for these applications is the use of
sodium-ion batteries that utilizes widely available and domestic resources.
Sodium ion batteries have similar functioning mechanisms as lithium ion
batteries but cost less, as sodium is much more abundant than lithium.
Currently, the performances of sodium ion batteries are mainly limited by the
cathode electrode materials. Most of the existing cathode materials of sodium
ion batteries suffer from low capacity and short cycle life. In addition,
precious metals such as cobalt and nickel are typically used in these electrode
materials, which increases the cost. This project aims to develop low cost and
high performance novel cathode materials based on the oxides of one of the most
abundant elements, manganese. The cathode materials are designed using
strategies derived from fundamental science that allow the cathode to be charge-
discharge cycled for hundreds of times with minimal performance degradation. For
educational impacts, the project will advance knowledge in the fields of solid
state chemistry and electrochemistry. The progress and new findings of the
project will be included in undergraduate and graduate courses and disseminated
to high school teachers and students through summer programs. The outcomes of
the project will expedite the development and commercialization of sodium ion
batteries, and therefore significantly improve the sustainability of energy
storage technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stability of the crystal
structure in cathode electrode materials in continuous electrochemical charge-
discharge cycles is key to obtain long cycle life in sodium ion batteries. This
project focuses on rational design of novel sodium manganese oxide cathode
materials with layered structures. Novel strategies are used to stabilize their
structure by doping selected elements into the manganese sites. The doping is
expected to effectively delay or mitigate the phase transitions during the
sodium intercalation and deintercalation processes, therefore allowing high
capacity and long cycle life. The designed materials will be synthesized and
electrochemically tested. Multiple advanced characterization methods such as in
situ X-ray diffraction will be used to investigate the changes of the crystal
structure of the materials during electrochemical cycling. By interpreting the
results from synthesis, electrochemical tests, and structure characterizations,
insights on the structural stability of the layered cathode materials will be
revealed, the hypotheses will be validated, and the materials design strategies
will be verified and further refined to guide the development of next generation
high performance cathode electrode materials for sodium ion batteries.