* 1706118
* A Microfluidics-Enabled In Vitro Model for Early Human Placental Development
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Balaji Rao, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

PI: Rao, Balaji M.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1706118&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The placenta
is a complex organ at the maternal-fetal interface that sustains fetal
development during pregnancy. During early human placental development, a subset
of trophoblast (TB) cells of the placenta, called the invasive TB, penetrates
the uterine tissue and alters the structure of the uterine arteries. This
remodeling of the arteries is critical for enabling efficient perfusion of the
placenta with maternal blood and ensuring fetal nutrition. Both insufficient and
excessive TB invasion are associated with potentially serious pregnancy
disorders; thus TB invasion is highly regulated. The precise regulation is
orchestrated by a complex interplay between TB cells and other cell types at the
placental interface. Formation of invasive TB and their invasion behavior is
also affected by external stimuli such as variations in oxygen concentration or
environmental contaminants. The goal of this project is to develop a
microfluidics-enabled in vitro model of human TB development for quantitative
analysis of TB differentiation and invasion in 3D cultures. A key feature of the
proposed approach is to use TB derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
as a bona fide surrogate for human TB. This model system will be used to assess
the effect of external stimuli and intercellular communication between other
cell types and TB, on TB differentiation and migration. The knowledge gained has
the potential to guide therapies for placental disorders and thus impact the
health of pregnant women and their babies. Integration of research with
education activities include: an interactive lecture-discussion module on
"Engineering in Pregnancy" targeted towards high-school students; a high school
student workshop designed to create general awareness of the science,
technology, ethics and regulation of pluripotent stem cell research;
collaboration with the Juntos Program at NC State to increase participation of
Latino youth in STEM disciplines; and, active engagement of undergraduate
students in targeted research projects that contribute to the overall project
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on creating a microfluidic
device that will enable in vitro analysis of early human placental development
during the time in which a subset of trophoblast (TB) cells of the placenta
(invasive TBs) penetrates the uterine tissue, alters the structure of the
uterine arteries and establishes remodeling that enables efficient perfusion of
the placenta with maternal blood and ensuring fetal nutrition. The precise
regulation of TB differentiation to an invasive phenotype and subsequent
invasion is orchestrated by dynamic interactions between TB cells and other cell
types at the placental interface, specifically cells of the uterine decidua and
certain types of immune cells (decidual natural killer (dNK) cells and decidual
macrophages). Furthermore, TB differentiation and invasion are affected by
external stimuli such as variation in oxygen concentration or environmental
contaminants. Experimental platforms to systematically and quantitatively probe
the effects of external stimuli and/or intercellular communication on TB
differentiation and invasion are largely lacking. The project addresses the two
major limitations that impede the development of realistic in vitro models.
First, availability of TB from early gestation is very limited. The project will
use TB derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) as an in vitro surrogate
for TB development in vivo. Second, quantitative analysis of TB differentiation
and migration in 3D cultures is experimentally challenging. The project will
develop a microfluidic platform that enables live cell imaging in 3D cell
culture and allows recovery of specific cells for transcriptome analysis. The
approach for live cell imaging draws from experimental strategies used in
studies on C. elegans. The project has three objectives: 1) Investigate the
effect of an environmental contaminant bisphenol A (BPA), a chemical shown to
have an inhibitory effect on TB invasion, on TB invasion in the microfluidic
platform, thus serving as a testbed to validate the microfluidic platform, 2)
Investigate the effect of oxygen concentration and oxygen gradients on TB
differentiation and invasion and 3) Investigate the effect of intercellular
communication between macrophages and TB on TB differentiation and invasion. The
project is potentially transformative due to two expected outcomes. First, the
proposed in vitro system will enable the investigation of molecular mechanisms
underlying pregnancy disorders and evaluation of potential therapies. In
particular, the experiments will help elucidate the role of oxygen gradients and
TB-macrophage interactions in TB development. Second, the proposed microfluidic
platform and strategies for tracking live cells will be broadly applicable to
cells in 3D culture, including co-culture of different cell types.