* 1706687
* A Non-invasive and Cost-effective Sputum Assay for Lung Cancer Screening
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Gymama Slaughter, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2019
* USD 349,999.00

The goal of this project is to develop an accurate, reliable, cost-effective and
non-invasive system for screening of high-risk individuals for early detection
and monitoring of lung cancer. Given the high false positive rate (95%) of the
current methods used in lung cancer screening, there is a large number of
referrals for invasive biopsies and expensive two-year follow-up examinations
that carry their own morbidity and mortality. Therefore, the objective of this
research project is to develop a sensor device that can detect biomarkers for
lung cancer cells accurately. The overall system integrates a microdevice,
called a microtoroid resonator, with a very small gold particle, that has a
diameter of about twenty nanometers, coated with DNA that can capture biomarkers
for lung cancer cells. The manipulation of light is used to generate a signal
when a positive test result occurs. Additionally, this research project is
providing support for research training and mentorship that address the need to
achieve greater diversity in STEM fields through recruitment, retention of
minority and female undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
develop microtoroid resonators with integrated sputum non-coding RNA (ncRNA)
biomarkers as lung cancer recognition elements for the robust, highly-sensitive
and selective detection of non-small cell lung cancer. With circular cross-
sections and controlled nanoscale defects, microtoroids are excellent candidates
for the development of multiplexed photonic biosensor platform that is
inexpensive and provide rapid detection of the ncRNA biomarkers in sputum.
Nanoscale defects in microtoroids are well-suited for the incorporation of
biorecognition elements to capture ncRNAs at low concentrations. The planned
research strategy will translate the strengths of novel transcriptome profiling
data developed from the whole-genome transcriptome into simpler screening tests,
and thus bridge the gap between basic research and patient care. It is expected
to produce a new point-of-care (POC) test using the microtoroid-based photonic
biosensor, for accurate and multiplexed detection of ncRNAs in sputum, which is
a convenient human body fluid for non-invasive diagnostics. Importantly, the
photonic biosensor platform will have several advantages over existing
techniques. 1) It is a label-free, amplification-free method and can provide a
rapid method for ncRNA detection. 2) The sensor platform can monitor multiple
targets simultaneously. 3) It can significantly reduce the hands-on time and
reaction time for multiple miRNA detections compared to traditional techniques
involving thermal cycling and microfluidic system, because it utilizes capture
probes for direct ncRNA detection. 4) It does not require temperature cycling.