* 1706155
* A high throughput platform for the selective generation of neurons from stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* John Wikswo, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can grow indefinitely in culture
and be specified to almost any cell type found in the human body. As such, they
represent an attractive avenue for tissue engineering and cell replacement
therapy. However, it remains difficult to convert iPSCs into sspecific cell
types, which hinders their applications. This project uses a unique engineered
device to simultaneously examine the effects of many different chemical cues on
iPSC specification. The model system to be studied involves the generation of a
subtype of neurons whose loss causes Parkinson's Disease (PD). Thus, the
immediate outcomes of this project will have positive impacts on PD patients,
and potential long-term implications for using iPSCs to replace other diseased
tissues. The project will also support research experiences for undergraduates
and for high school students through an existing outreach program with the
Nashville public school system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) have the potential to revolutionize personalized medicine by
serving as an unlimited source of patient-derived material for disease modeling,
drug screening, and tissue engineering. A key challenge remaining is the
reproducible differentiation of individual iPSC lines to homogeneous populations
of the desired cell type. A majority of iPSC differentiation procedures yield
heterogeneous cell mixtures, and differentiation conditions identified for one
iPSC line often do not translate to other lines. Whereas in vivo development
relies on diverse spatiotemporal cues, where subtle differences in growth factor
concentrations can alter lineage trajectories, standard iPSC differentiation
procedures utilize static cultures with infrequent media changes that lack
continuous control over soluble protein and small molecule concentrations. As
such, the objective of this proposal is utilize a unique microformulator
platform, which permits independent media delivery to each well of a standard
96-well plate, for iPSC differentiations. The proposal's specific aims will be
focused on producing A9 midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons, which are the cell
type lost in Parkinson's Disease (PD). DA neurons have been previously
differentiated from iPSCs but with heterogeneous identity and line-to-line
variability. Thus, the utility and significance of the microformulator will be
demonstrated by: 1) iterative screening of differentiation conditions that yield
highly pure midbrain DA progenitors from a single iPSC line; 2) iterative
screening of differentiation conditions that favor high purity A9 midbrain DA
neurons over other DA subtypes; and 3) demonstration of rapid optimization of
differentiation conditions to multiple iPSC lines.