* 1706130
* Multiscale plenoptic imaging and direct computation of turbulent channel flows laden with finite-size solid particles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Lian-Ping Wang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

CBET - 1706130&lt;br/&gt;PI: Wang, Lian-Ping&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent
flows that contain particles occur in a variety of industrial, biological, and
environmental processes. The analysis of these flows is challenging, because
interactions between the suspended particles and the surrounding fluid not only
affect dynamics of the particles, but also influence characteristics of the
overall flow. This award will support development of computational and
experimental tools to better understand how particle-fluid interactions at the
particle scale influence transport in turbulent flow at large scales. An imaging
system will be constructed to record three-dimensional velocity fields of
particle-laden fluids in turbulent open-channel flow. Experimental results will
be compared with numerical simulations of the identical flow to validate the
simulation methods and provide additional insight into relationships between
particle dynamics and flow. The research team will incorporate results from the
project in a new short course that will combine computational fluid dynamics
with new techniques in computational imaging and computer vision. An
instructional module illustrating these methods will be developed for high
school students and teachers participating in the High School Summer Research
program at the University of Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A plenoptic particle
tracking velocimetry system will be constructed that can measure the three-
component velocity fields in three-dimensional, turbulent, particle-laden flows
at both micro- and macro-scales. This velocimetry method uses a plenoptic camera
that can record many images of a collection of particles from different
viewpoints and angles at the same time. Then, computer vision algorithms are
applied to recover accurately the instantaneous positions of the particles in
three dimensions, which can be used to find the velocity fields. In addition,
the particle tracking system in this project will be designed to capture the
rotational velocity of individual particles. In parallel, a highly scalable
particle-resolved simulation tool based on the mesoscopic lattice Boltzmann
approach will be applied to resolve the three-dimensional motion at all scales.
Results from the simulations will be compared with experimental data at all
scales. At the particle scale, these data include trajectories, velocities,
accelerations, and angular velocities of particles, particle-wall and particle-
free surface interactions, as well as local flow statistics near the surface of
a solid particle. At the system scale, the tools will be used to study
turbulence modulation, flow drag, and flow transition in the presence of the
finite-size solid particles.