* 1706436
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Models and Quantitative Experiments of Red Blood Cells Transmigration through Inter-Endothelial Slits in the Spleen
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Zhangli Peng, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 10/31/2019
* USD 209,778.00

CBET - 1706436/1706571 PIs: Peng, Zhangli/del Alamo, Juan Carlos

During their circulation through the spleen, red blood cells are challenged to
squeeze through narrow slits between endothelial cells that are much smaller
than the red blood cell itself. The squeezing motion leads to large red cell
deformations and significant mechanical forces on the cells that can cause cell
rupture. Aged or otherwise altered red blood cells become trapped and are
removed from the circulation. The goal of this collaborative project is to
understand the mechanics of red blood cell transmigration through narrow slits
by a combination of experiments and high-fidelity numerical modeling.
Microfluidic-based experiments will be used to measure the forces required for
healthy and diseased red blood cells to move through slits with well-defined
widths and geometries. A multi-scale computational model will be developed to
fully characterize red blood cell transmigration through slits in the spleen.
The results will show how transmigration depends on the geometrical and
mechanical properties of the red blood cell and its environment from the
molecular level to tissue level. This research may also contribute to knowledge
about other important physiological processes, including inflammation and the
metastatic spread of tumors, in which transmigration of cells through narrow
slits plays an important role. Elements of this project will be adapted for
hands-on demonstrations for high school students, and to excite youngsters and
their parents about the importance and behavior of multi-component vesicles.

Squeezing through narrow gaps requires significant mechanical forces and red
blood cell deformations, which can lead to bilayer-cytoskeletal detachment, cell
volume change, and cell rupture. Despite the importance of transmigration to red
cell maintenance, there are no quantitative data available on the deformation
and stress distributions of transmigrating red blood cells. A multiscale model
of red blood cell transmigration will be developed that accounts explicitly for
the lipid bilayer of the cell and its underlying cytoskeleton. A force
microscopy technique will be used to measure the mechanical forces experienced
by red blood cells while passing through slits of controlled size, stiffness and
adhesiveness. Red blood cell deformation will be visualized as they pass through
the slits, and the roles of microstructural components of the cells will be
examined by pharmacological manipulations. Results from the experiments will be
used to validate the computational model. The model in combination with
experiment will be used to investigate how molecular alterations affect the
filtration of RBCs in the spleen when the microstructural organization of the
cells and the splenic environment are systematically altered. Results from these
studies will be useful in understanding cellular deformation in physiological
processes and in biomedical devices where cells undergo large deformations.