* 1706731
* Control and estimation of glycosylation profile via media supplementation based on intracellular models in mammalian cell cultures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Seongkyu Yoon, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 329,525.00

Recombinant monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are effective in curing many diseases,
including several types of cancer. The effectiveness of mAbs is closely related
to the pattern of decoration of the mAb surface with sugars. This project
attempts to understand and ultimately predict how mAbs are decorated with sugars
in specific locations on the surface. Such knowledge would fill a significant
gap in current industrial practice on mAb quality control and improve the
development and manufacturing of such therapeutic molecules. The research team
will also provide STEM training opportunities through undergraduate research,
recruiting minority students, developing new biomanufacturing courses and
lectures, and supporting outreach activities for K-12 students and general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful control and optimization of mAb
glycosylation is currently hindered by limited understanding of how
glycosylation responds in vivo to culture perturbations. This research proposes
to tackle the challenge by exploring intracellular metabolic mechanisms that
link media supplementation in to glycosylation.This should eventually lead to
the establishment of a model to predict glycosylation variation in cultures and
accommodate a control methodology via media supplementation. Mechanistic
insights into the cellular physiology critical to glycosylation will be achieved
by multi-omics approaches. This will pave the way to developing intracellular
metabolic models which connect media supplements, intracellular properties, and
glycan profiles, an to developing control strategies for glycan attributes via
media supplementation. If successful, these results should enable the
reproducible generation of fully active monoclonal antibodies, increasing the
efficacy and decreasing the cost of this important human health therapy.