* 1706166
* Liquid-Solid Flows with Inertia and Particle Settling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Melany Hunt, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 361,989.00

Flows of liquids that contain solid particles are important in a wide variety of
industries, with examples that include coal slurry pipelines, hydraulic
fracturing processes, and the processing of materials for energy production. For
example, the production of fuel from biomass involves grinding the biomass, then
mixing it with water to create a slurry of settling, solid biomass particles
that are then pumped into a reactor for further processing. Understanding these
liquid-solid slurries and how they behave in flow will enable the use of less
water and energy in their processing. Similar examples occur in the handling and
storage of nuclear wastes, and in a wide range of geophysical flows including
landslides and sediment transport. This award will support unique experiments on
liquid-solid flows under conditions where the inertia of both the liquid and the
solid are important. This inertial regime is important in a range of industrial
problems including those above and has not been previously studied. This
research, using a custom-built instrument, will provide a set of experimental
data that can be used to help predict particle settling, particle bed expansion,
and the forces required to flow these slurries. An integral part of the research
is the education of students. In addition, a series of online modules will be
created to address challenges facing women in the fields of science, technology,
mathematics, and engineering and how to make STEM academic and research
environments more inclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposal is to
study non-colloidal particle suspensions using a custom-built rheometer, and to
produce a rich experimental data set in an unexplored parameter regime of solid
volume fraction and particle Reynolds number. The apparatus generates flow
between concentric cylinders, and measurements using either neutrally-buoyant or
settling particles will cover particle Reynolds numbers from 0.1 to 1,400 and
solid fractions from dilute to dense. Measurements will include 1) the shear
stress and the collisional particle pressure for neutrally-buoyant suspensions
over a wide range of flow conditions, including turbulent suspension flows, 2)
the stresses and bed expansion for conditions in which the particles are denser
than the surrounding fluid, and 3) two-components of the local particle
velocities, the vertical variation in solid fraction, and particle collisions.
The resulting data set will serve as a valuable benchmark for simulations and
models of inertial liquid-solid flows, and will provide a basis for
understanding the role of particle fluctuations and the transition to turbulence
in particulate flows.