* 1706143
* Resilience, Reliability, and Externalities of Integrated Centralized and Distributed Water and Energy Systems: The Integrated Water-Energy Dynamic (iWED) Model
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kevin Gardner, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 303,680.00

1706143 (Mo). This project aims to identify trade-offs and synergies among
centralized and distributed water and energy supply schemes and enhance
understanding of water-energy interdependence and dynamics as demographics,
climate, technologies, and policies change. To achieve this goal, a novel,
integrated Water-Energy Dynamic (iWED) modeling framework will be created based
on system dynamics (SD) theory coupling results from life cycle assessment, life
cycle cost assessment, structural path analysis, and process-based climate and
hydrologic models. A generic iWED model and decision making framework will first
be developed on the regional scale. It will then be tested through two
contrasting case studies: the Tampa Bay, FL region and the Great Boston area, MA
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, all water and energy sources of a
region will first be identified as critical resource components and simulated as
stocks (time dependent cumulative levels of source availability). The inflows
and outflows of each stock will be identified. A baseline water systems model
will then be developed linking water sources, infrastructure capacity, and
demand using existing climate and hydrologic models and mass balance equations.
A similar energy systems model will also be established. The water systems model
will then be linked with the energy systems model using outcomes of life cycle
assessments, supplemented by structural path analysis. Changes in water and
energy balance, interactions, and resilience will be examined when varied types
and percentages of distributed water and energy systems are integrated into the
existing network considering varied population and downscaled climate change
scenarios. Based on the water and energy vulnerability and resilience results
under varied decentralization scenarios, a life cycle cost model will be
developed to evaluate the potential savings from centralized supply, capital and
maintenance costs associated with distributed infrastructure, and potential
incentive/disincentive policies that could support social justice and
conservation goals with distributed water and energy systems. This work is
target to generate new knowledge in 1) regional scale dynamic water-energy nexus
quantifications over their entire life cycles; 2) the influences of the
decentralization scale on water and energy availability and resiliency; 3) the
influences of different and dynamic local contexts on the water-energy nexus
under different water and energy supply schemes; and 4) the feasibility of
policy and management strategies that simultaneously optimize characteristics of
water and energy supply as well as promote social justice. This project will
also result in the development of 1) a new integrated water, energy, fund
availability and balance model - iWED, which can be generalized to any region of
concern, 2) a life cycle cost inventory of different life cycle water and energy
systems, and 3) dynamic policy and scenario analyses to inform integrated water
and energy management and support decision making of future water and energy
paradigm shift. The envisioned iWED model could easily be extended to support
and advance the development of other pertinent research fields such as
understanding the interactions among other critical resources (e.g., the food-
water-energy nexus), smart and net-zero communities, urban metabolism, and
industrial symbiosis. This project will also result in development of a new
open-sourced learning module, which can be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate level systems analysis courses, and an educational role-play game that
can be used to promote systems thinking and improve understanding of the water-
energy nexus.