* 1706322
* Bioengineering of Channelrhodopsins for Neurophotonic and Nanophotonic Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Kenneth Rothschild, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2022
* USD 520,000.00

A vital area of research that expands the scope and horizons of biophotonics is
the recent discovery of new forms of channelrhodopsins (ChRs-a family of
proteins that function as light-gated ion channels). ChRs have played an
important role in optogenetics and the recent discovery of new channelrhodopsins
from algae, has expanded the potential applications of this unique class of
microbial rhodopsins. Optogenetics applications include restoring vision to the
blind and uncovering the basis of a host of brain disorders including strokes,
traumatic brain injury, addiction, anxiety disorders, deafness, epilepsy,
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present key questions such
as the molecular basis of the cation and anion selectivity, the mechanism of
light-activated channel-gating and control of channel kinetics remain largely
unknown. In order to answer these questions and test specific hypotheses, the
PIs will utilize advanced vibrational spectroscopic and bioengineering
techniques. These include low-temperature and time-resolved FTIR difference
spectroscopy, confocal near-IR Raman and femtosecond visible-pulse/IR-probe
spectroscopy. The research program will involve undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral trainees. This will provide a pipeline to industry for talented
engineers and scientists trained in the new field of biophotonics.