* 1706581
* Molecular Structure and Reactivity of Model Mn/Na2WO4/SiO2 Oxidative Coupling of Methane Catalyst under Operating Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 562,615.00

This research project addresses the direct catalytic conversion of methane, the
primary component of natural gas, to value-added chemical feedstocks. In
particular, the research provides fundamental insight into the mechanisms of how
two methane molecules couple together to form various molecules with two carbon
atoms, the OCM reaction. The latter types of molecules are chemicals and fuels
of interest to chemical industries. The OCM reaction is of current industrial
interest as a more economical alternative to large-scale, capital-intensive
routes for methane conversion, especially for remotely located methane
reservoirs whose methane cannot be economically transported to centralized
chemical plants. The project combines research, teaching and an outreach plan
focused on understanding limitations of the best performing OCM catalyst, and
exploring options for improving its activity and selectivity beyond current
levels. This research is being showcased in annual summer workshops at the
Lehigh Valley Da Vinci Science Center where visitors of all ages will be exposed
to the new technologies being developed that convert methane to chemicals.
Workshops, curricula development, and research integration into a senior
Chemical Engineering Project Design capstone course will impact approximately180
middle-, high-school and undergraduate students of diverse socioeconomic
backgrounds per year. The research is being conducted in collaboration with
international researchers, which will allow access to cutting edge research
facilities not available at Lehigh, enhance visibility of the research, and
expose the participating students to the research culture in leading
international laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is built on the
hypothesis that the active site for OCM by supported Mn/Na2WO4/SiO2 catalysts is
an isolated surface WOx species anchored to the silica support. The
investigators' preliminary studies have identified, for the first time, the
presence of unpromoted and promoted isolated surface WOx sites during OCM that
catalyze this reaction. The objectives of the project are to (1) establish the
fundamental catalyst structure-activity relationships by application of modern
in situ and operando spectroscopy during OCM combined with kinetic studies and
density functional theory (DFT), and (2) apply the new fundamental insights to
guide rational design of advanced active and selective OCM catalysts functioning
at lower temperatures. Various permutations of unpromoted and Na-, Mn- and
Na/Mn-promoted SiO2-supported WOx sites are being synthesized. The silica
support is also being surface-modified with sodium metal and nanolinkers (TiOx,
ZrO2, Al2O3) that will increase the number of isolated surface WOx sites and
tune their reducibility and acid-base characteristics. The promoters-to-W ratios
is being systematically varied to explore their effects on both the number and
structure of the WOx sites and OCM activity/selectivity. The catalysts are being
characterized as prepared and during OCM reaction conditions with in situ and
operando spectroscopy (Raman, UV-vis and NAP-XPS) to determine the molecular and
electronic structures of the WOx sites on silica. Experimental findings are
being complemented with molecular level DFT calculations to provide additional
insights into structure-activity relationships. Corresponding kinetic studies
with isotopic CH4/CD4 and 16O2/18O2 are addressing the rate-determining-step and
relative participation of different WOx sites, respectively, - the latter via
time-resolved Raman-Mass Spectroscopy. Information about gas phase radicals and
their relationship to specific catalyst structures is being obtained with
Molecular Beam Mass Spectroscopy through collaboration with European partners.
The new insights will lead to conceptually new and realistic catalyst models
that will have the potential to enable development of one-step OCM catalytic
processes. Successful execution of the proposed research has the potential to
lead to economically viable production of C2 hydrocarbons from cheap, abundant,
yet difficult and costly to transport methane, and thus move the US closer to
energy independence while also providing a longer timeframe to transition into
sustainable chemicals. The project will involve collaborations with two
companies, Siluria and SABIC, that will facilitate transfer of new catalysts to
the chemical industry.