* 1706009
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Carbon and nutrient responses in an estuarine-coastal complex impacted by floodwaters from Hurricane Matthew
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Christopher Osburn, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2017
* USD 84,257.00

This project constitutes a rapid-response effort to investigate the effects of
the extreme flooding event of Hurricane Matthew on coastal cycling of carbon and
nutrient elements. The investigators aim to improve our understanding of how
estuaries and coastal systems respond to extreme events by measuring carbon,
nitrogen, and phosphorus loading into the Neuse River Estuary-Pamlico Sound
(NRE-PS) coastal ecosystem. The NRE-PS is the urgent study site to examine
resulting effects of Hurricane Matthew on coastal environments because it is
downstream of the most intense flooding that occurred, and it is located on the
North Atlantic "hurricane track", likely to be impacted by future extreme
events. Furthermore, it is the focus of a long-term monitoring program in that
system, the Neuse River Estuary Modeling and Monitoring Program (ModMon), which
was initiated in 1993. That date is significant because it preceded a recent
rise in Atlantic tropical cyclone activity and has been able to capture the
biogeochemical and ecological effects of major storms that have impacted the NC
coast, including Hurricanes Fran (1996), Floyd (1999), Isabel (2003), and Irene
(2011). Incorporating intensive sampling of the Hurricane Matthew flooding in
the context of these ongoing observations will enable a comparison of the
material fluxes into this coastal environment resulting from a major tropical
storm and provide a comparison with other coastal environments. Outcomes of this
work will be communicated widely via existing outreach efforts of each
investigator's research programs to local and regional resource managers,
regulators, and other stakeholders. Nutrient loading will be critical
information for stakeholders because the Neuse Estuary is an EPA 303(d) listed
waterway impaired for nitrogen. Project results can aid in understanding the
effects of extreme weather events on ecosystem disturbances and inform coastal
carbon flux estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific questions to be addressed
in the context of this project include: 1) How do coastal carbon and nitrogen
budgets respond to floodwaters from tropical storms and hurricanes? 2) What is
the biological and photochemical reactivity of this material? The first question
can be answered via a relatively short, yet intense, period of observations,
such as is proposed here. The second question, which has potential
teleconnections to climate in terms of carbon fluxes, food web responses, and
other ecosystems processes, requires a longer duration study. However, Question
2 could be answered by further study of samples collected during a short and
intense period of sampling proposed to answer Question 1. Work proposed in this
project will result in estimates of fluxes and reservoirs of key constituents
such as dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), dissolved and particulate organic
carbon and nitrogen (DOC, POC, DON, PON), and N and P nutrients, as well as
chlorophyll biomass and pigment analyses.