* 1706620
* Development of a LED-enabled biosensor for the detection of BNP biomarkers based on flexible platform
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Minhee Yun, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2023
* USD 397,966.00

A real-time mechanically flexible biosensor for medical applications is the
focus of the current effort due to low-cost and mass manufacturing capability.
The proposed new diagnostic approach will use a display device for detecting an
important biomarker that indicates heart failure. If successfully demonstrated,
the proposed technology will lead to the development of flexible and wearable
biosensors with effective manufacturability that can provide real-time
assessment of heart status directly to the wearer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the proposed research is to develop a light-emitted-display
(LED)-enabled biosensor on flexible substrates that can be used to detect B-type
Natriuretic Peptide (BNP), a cardiovascular disease biomarker, as well as other
biomarkers. Flexible and real-time diagnostic devices are attractive because of
their simplicity, fast response, and low manufacturing cost. It is proposed to
use a 2-dimensional conducting polymer to fabricate an LED-enabled biosensor on
the flexible platform for real-time analysis. First, polyaniline-based biosensor
and a LED device on the flexible substrate will be integrated for enabling in
situ measurement. Second, characterization and tests will be performed using
clinical human serum samples. Upon antigen binding, the LED will emit red light
whose intensity is proportional to BNP concentration. It is hypothesized that
the drain current will be directly correlated to BNP concentrations, thus it can
provide for quantification of BNP in human serum. Clinical blood samples from
heart patients will be acquired from the University of Pittsburgh Medicine
Center (UPMC). The proposed investigation can potentially lead to an important
new tool for diagnosing biomarkers, resulting in significantly contributing to
public health and diagnostic technology.