* 1706472
* CAREER: A low cost, label-free, multiplexable optical cavity biosensor with high sensitivity, high selectivity, and a large dynamic range using chained differential detection
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Seunghyun Kim, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2020
* USD 158,348.00

1350648 - Kim

Technical Abstract

The early detection of diseases is the key to improving survival rates of
patients and reducing economic impacts. Point of care diagnosis is the time
critical solution for the early detection of diseases accomplished by staging
effective diagnosis tools near the patient, either at the patient?s bedside or
at a physician?s office, to monitor and diagnose the patient?s health and
wellness without the costly and time-consuming processes necessary when using
centralized laboratories. The objective of this proposed research is to develop
a novel optical cavity biosensor using chained differential detection for the
purpose of point of care diagnosis. Optical cavity based biosensors are by
nature very promising for point of care diagnosis due to their label-free
operation, low cost, high sensitivity, and high selectivity. On top of the
intrinsic benefits of optical cavity based biosensors, the team introduces (1) a
three laser diode system to accomplish multiplexability, (2) a differential
detection method to enhance its sensitivity, (3) a chained mechanism to increase
the linear dynamic range significantly, and (4) a simple cavity structure which
is easy to integrate with a sample handling system such as microfluidics.
Successful completion of the proposed research project will result in a
promising platform for a point of care biosensor that can be used for early
detection of diseases and possibly create a new paradigm of medical diagnosis.

For general public:

The goal of this research is to develop a low cost and highly sensitive device
which will test for multiple diseases using a small amount of a biological
sample, usually blood. The design is composed of a biosensor with simple two
reflecting mirror structure (optical resonance cavity), constructed using well
known fabrication processes. The simple design of the device ensures that it
will be low cost, thus making it accessible to patients in both developed and
developing countries. Since the early detection of diseases is the key to
treating them effectively, it is crucial for patients to be tested regularly.
This device will enable tests to be conducted by the patient in the home or at a
physician?s office, in lieu of extensive and time consuming tests, allowing the
patient to regularly monitor for the presence of multiple diseases. Enabling the
patient to test his/herself regularly will allow diseases to be discovered early
and allow for more effective and less expensive treatments.