* 1706511
* Shape, wobble, and roll: adaptation of bacterial morphology to mechanical environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Bin Liu, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 310,622.00

Bacteria have consistent sizes and shapes that are linked to the nature of their
living environments. Cocci (with spherical shapes) and bacilli (with rod-like
shapes) are generally found as clusters in soil and mammalian gastrointestinal
tract, while spiral-shaped bacteria are known for their ability to move
efficiently through dense media. The aim of this work is to elucidate how shape
and size determine the adaptation of a bacterial strain to an environment with
specified rheological properties. This work is facilitated by an automated
tracking microscope that resolves the shape and motion of free-living
microorganisms in 3D. The project will pursue a purely mechanical approach in
examining the extent to which bacterial morphology is an indicator of cell
fitness and virulence. This study also aims to be a guide to the design of
robotic micro-scale swimmers that need to move efficiently through complex fluid
media in order to deliver drugs or kill pathogenic cells in a timely manner. The
innovation of the automated microscope will contribute to an interactive
educational program at a local high school where high school students will be
taught how to use a 3D printer to design and optimize experimental implements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a framework that maps the
selective bacterial morphology to the specific rheological properties of the
living habitats. The proposed study focuses on answering the following
questions: how the cell body of a microorganism contributes to its swimming
motility; how different cell shapes produce marked rheological effects; and
whether these environmental effects can be utilized to manipulate cell shapes.
The morphology of an individual cell and its three-dimensional movements will be
measured under an automated tracking microscope. The PI will design and create
gradients of rheological features for each individual bacterium using
microfluidic devices fabricated through photolithography. Combined with the
tracking microscopy, the PI will study the direct impact of non-Newtonian
features of the surrounding media on the motion of individual cells. The PI will
also create microfluidic devices to introduce temporal-dependent "selective"
pressures, and aim to isolate phenotypes preferred by the fluid environment.
Such devices can be used to directly control the phenotypic expressions of live
biological systems and will shed light on how phenotype variations allow the
same species to adapt to various living habitats. Ultimately, this work aims at
creating new approaches for controlling the activities and functions of
microorganisms through the hydrodynamic properties of its fluid environment. It
will also guide future design of micro-scale robots for medical and industrial
applications.