* 1706545
* Collaborative Research: Controlling Cellular Physiology and Enzyme Localization for Enhanced Oleochemical Biosynthesis in Yeast
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Ian Wheeldon, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 310,155.00

Yeast possess the capability to produce important precursors for the production
of polymers, adhesives, cosmetics, food emulsifiers, and perfumes.
Biomanufacturing of these products offers the potential for sustainable, safe
processes with unparalleled selectivity for industrial-scale production of both
these classes of oleochemicals.Â The research of this project will be the focal
point of efforts to engage graduate, community college and undergraduate
students in engineering yeast for the bioproduction of organic acids and
alcohols. By recruiting students from under-represented backgrounds in Riverside
County, California and in the rural upstate of South Carolina, this project
seeks to train a diverse workforce for the growing industrial biotechnology
sector in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
and peroxisome are the major sites of lipid and fatty acid modification in
oleaginous yeast, and the native capacity to accept overexpressed enzymes at
these intracellular locations is limited. The objective for this project is to
control ER and peroxisome physiology in Yarrowia lipolytica to enhance enzyme
expression for the synthesis of oleochemicals. Our central hypothesis is that
the catalysis and yield of biosynthetic pathways can be enhanced by 1)
increasing the capacity of the ER and peroxisomes to accept relevant pathway
enzymes, and 2) co-localizing heterologous lipid-modifying enzymes with the
native lipid synthesis and degradation machinery. This project seeks to develop
transcriptional control of gene expression to proliferate the ER and peroxisomes
and enhance protein trafficking to these organelles. To enable this new
metabolic engineering strategy, transcriptional controls including CRISPR-based
gene activation and engineered fatty acid responsive promoters that can control
temporal gene expression will be developed. These contributions are potentially
transformational because they are expected to create a novel route to engineer
biosynthetic pathways that require intracellular localization for function, thus
enabling the engineering of pathways that are not readily accessible by
traditional methods. The metabolic engineering strategy and gene regulation
tools will be specifically developed for application in Y. lipolytica to exploit
its high capacity to metabolize diverse carbon sources such as glucose, xylose,
glycerol and waste fats, and produce high titers of oleochemicals. The novel
approach to productivity enhancement embodied in this proposal has the potential
to transform the production of oleochemicals, and other products best served by
intracellular localization. The knowledge generated by the attendant study of
enzyme expression in the ER will also be of great value to synthetic and systems
biology, and by extension to the larger biomanufacturing community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award by the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering
Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.