* 1706343
* GOALI: WERF: Towards Energy-saving Wastewater Treatment through High-fidelity Heterogeneity Profiling-based Multiple-zoning Control Methodology
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Baikun Li, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

PI Name: Baikun Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1706343&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;High energy consumption is a long-standing problem for the wastewater
industry. Biological nutrient removal (BNR) systems monitored using single-point
probes give an incomplete picture of the operational status and wastewater
quality. The PIs seek to address this problem through a combination of in situ
profiling, modeling, and feedback-control methodology. An objective is to
transform BNR from an energy-intensive, inefficient, and unstable system to a
precisely controlled, energy-saving, dynamic, robust system. The industry
internship program will help create a workforce with special emphasis on
innovation and entrepreneurship. Multiple outreach initiatives including
training workshops and high school seminars will introduce students, especially
those from underrepresented groups, to environmentally friendly
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to achieve
energy-saving wastewater treatment through three innovative solutions: high-
fidelity profiling of heterogeneous processes using milli-electrode array (MEA),
data-driven modeling, and advanced model predictive multiple-zone control. By
using nitrification as the testbed, the PIs will conduct four interactive tasks:
1) MEA profiling of seven critical parameters (dissolved oxygen, redox
potential, pH, temperature, conductivity, ammonium and nitrate) will be
conducted in a lab-scale nitrification system to obtain high-fidelity profile
data; 2) Data-driven models will be developed based on the distributed MEA
profiles to describe the physical and chemical process in the system and predict
energy consumption and nitrification efficiency under varying conditions; 3)
Multiple-zone nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) methodology will be
developed to enable precise adjustment of critical operational parameters and
execute real-time control in each zone to maintain a high efficiency and
stability; and 4) High-fidelity profiling-based multiple-zone control will be
demonstrated in a pilot-scale nitrification system at the industrial partner?s
site to examine its accuracy in a real-world scenario. This innovative profiling
and control methodology will potentially transform the design, engineering, and
management of wastewater systems with the possibility of achieving energy-
positive wastewater treatment. Overall, the project targets the problem of high
energy consumption in the wastewater industry and will make a significant
contribution to ensure energy-saving design in an easily deployable platform.
The industry partner will add value to the project by evaluating the scalability
of the proposed profiling-control technology and accelerating the translation of
academic discoveries to the wastewater industry. The outcomes of the project
will be appropriate for a broad spectrum of end-use applications and thus
provide general benefit the wastewater industry.