* 1706862
* SusChEM: GOALI: Drinking Water Safety and Sustainability: Identifying Key Chemical Drivers of Toxicity for Long-Term Solutions in the United States
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Michael Plewa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 140,000.00

Collaborative Proposal&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Susan D. Richardson/Michael
Plewa&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1705206/1706862&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
majority of citizens in the US consume disinfected water. Chemical disinfectants
inactivate pathogens in drinking water; however, an unintended consequence is
their reaction with natural organic matter (NOM), anthropogenic contaminants,
and bromide/iodide to form disinfection by-products (DBPs). For our drinking
water supplies, a wide range of pristine and impacted waters are used, where
high levels of certain emerging DBPs of concern have been reported. As a result,
DBPs represent a ubiquitous chronic chemical exposure, yet the forcing agents
for toxicity remain unknown. This research will address this knowledge gap,
serve as the basis for a future wider International DBP study, and create a new
paradigm for drinking water regulation to enhance drinking water safety and
sustainability. The PIs will employ the on-going academic programs at their
universities to provide research experiences for undergraduate and high school
students, in particular students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; An international group of leading scientists participating at the
2015 Gordon Research Conference on Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products met
to address these issues and recommended an International DBP study to (1)
evaluate DBP levels globally, focusing on key emerging DBPs and surrogate
parameters: total organic chlorine (TOCl), total organic bromine (TOBr), total
organic iodine (TOI), and (2) determine which subsets of DBPs are the forcing
agents of toxicity. The PIs seek to accomplish these goals in an initial
assessment in the US. Results from this research will generate data to better
understand DBP risks, determine the forcing agents of toxicity, and enable long-
term engineering solutions to enhance drinking water safety and sustainability.
This research will identify the drivers of in vitro toxicity as a metric of
potential human health risk for DBPs in drinking water from the United States
and will serve as the basis for a future International DBP study that will
globally assess DBP risks. While it is widely recognized that individual
bromine- and iodine-containing DBPs are more toxic than their chlorine-
containing analogues, the correlation of TOCl, TOBr, and TOI with a wide range
of individual DBPs has not been evaluated. These chemical surrogates are
recognized as holding great potential (especially TOBr and TOI) for accounting
for risk, both from known DBPs (including the 65 priority DBPs to be quantified
in this study) and the unknown DBPs, where &gt;50% of the total organic halogen
(TOX) content has yet to be identified. The Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has expressed interest in the potential to use these kinds of surrogates
for regulation if they adequately represent the adverse health risk from
halogenated DBPs. Thus, this research also has the potential to modify
regulations as we know them today and better protect human health and enable
global, safe, and sustainable drinking water.