* 1706489
* Nanosensor for the Point-of-Use Detection of Hepatotoxic Microcystins in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* William Heineman, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2021
* USD 428,373.00

This research will develop and test a novel sensor designed to detect and
quantify algal toxins (cyanotoxins) frequently found in freshwaters. The
presence of high concentrations of cyanotoxins in several freshwaters, some of
which serve as sources of drinking water supplies, seriously threatens human and
environmental health. This project aims to address the urgent need of rapid
monitoring and quantification of microcystins in surface waters experiencing
algal blooms. Microcystins are a group of frequently found cyanotoxins in
freshwaters experiencing problems of harmful algal bloom formation. The
investigators will develop highly-selective and fast-responding sensors for the
detection and quantification of microcystins in drinking water and sources of
drinking water supplies using advanced carbon
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to create nanostructured
biosensors for selective identification and quantification of microcystins. With
this objective, two specific aims are targeted: 1) demonstrate nanostructured
sensors for point-of-use determination of microcystins, and 2) validate sensor
performance with real-world water samples. The sensor will be based on an
interdigitated array electrode structure inside a microfluidic channel; advanced
carbon nanomaterials such as 3D graphene and carbon nanotubes will be coated on
the electrode to provide nanostructured detection of microcystins. These
nanomaterials are advantageous for sensor purposes; they provide high electrical
conductivity and increased surface area. The sensor selectivity will be provided
by bioreceptors specific to different microcystin isoforms. The nano-biosensor
will employ electrochemical measurement techniques such as Electrochemical
Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS). The fabricated device will be evaluated for its
ability to detect and quantify microcystins in natural surface water obtained
from various freshwater aquatic systems that experience severe occurrence of
cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (cyano-HABs). This study will also provide a
fundamental understanding of the principles for creating nano-biosensors used in
selective identification and quantification of microcystins. The project has a
strong societal impact. First, this collaborative research and educational
activities through this project will provide a significant contribution to the
field of nano-biosensing for monitoring water quality. Second, it addresses a
serious and emerging environmental problem that is associated with the presence
of the highly toxic microcystins in natural waters. Finally, the nanotechnology-
based biosensors introduced in this research can be further developed for in-
situ monitoring of microcystins, which have been repeatedly reported to occur in
some of the Great Lakes, several other US and international lakes and rivers.
This will have a tremendous implication for managing sources of drinking water
and protecting human health. These efforts can be complementary to other on-
going efforts towards the restoration and sustainability of surface aquatic
systems. In addition, the research activities will directly advance the
knowledge and understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning by
bringing together a research team of graduate students, undergraduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and faculty. Several activities will enhance education on
cyanotoxins. These include (i) rigorous cross-disciplinary laboratory training
for students in different programs, resulting in the enrichment of the
curriculum, (ii) collaborative research opportunities for scientific training to
the student researchers, (iii) broad dissemination of results, (iv) enhanced
public awareness of topics relevant to Cyano-HABs and cyanotoxins, and (v)
strengthened interdisciplinary research collaborations.