* 1706290
* Collaborative Research: EPRI/WERF: Collaborative Research: Electrical percolation in flowable electrodes for energy-efficient water re-use applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Marta Hatzell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 69,245.00

PI Name: Kelsey Hatzell/Marta Hatzell&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1706956/1706290&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is a growing need to develop low
cost and modular water reuse systems to promote optimal reclamation and
treatment of discharged water from industrial, municipal, agricultural and
energy generation sites. Targeting strategies that optimize water usage could
significantly alleviate stresses at the core of the food-energy-water nexus. The
development of new water deionization technologies which can be easily scaled to
meet the decentralized demands is imperative for water sustainability.
Capacitive deionization is a cost effective and low energy electrochemical
approach for treating brackish water streams; however, there are fundamental
limitations to this approach because the process is not continuous. In this
project a novel flow-electrode-based architecture is examined as a means for
both continuous and scalable deionization and energy recovery. The researchers
plan to collaborate with local organizations (Georgia Intern Fellowship for
Teachers and Vanderbilt School for Science and Math) in order to design an
experiential curriculum on brackish water treatment to increase water literacy
in the Southeast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
advance fundamental understanding of the design of flowable electrode
architectures for ion removal processes. The PIs plan to study the concept of
flow-electrode capacitive deionization (FCDI) for water treatment. FCDI systems
have three flow channels, two of which serve to transport suspended activated
carbon particles, which remove or electroadsorb ions, and a center channel where
the feedwater is directed. To date, few studies have explored the fundamental
mechanisms which promote efficient charge transfer and storage within flow
electrodes. Specifically, understanding the influence of hydrodynamics within a
flowable electrode and its effect on the formation and disruption or percolation
networks can potentially increase material utilization and control
electrochemical penetration depths. The PIs seek to define a new theoretical
framework to describe charging and electron conduction processes at the
particle-particle level in order to elucidate idealized operating conditions
that promote energy efficient ion removal processes. The PIs will investigate
the percolation network of carbon particles in a flow electrode using
computational fluid mechanics, advanced in-situ characterization, and bench
scale experimentation to obtain new fundamental and applied knowledge regarding
this emerging deionization technology. Direct interrogation of the electrical,
mechanical and microstructural properties of flowable electrode percolation
networks will be obtained through advanced synchrotron-based techniques. The
work has the potential to guide the design of a new process for water
purification and may have broader relevance for other environmental technologies
involving energy storage, energy conversion, and desalination.