* 1706061
* Integrating synthetic biology approaches with patterned biofilm formation to investigate bacterial persistence in heterogeneous structures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Dacheng Ren, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

PI Name: Dacheng Ren&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1706061&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria produce non-growing subpopulations, known
as persister cells, which are highly tolerant to a variety of stresses such as
heavy metals, heat, and antimicrobials. Persister formation increases when a
bacterial culture enters the stationary phase or when bacteria form a biofilm, a
surface-attached multicellular structure with bacterial cells embedded in a
matrix produced by the attached cells. Increasing evidence indicates that
persister cells play important roles in biofilm associated stress tolerance. In
this project the team will integrate synthetic biology with patterned biofilm
formation to control persister formation in biofilms and use this new system to
study the effects of control agents. The research in this project will be used
as a topic for developing new modules and experiments for courses in
bioengineering and chemical engineering curricula. Outreach activities are
proposed to broaden the participation of K12 teachers and students, especially
underrepresented groups (including veterans), in science and engineering.
Activities include summer workshops and tailored student projects in local
schools. Together, these integrated activities will help recruit and prepare
students with knowledge and skills to meet the challenge of new technologies to
better serve the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the critical
knowledge gap in understanding bacterial persistence, the PIs will develop a
novel experimental system with the capability to control persister formation and
wake-up in biofilms using near-infrared-light. They will monitor bacterial
persistence in real-time in patterned biofilms with minimized structural
heterogeneity. Specifically, this team will engineer a near-infrared-light-
controlled gene expression system to manipulate persistence by tuning the
expression level of selected toxin and antitoxin genes. Persister formation and
wakeup will be monitored using unstable green fluorescent protein under the
control of the growth-rate-dependent promoter PrrnB1. With the biofilm
morphology and persister formation well controlled, this system will bring an
unprecedented opportunity to obtain new insights into bacterial persistence in
biofilms. Gene expression profiles of biofilm persister cells and normal cells
will be compared and the changes in gene expression during persister formation
and wake-up will be revealed. The light-induced biofilms with large numbers of
persister cells and control biofilms will then be used to investigate the
effects of antibiotics on persisters and normal cells in biofilms. The
concentrations of antibiotics at different depths of biofilms and in normal vs.
persister cells will be characterized by using mass spectrometry, and by
molecular simulation and calculation based on mass transfer principles. The
experimental results and modeling data will be integrated to understand biofilm
persistence and killing by specific agents. The findings from this study will
improve our general knowledge of bacterial physiology and help develop more
effective methods of microbial control in applications such as healthcare and
biosecurity.