* 1706586
* Transport of Non-Spherical Particles in Wavy Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 343,513.00

Plastic debris is a growing environmental concern for the world's oceans;
several million metric tons of plastic enter the oceans each year. Much of the
plastic debris is present as small, irregular particles five millimeters or less
in length, called "microplastics," that pose a threat to marine organisms, the
environment, and human health. This research project involves extending state-
of-the-art research about particle-laden flows to situations relevant to the
microplastics problem. Irregular particles are being studied in wavy flows to
understand how to control the transport and sorting of these microparticles in
the ocean and in near-shore environments. Both laboratory experiments and
modeling are being performed and tools for predicting the motion of
microplastics in the ocean and the length of time particles spend near the shore
are being developed. The research team is working with earth scientists,
biologists, and policy makers to integrate the resulting knowledge into
conservation efforts. The investigators also are closely engaged in mentoring
graduate students, teaching undergraduates about the transport of marine
microplastics, and creating outreach activities for high school and middle
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is identifying and
classifying the mechanisms that control transport and tumbling of anisotropic
particles in wavy environments and quantifying the dispersion rate and sorting
of these particles based on size and shape in waves. While particle-laden flows
are well studied in certain limits, the complexities of particle-laden flows
involving large, anisotropic particles in surface gravity waves is complicated
by the wide range of length and time scales involved. In particular, direct
numerical simulations become computationally expensive, and as a result,
experiments are a crucial tool. The investigators have advanced facilities for
generating and quantifying wavy flows and are performing experiments and
empirical modeling to characterize particle transport in these flows. The
experiments will allow the researchers to address how anisotropic particles,
like microplastics with their additional degrees of freedom for rotational
motion relative to spherical particles, may lead to complex dynamics when
coupled with waves, turbulence, and the stratification found in the ocean. A
better understanding of these interactions will provide guidance regarding
assumptions going into simplified models. The governing nondimensional
parameters (the density ratio, wave Froude number, and Stokes number) are being
varied over ranges relevant to those in the ocean. Pointwise flow
characteristics and turbulence are being measured using laser Doppler
anemometry; waves are being characterized via wave gauges; and the mean
transport due to Stokes drift is being measured via particle tracking.
Anisotropic particles, including rods, disks, and ellipsoids, are being created
via 3D printing, and the dispersion of these particles is being measured by
releasing a cloud of particles and then measuring the phase-averaged shape of
the cloud over time and space. The results are expected to enhance our
understanding of the fundamental physics governing the transport of non-
spherical particles in waves and to inform the empirical modeling of
microplastics in the ocean.