* 1706093
* Collaborative Research: Linking metal nanoparticle chemical modifications at the luminal/intestinal epithelia interface to intracellular alterations of essential metal homeostasis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Matteo Minghetti, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2022
* USD 245,710.00

The increase in global metal nanoparticle production, due to the vast array of
applications they can be used in and the technological advancements they bring
about, raises questions about their potential impact on human health and the
environment. The cell has evolved to tightly regulate the uptake and
intracellular concentration of essential and toxic metal ions; however, metal
nanoparticles seem to bypass these normal uptake systems and accumulate in the
cell in a less controlled manner. Determining the exposure scenarios that
enhance or reduce metal nanoparticle uptake, bio-reactivity, and toxicity is
often difficult due to the lack of appropriate biological models. To allow for
such investigations at the cellular level, this research project uses a model of
the fish intestine derived from rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Once inside
the cell, the bio-reactivity and toxicity of nanoparticles depends on their
chemical transformation, a process which is currently poorly understood. This
research project endeavors to link the dynamic chemical modifications of metal
nanoparticles outside and inside the cell and intracellular alterations of
essential metal homeostasis. The mechanistic knowledge generated in this project
is envisioned to support human and environmental risk assessment with regard to
metal ions and metal nanoparticle exposure. Moreover, the development of the
fish intestine model will benefit regulatory science by potentially reducing the
cost of testing and contributing to the efforts to establish animal-free
alternatives in toxicology risk assessment. This multidisciplinary project is an
opportunity for valuable collaborative training for two graduate research
assistants and multiple undergraduate research assistants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is designed to evaluate the impact
of metal nanoparticles on the homeostasis of essential trace metals. Temporal
and spatial distributions of essential and non-essential metals are being
correlated to intracellular biomarker of metal bioavailability, establishing a
link between intracellular chemical modifications and biological responses.
While it is possible to determine dissolved metal speciation outside the cell
using simplified cell culture media and chemical equilibrium models,
intracellular metal speciation is more difficult to ascertain. Accurate
evaluation of intracellular metal speciation requires a technique that allows
for in situ measurement such as X-ray spectroscopy and microscopy. This research
project studies how to link extracellular silver and titania nanoparticles
behavior (agglomeration, dissolution, and speciation of dissolved metal ions) to
intracellular chemical modifications induced by metal nanoparticles (levels and
localization of essential trace metals) to molecular and cellular responses
(mRNA and protein levels of metal transporters and imaging of cellular
organelles) in RTgutGC. RTgutGC is a unique intestinal fish cell line that when
grown on transwell inserts, develops several of the features found in intestinal
epithelia in vivo. Study of cellular localization of metal nanoparticles and
local influence on essential metal distribution over time will be valuable from
a toxicology/pharmacology standpoint but also in aquaculture, which is now
looking into the use of nanotechnologies to improve uptake of nutrients and
drugs.