* 1706474
* Boundary Layer Turbulence Control via Acoustically Resonating Porous Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Carlo Scalo, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,788.00

Porous surfaces are ubiquitous in aeronautical applications, some of which
include: suppression of noise in gas turbines; control of flow instabilities in
combustion chambers; enhancement of aerodynamic performance of wings under high-
lift configurations, e.g. during landing; turbine blade temperature control via
coolant air bleeding through the pores; reduction of aerodynamic heating on the
surface of hypersonic (Mach>7) vehicles. At the core of all of the
aforementioned applications there is the interaction between: (a) the flow
evolving over the porous surfaces and (b) the flow trapped within the pore-space
of the surfaces themselves. State-of-the-art modeling techniques are unable to
simulate the physics under these combined effects. As a result, technological
development in flow control over porous surfaces has been limited by the lack of
progress in the modeling, and hence understanding, of the fundamental
interaction between the features of the porous surfaces and overlying flow
dynamics. The goal of the proposed study is to carry out highly controlled
experiments and simulations in a canonical flow configuration that will allow
direct comparison between the two approaches, assisting in overcoming the
aforementioned limitations. The proposed research will have broader impacts on
society through direct effects on engineering practice. Development of
resonating surfaces will have important technological impacts in aeronautical
applications, including delaying separation in high-speed boundary layers and
control of trailing edge noise in commercial aircrafts. The majority of fluid
machinery applications will also be impacted by the success of this effort, for
it provides simple means to enhance turbulent heat-and-mass-transfer and mixing.
In addition, this project will work with successful diversity and outreach
programs at Purdue, including recruiting initiatives and retention of
underrepresented groups with which the PIs collaborate.

Porous surfaces interacting with a compressible flow are classically modeled via
impedance boundary conditions. The latter are formulated directly in frequency
domain, relating the Fourier transforms of the pressure and wall-normal
transpiration velocity at the surface. Recent computational advances have
allowed for the first time to impose impedance in the time-domain in a fully
compressible Navier-Stokes solver by retaining full numerical and physical
realizability (respecting causality of wave-propagation), unlocking the key
computational strategy needed to unravel the fundamental physics of the coupling
between a compressible flow and porous surfaces. This enabling capability
provides an original and elegant way to computationally model the effect of
porous surfaces on the overlying flow structure. This has allowed the first
high-fidelity numerical simulation of a compressible turbulent flow over wall-
impedance to be carried out, revealing the fundamental structure a new self-
sustaining state of near-wall turbulence altered by acoustic resonance. The
proposed work will investigate sound-turbulence interactions by controlling the
acoustic impedance at the wall in the canonical setting of turbulent channel
flow turbulence at flow conditions reproducible both experimentally and
numerically. The proposed effort combines highly-parallel large-eddy simulations
with state-of-the-art experiments, which include time-resolved tomographic and
highly resolved planar particle-image velocimetry (PIV), with direct estimates
of turbulent characteristics and measurement uncertainty. An experimental
prototype of a tunable resonating surface will be developed and will be employed
to physically demonstrate the feasibility of this process. A new series of
numerical investigations will proceed in parallel, supporting analysis and
modeling of wave-turbulence interactions and the resulting flow instabilities.
Advanced subgrid-scale modeling techniques will be used to investigate the
compressible regime where wave modes exhibit stronger coupling with the flow
hydrodynamics.