* 1706797
* Collaborative Research: Novel Materials and Reactor Design for Coupled Electrolytic Hydrogen Production and Nitrate Removal With Resource Recovery from Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Charles Werth, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 223,753.00

1706797 / 1705255&lt;br/&gt;PIs : Werth, Charles J. / Jawahar Hussaini, Syed
Mubeen &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrate is the world's most ubiquitous groundwater
pollutant, and its management is recognized as one of the Grand Challenges by
the National Academy of Engineering. Catalytic treatment has emerged as a more
sustainable option for nitrate removal from drinking water, but its
implementation has been stymied by a lack of scientific knowledge and innovation
in new materials that directly address challenges in reactor performance and
scale-up. Specifically, nitrate treatment in scalable reactors is limited by
hydrogen delivery to reactive catalysts sites. The PIs propose a high risk/high
reward approach that is based on generating adsorbed atomic hydrogen in situ via
electroactive catalyst supports. The overriding hypothesis is that atomic
hydrogen can be electrolytically generated at the same (or directly adjacent to)
site where nitrate reduction occurs, and this generation can be balanced with
nitrate reduction to eliminate hydrogen mass transfer limitations, optimize
hydrogen use, minimize energy consumption, and recover value-added resources,
ammonium and chlorine. The specific objectives of the proposed work are: 1) To
identify the fundamental bulk material and surface chemical properties
responsible for the synthesis of carbon-based catalyst supports with high-
electrical conductivity, metal dispersion, water permeability, and strength. 2)
To elucidate reaction mechanisms and kinetics of coupled electrolytic hydrogen
generation and nitrate reduction processes in batch and flow-through reactors,
and to identify the fundamental properties of new catalytic materials that
optimize these processes. 3) To evaluate the economic and environmental
sustainability of a hybrid ion exchange - electrochemical reactor for nitrate
removal from drinking water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach involves
novel synthesis and electro/catalytic experiments that aim to elucidate
structure/property correlations, reaction mechanisms, and optimal reactor
conditions for efficient nitrate removal coupled with ammonia recovery from
simulated drinking water, and an economic and environmental life cycle analyses
of the technology coupled to ion exchange waste brine treatment and reuse that
will serve as feedback for process optimization. Potential scientific
advancements include: (i) foundational insights and structure-activity
relationships to guide synthesis of new cathodic materials that efficiently
generate hydrogen and reduce nitrate at catalytically reactive sites; (ii) the
design of a novel electrolytic- based reactor that integrates these robust
cathodic materials into a packed-bed flow system; (iii) integrated resource
recovery of agriculturally valuable ammonium, as well as chlorine for catalyst
fouling mitigation and water disinfection; and (iv) the development and
dissemination of an integrated model that allows scale up for a cost and
environmental impact assessment for new technology development. Proposed
educational, outreach and engagement activities include using UT Austin's
engineering open houses to expose junior high and high school students to
engineering design for water treatment the development of a new teaching modules
and dissemination to water utilities through an industry collaborator.