* 1706516
* International Workshop on Spoken Dialog Systems (IWSDS) Workshop Student Travel
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Maxine Eskenazi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2018
* USD 8,000.00

The International Workshop on Spoken Dialog Systems (IWSDS) is one of the major
annual workshops that assembles the Spoken Dialog research community. This year,
the workshop will address major issues that are of interest to both the research
community and the public at large such as the intelligent agent (Siri, Echo,
Home, etc), the ethics in dealing with these agents, intelligent agents and
emotions, and how to assess the performance of an agent. Many students attend
IWSDS to both present their own findings and to learn from others in the field.
They meet colleagues, with whom they can collaborate, exchanging ideas and data.
The grant will provide travel funding to enable students from American
universities who are working in this area to present their work at this
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2017, the International Workshop on Spoken Dialog
Systems (IWSDS) will see presentations on multi-domain systems, the ethics of
intelligent agents, intelligent agents and emotion, assessment, and a variety of
other topics of interest to the Spoken Dialog research community. The three day
event will welcome researchers from around the world for a combination of oral
and poster presentations as well as demonstrations of state-of-the-art systems.
This grant will enable students from American universities to attend the
Workshop to present their work and to learn about the work taking place
elsewhere. They will meet colleagues and have the opportunity to discuss their
work and to exchange information and perhaps begin collaborations with other
attendees.