* 1706825
* Chemical Kinetics of Phosphorus-Containing Compounds Used as Fire Suppressants and Chemical Agent Surrogates
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Eric Petersen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 07/31/2020
* USD 269,999.00

Compounds containing phosphorus have modern, global ramifications because of
their use as promising fire suppressants. The alternate usage of these
phosphorous compounds as promising replacements for halon-based fire
suppressants provides additional, far-reaching impact and a strong need for
sufficient understanding of their chemical behavior. These compounds can also be
used as chemical agent simulants to understand more about their behavior in
flames. In this research project, the chemistry of phosphorus-based molecules
will be studied experimentally. The primary result will be an accurate
representation of the important chemical reactions that occur in flames
containing these phosphorous compounds. Improved models can then be employed by
engineers and scientists. This multidisciplinary project will allow
opportunities for the graduate students, postdoctoral researcher, and
undergraduate students working on the project to publish and attend conferences
in fields in which they might not normally participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
compounds of interest to this project are phosphorus-based. A major aspect of
accurately predicting their combustion behaviors lies in the accuracy of the
phosphorus-oxidation kinetics sub-mechanism. Despite their current importance,
there are few kinetics data at combustion conditions for these compounds, and
the chemical kinetic reaction rate coefficients are not at all well known. This
fundamental study will focus on making direct measurements of the reaction rate
constants of key reactions in the phosphorus oxidation sub-mechanism. The
fundamental chemical kinetics information produced from this work will be one-
of-a-kind and will provide results that are much needed for simulating the
effects of P-containing compounds in a combustion environment. By using a shock
tube to produce the high-temperature conditions (1000 to 2000 K), laser
absorption measurements of key intermediate species such as PO2, HOPO, H2O, and
HOPO2 will be performed. New spectroscopic information thereon will be obtained,
and laser absorption measurements of their concentrations will be performed for
the first time in a shock tube. Such measurements will lead to determination of
the reaction rates of several important reactions (up to 6) for the first time.
The successful completion of this project will greatly advance the predictive
capabilities for the combustion behavior of several phosphorus-containing
species of practical and topical interest.