* 1706475
* SusChEM: Customizable Separations using Oil-Coated Bubbles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Sven Behrens, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

The processing of ores to recover valuable minerals, the production and
recycling of paper, and the treatment of wastewater all require processes that
remove small solid particles from an aqueous slurry. Allowing the small
particles to settle by gravitational forces alone would require prohibitively
large settling basins. Thus, the industrial standard is to bubble air through
the slurry, so that the particles adhere to the bubbles and rise to the surface
where they can be easily skimmed off. This froth flotation process is best
suited for removal of hydrophobic (oil-loving) particles, but is less effective
for hydrophilic (water-loving) particles, as the latter have less proclivity to
leave the aqueous phase and cling to the air bubble. Yet, a trend to replace
oil-based chemicals with benign water-based substitutes has challenged effective
removal via traditional froth flotation methods. As one example, the increasing
use of environmentally friendly water-based printing inks leads to difficulty in
recycling this paper. As new separation strategies are developed, there is an
arguable advantage in adapting existing equipment and processes. This project
will develop a method to coat the air bubble with environmentally benign and
recyclable bio-based oils to increase the improve the efficiency of froth
flotation in removing hydrophobic particles.

The central hypothesis of this project is that an oil coating on the bubble will
positively affect froth flotation by removing energy barriers for particles to
adhere to the bubble surface, thereby improving particle-bubble adhesion, and
increasing the separation efficiency. The oil coat is also expected to alter
both the bubble shape and its rise dynamics. These hypotheses will be probed
experimentally in a flotation column, comparing coated to uncoated bubbles,
using a combination of optical, gravimetrical, and chemical analyses. Model
particles allow for systematic variations in wettability, particle type, and the
oil composition, and will be used to develop a theoretical framework. The theory
will be extended and validated with hydrophilic inks from an actual paper pulp.
The project will lead to a fundamental understanding of the three-phase oil-
water-bubble interactions responsible for the performance of flotation
separations, allowing customization of the engineering design of flotation
devices for a specific separation task. One graduate student and one or two
undergraduate researchers will conduct the laboratory experiments. Outreach
efforts will include hands-on demonstrations using table top flotation columns,
with a target audience of elementary and middle school students.