* 1706059
* Collaborative Research:  High-performance water purification membranes made of 2D zeolite nanosheets
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Baoxia Mi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 189,985.00

Collaborative Proposal &lt;br/&gt;PI: Baoxia Mi/Dongxia
Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1706059/1705284&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Clean water production has become a global challenge as the world
water demand is approaching the available fresh water supply. Membrane
technology holds great promise for solving this problem by supplying fresh water
through purification of nontraditional sources such as seawater, brackish water,
and wastewater. Typically, polymeric semi-permeable membranes have been used in
the purification process. Polymeric membranes are effective in removing salt
from water, but they suffer from membrane fouling, low chlorine tolerance, and
low water permeability, leading to high capital and maintenance costs. A focus
of this project is to overcome these problems by developing a next-generation
membrane using a novel 2-dimensional (2-D) zeolite nanomaterial. High-
performance zeolite membranes may have other applications in other areas, such
as point-of-use water treatment, renewable energy production, and drug delivery.
The educational activities particularly target K-12 female students,
underrepresented minority groups, and the general public. Both the diversity of
students in engineering careers and the public interest in science and
technology will be enhanced. The knowledge gained from this project may help
guide the design of new processes to help resolve the global water
crisis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Principle Investigators plan to exploit the
unique properties of 2-D zeolite nanosheets as radically new materials to make
high-performance membranes for water purification. One problem impeding zeolite
membranes from realizing their potential in water purification applications is
the difficulty of achieving high zeolite loading in the synthesized membrane;
therefore, developing highly efficient strategies to drastically increase
zeolite loading without sacrificing membrane mechanical strength or structural
integrity will be a research focus. The PIs take a novel interdisciplinary
approach that: (1) exploits the emerging 2-D zeolite nanosheets that have a
higher external surface area, more surface functional groups, and a unique
flexible shape, all of which will lead to much enhanced physicochemical
properties of membranes when compared with those generated by 3-D zeolite
nanoparticles used in all previous studies; (2) customizes a layer-by-layer
technique that will ideally assemble the 2-D zeolite nanosheets into an ultra-
thin zeolite membrane with extremely high loading and significantly improved
performance in water purification; and (3) performs a thorough investigation to
elucidate the underlying mechanisms for the water/contaminant transport and to
evaluate the potential in-situ regeneration and long-term stability of the novel
zeolite membranes. Compared with traditional polyamide or previous zeolite-
polymer nanocomposite membranes, the zeolite nanosheet membrane will offer many
significant advantages including: (1) higher zeolite loading, (2) higher water
permeability, (3) improved fouling control through in-situ regeneration, and (4)
improved chemical stability. The PIs investigate the structure/function of the
zeolite nanosheet membrane and the water and solute transport in these novel
zeolite membranes.