* 1706733
* SusChEM: GOALI: Harnessing the Antimicrobial Properties of Copper to Control Legionella in Plumbing Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Adam Estelle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 379,752.00

Proposal Number: 1706733&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Marc A. Edwards&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The growing public health threat in drinking water from opportunistic
pathogens (OPs), such as Legionella, calls for practical engineering solutions
that are compatible with sustainability goals. Taking advantage of the natural
disinfecting properties of copper (Cu) pipes, which are widely used in plumbing
systems, is an attractive approach for control of Legionella; however, Cu is not
consistently effective in practice, as it sometimes inhibits and other times
stimulates Legionella growth. This research seeks to address this fundamental
knowledge gap through bench, pilot, and field-scale studies to identify the
water chemistries that enhance or inhibit Cu-driven disinfection of Legionella.
This research is potentially transformative as it will inform practical,
economical, and sustainable means of addressing a key public health threat just
as trillions of dollars will be invested to upgrade antiquated water
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis for this
research is that water chemistry directly and indirectly influences Cu toxicity
towards Legionella. The specific objectives are to: 1) Determine the effects of
Cu speciation, complexation, and precipitation in governing toxicity towards
Legionella under conditions relevant to hot water building plumbing systems; 2)
Explore the role of microbial communities inhabiting plumbing systems to mediate
toxicity of Cu, e.g., through shielding or responding to nutrients released from
corrosion reactions (e.g., H2 evolved), and confirm Objective 1 phenomena under
realistic pilot-scale plumbing conditions; and 3) Conduct a field survey to
validate relationships among physicochemical, Cu speciation/solubility, and
microbial factors in real-world plumbing systems and illuminate drivers of Cu-
enhanced versus Cu-inhibited Legionella growth. This study will be the first
systematic examination of the speciation- and solubility-dependent nature of Cu
toxicity towards Legionella in potable water systems, particularly within hot
water that is most relevant to OP proliferation. Of particular interest is the
occurrence and behavior of cuprous (Cu1+) ions. Cu1+ is probably non-toxic to
Legionella and may even indirectly stimulate its growth by catalyzing deposition
corrosion of less noble metal plumbing materials which will then provide H2 for
autotrophic hydrogen-oxidizing bacteria. Cupric (Cu2+) ions have strong biocidal
properties, but effectiveness may be limited by temperature, redox, inorganic
and organic ligands, corrosion control agents, and biofilm properties. An
innovative combination of tools will be used to characterize complex
interdependencies among the microbial community composition, physicochemical
properties, Cu speciation, and Legionella, including next-generation DNA
sequencing, green-fluorescence protein modified strains, flow cytometry,
scanning electron microscopy, and x-ray diffraction crystallography. Knowledge
generated by this research has the potential to guide building maintenance
practices to prevent the proliferation of Legionella.