* 1706934
* The dynamics of buoyant vortices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Stefan Llewellyn Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 315,655.00

The goal of this project is to carry out a systematic study of vortical flows
incorporating buoyancy effects, including the effects of gravity, density
differences and surface tension. Explicit calculations of the motion of vortices
in the presence of density differences and surface tension will develop
understanding of fundamental fluid processes. Potential applications include a
number of technological and geophysical situations, such as volcano vortex
rings, cavitation, and flows around helicopter rotors and wind turbins. The
project brings together researchers with complementary skills and experience in
vortex dynamics and variable-density flows, and begins a new collaborative
effort with scientists in Japan, Spain and Great Britain. In addition to
outreach, during a series of workshops, the PI and teachers will develop a
curriculum unit focusing on the calculus relevant to physical principles,
illustrated by examples from the proposed work and fluid mechanics more
generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four sub-projects will be investigated. First,
the stability of vortex filaments will be examined in the presence of density
variations. The case of rings and helices will be examined, since for these
geometries solutions are known for the basic state. Second, an asymptotically
consistent model for the evolution of a thin-core vortex filament with density
variations will be developed and implemented. A formulation based on a force
balance allows buoyancy and surface tension forces to be incorporated in a
natural manner. Third, contour dynamics methods for axisymmetric vortex rings
with density differences will be developed. This leads to the evolution of a
vortex sheet on the boundary generated by baroclinic torques. Fourth, a new
approach to contour dynamics applicable to helical vortices will be introduced
and implemented, giving new exact solutions to the problem. The sub-projects are
independent but related: each gives insight into features of the full problem.
The outcome should include advances in the understanding of vortical fluid flow,
including new solutions, and in new reduced models of such flows.