* 1706295
* An integrated experimental and computational study of erythrocyte adhesion mechanics in blood flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Bo Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,916.00

When red blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels, a number of
potentially life-threatening health problems can be created, including sickle-
cell anemia, malaria, and diabetes. Currently, our understanding of how red
blood cell properties influence their stickiness is limited. This research
project combines theory, mathematical models and experiments to try to develop
an accurate description of the mechanisms that lead to cell adhesion to blood
vessel walls. The researchers involved in this project are participating in an
existing outreach program that engages high school students from local
disadvantaged communities in research opportunities, lab tours, and guest
lectures. YouTube videos and workshops targeted at the general population are
further extending the understanding of this work to a broader audience, as are
the development and delivery of experimental modules related to this project.
This flexible educational and training program is intended to help develop the
workforce needed to address expanding demands in the field of biomedical science
and healthcare.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this study is
that erythrocyte deformability is a key factor in cell attachment and detachment
processes, wherein low-deformability cells have more stable contact with the
adhesion molecules, which enhances the adhesion strength of erythrocyte to
endothelium. To verify the hypothesis, the specific research aims of this
project are: (i) to derive a fundamental understanding of the fluid mechanics in
the vicinity of erythrocyte endothelium interactions by a novel monolithic
Lagrangian Fluid-Structure Interaction model and micro-Particle Image
Velocimetry experiments in microfluidic channels, and quantify the lift and drag
forces on the deformable cells exerted by the plasma under different flow
conditions; (ii) to use integrated microfluidic experiments and cell-scale
Fluid-Structure Interaction simulations to characterize the mechanical
properties and deformability of healthy and unhealthy cells in physiological
conditions; and (iii) to qualitatively and quantitatively describe the influence
of cell deformability on the underlying physics of flowing erythrocyte adhesion
to immobilized endothelium proteins by a combination of three-dimensional direct
cell simulations in plasma and microfluidic experiments. The researchers are
focusing on better understanding the sensitivities of the shape, deformability
and membrane properties of cells, the type and density of receptor-ligand bonds,
as well as the physiological shear rates of plasma, on the dynamic strength of
erythrocyte-endothelium adhesion. This project will advance the knowledge base
in computational science, biomechanics and develop new experimental technologies
to treat vascular disease.