* 1706393
* Collaborative Research: High-throughput microliver platform for drug toxicity screening
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Salman Khetani, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

In vitro models of the human liver play a critical role in assessing the
toxicity of drugs and industrial chemicals prior to human exposure. Such models
are also useful for developing therapeutics against global diseases that affect
the liver, such as hepatitis B/C viral infections, fatty liver disease, malaria,
type 2 diabetes, and cancer. While considerable progress has been made over the
last few years in utilizing engineering tools to fabricate higher functioning
and longer-lasting human liver models, some key gaps and limitations still need
to be addressed including increasing the throughput capability of the system,
improving reproducibility in the production of the model, and including cancer
cell lines in certain models. This research project is developing and optimizing
a high-throughput "micro-liver" platform comprised of a biologically compatible
gel, human liver cells, and additional biological molecules needed to support
the functions of the cells. The investigators are using this platform to test
the hypothesis that the microenvironment of this platform will imitate liver
functions at levels that are significantly closer to actual physiological liver
function. The investigators are also using clinically-relevant compounds to test
the utility of these "micro-livers" for drug metabolism and toxicity screening.
The educational efforts associated with this project using the findings and
novel devices of this project to engage high school teachers and students in
research experiences. Introducing cutting-edge research concepts earlier in high
school is expected to better prepare students for a rigorous engineering
curriculum at the college level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is
focused on creating the first high-throughput, three-dimensional (3D) microliver
platform with a tunable extracellular matrix (ECM) microenvironment containing
primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) and a complex mixture of liver stromal cells.
The data generated will yield a fundamental understanding of the interactions of
different types of human liver cells in a 3D context and the effects of drugs on
such interactions. These findings will provide design criteria for the
biomanufacturing of larger-scale 3D liver constructs for tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine. The microgel platform and systematic exploration of cell-
cell and cell-ECM interactions in the liver can also be broadly applicable to
other tissue types being developed for integration into organs-on-a-chip
systems. The project has two objectives: 1) develop and test a microfluidic
platform for the high-throughput fabrication of 3D human liver microgels for
investigating cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions and 2) investigate the effects
of drugs on the morphology/functions of 3D human liver microgels. Objective 1
builds on a recently developed microfluidic flow-focusing device for generating
microgels containing liver-inspired ECM, PHHs, and liver stromal cell types. The
device will be used to test the hypothesis that a 3D microenvironment, which
contains the complex liver-inspired ECM coupled with key liver stromal cell
types, will enhance and stabilize for several months PHH functions at levels
that are significantly closer to physiological outcomes than possible with
existing systems. Use of a microfluidic system overcomes the problems associated
with 3D culture methods using bulk collagen gels that are too labor-, time-, and
cost-intensive to use in high throughput screening and, due to large size, have
significant diffusion limitations for nutrients and signaling molecules. The
system enables systemic investigation of the interactions of PHHs with stromal
cells within a 3D ECM microenvironment, thus providing design principles for the
construction of a human liver model that more accurately recapitulates human
liver functions and drug responses.