* 1706552
* Chemical efflux of environmental estrogens
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Otakuye Conroy-Ben, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 329,998.00

Wastewater treatment employs biological processes to reduce contaminants prior
to discharge into the environment. Among the suite of chemicals that must be
treated are emerging contaminants, which include endocrine disruptors,
antibiotics, and illicit drugs, among others. Such pollutants, specifically
estrogen mimics, survive wastewater treatment and have been shown to contribute
to endocrine disruption in aquatic animals. The extent of wastewater-derived
contaminants is well-studied in public surface water, reclaimed water, and
reused water in the US; however, little is known about the extent of emerging
contaminants on Tribal lands. The broader scope of emerging contaminant
attenuation is being explored in Tribal communities through a joint partnership
with the Inter-Tribal Council of Arizona, in which modules are being developed
for the training of water professionals in emerging areas of wastewater
treatment, pollution, and reuse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of
this project is to determine if multi-drug efflux mechanisms or chemical efflux
in wastewater bacteria contributes to estrogen attenuation during secondary
treatment. Preliminary studies show that estrogens such as 17b-estradiol,
nonylphenol, and bisphenol-A induce genes encoding multi-drug efflux proteins
and are substrates of efflux pumps. These pumps may play a significant role in
the cycling of emerging contaminants in wastewater. The membrane-bound proteins
are expressed in response to toxic chemical accumulation and convey one form of
multi-drug resistance in bacteria. A key hypothesis is that efflux pumps export
endocrine disrupting chemicals from the bacterium prior to biodegradation,
leading to attenuation during wastewater treatment. The primary goals are to (1)
quantify multi-drug efflux genes and proteins in wastewater bacteria, (2)
identify wastewater substrates of efflux pumps, and (3) evaluate if efflux of
estrogens from bacteria is a major transport mechanism that contributes to
attenuation. The novel concept of estrogen-induced antibiotic resistance may
contribute to estrogen mimic attenuation and will be tested in this project.