* 1706014
* Nanoparticle Diffusion in Complex and Dynamic Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Karen Winey, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 456,939.00

CBET - 1706014&lt;br/&gt;PI: Winey, Karen I.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many polymeric
materials are modified with nanoparticles to provide special mechanical,
electronic, or optical properties. Controlling the distribution of the
nanoparticles throughout the polymeric material is essential for achieving these
desired properties. Nanoparticles can diffuse through polymers or gels, and in
some cases diffusion during processing or during use of the material leads to a
maldistribution of nanoparticles and nanoparticle aggregation that degrade
product performance. This award will support research into the diffusion of
nanoparticles in polymers and gels. It will focus specifically on the regime
where the nanoparticle sizes are comparable to the size of mesh formed by
entanglements in polymers and by crosslinks in gels. In this regime,
nanoparticle diffusion depends on the both the movement of the nanoparticles and
fluctuations in the polymer mesh through which the nanoparticles diffuse.
Effects of the nanoparticle shape, interactions between the nanoparticles and
the polymeric matrix, and spatial variations in the structure of the polymer
matrix will also be examined and compared with existing theories. Results from
this award will be disseminated to industrial practitioners through an annual
symposium organized by the researchers. In addition, the research team will lead
hands-on demonstrations of nanoscience for the public at Philly Materials Day
and the University of Pennsylvania's annual Nano Day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support research to measure nanoparticle diffusion in hydrogels and
entangled polymer melts that are characterized by their mesh size and tube
diameter, respectively. The research will explore systems where the nanoparticle
diameter and mesh size or tube diameter are comparable, because models predict
strong deviations from conventional Stokes-Einstein diffusion in these cases.
Single particle tracking methods will be used to measure nanoparticle diffusion
in tetra-poly(ethylene oxide) and polyacrylamide hydrogels. Tetra-poly(ethylene
oxide) hydrogels form a model network with nearly monodisperse mesh size.
Polyacrylamide hydrogels form a network with a mesh size and heterogeneity that
can be manipulated by varying solvents. Rutherford Backscattering Spectrometry
will be used to measure nanoparticle diffusion coefficients for phenyl-capped,
brush grafted, and hydroxyl-terminated nanoparticles (spherical and cylindrical)
in polystyrene and poly(2-vinylpyridine) to explore both athermal and attractive
nanoparticle-polymer interactions. Quantitative comparisons will be made with
models and theories across a critical range of the ratio of nanoparticle to mesh
size, as defined as the tube diameter in the reptation model. Finally, one
nanoparticle-polymer system has been specially designed to facilitate measuring
nanoparticle diffusion by both single particle tracking and Rutherford
backscattering methods to compare complementary information provided by
individual nanoparticle motion and ensemble averages from a single system.