* 1706777
* GOALI: Development of Next Generation Microcombustor-Thruster Using Anisotropic Nano-Coating
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Ashwani Gupta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 340,000.00

Micro-combustors are critical components in micro-power systems for small and
portable power generation as well as for use in micro-thrusters, thrust vector
control, small aerial vehicles and small satellites. One of the big challenges
in micro-combustors is to achieve stable combustion and minimize the thermal
losses. Aiming to address this challenge, this project plans to develop thermal
barrier coatings with a highly-anisotropic thermal conductivity to minimize the
heat loss and enhance flame stability in micro-combustors. Development of high-
performance micro-combustors is also expected to greatly benefit many areas of
industrial sectors, including thrust vector control, gas turbine engines, rocket
engines, diesel engine, and portable power sources, since they all have similar
challenges. This project include a multi-year undergraduate research component
for the University of Maryland's prestigious Gemstone Program. Involving these
undergraduate and graduate students in this project will help enhance their
interests in science and technology by offering these students research training
opportunities to gain hands-on research experiences. Web-based education and
international education will also further broaden the international impacts of
the proposed research and educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore means to develop and deposit a novel and innovative
nanostructured thermal barrier coating with a highly anisotropic thermal
conductivity on the inside walls of sub-millimeter-scale micro-combustor. This
type of thermal barrier coating is able to enhance heat recirculation along the
combustor surface while minimizing the heat loss through its surface, therefore
promoting flame stability. The proposed approach will expand the flame stability
limits and enhance the combustion efficiency and thermal performance in micro-
combustors. Efficient thermal management with efficient heat exchange between
the exhaust gases and fresh reactant mixture is critical in the micro-
combustors. In the proposed multilayer thermal barrier coating, the thermal
conductivity in the cross-plane direction will be significantly reduced by
interfacial resistance between the nanosheets to values below 1 W/mK.
Additionally, these thermal barrier coatings will have high resistance to
oxidation corrosion and decomposition. This project will influence the
development of the next-generation of miniature scale combustors and propulsion
devices for use in terrestrial and space applications.