* 1706815
* SusChEM: Exploring Chalcohalide Split-Anion Perovskite Photovoltaics Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yiyang Sun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 270,545.00

Perovskites are a type of material that has shown promise for use in thin-film
solar photovoltaics for renewable electricity production. A recent record of 22%
solar cell efficiency was achieved with hybrid organic-inorganic halide
perovskite materials as light absorbers. To enable practical commercialization
of this type of perovskite-based photovoltaic, two key issues must be addressed.
The most critical challenge is to design perovskites without lead (Pb) that
still have comparable efficiency and stability performance. The other hurdle to
practical application is instability when exposed to moisture. This project will
generate fundamental knowledge on alternative high-performance stable perovskite
materials to replace lead-based ones. The project's outcomes are a new series of
green materials to replace and outperform existing PV perovskite materials that
contain environmentally harmful elements. These green materials could
potentially transform the current photovoltaic industry considering their cost
and environment advantages. The project will also help promote education
diversity under several initiative programs at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to explore and test
chalcohalide split-anion perovskite photovoltaic materials. The partial
replacement of halogen elements by chalcogen elements (i.e. split-anion
chalcohalides) in the perovskite structure will introduce a large pool of high-
mobility metal elements with the potential to replace lead in conventional
halide perovskites. Under this hypothesis, the principal investigators will
combine computational and experimental approaches to study the quantitative
impacts of split anions on the electronic, optoelectronic, and chemical
properties of the materials. The outcomes of the research are fundamental
understanding and a knowledge base on predicting the electronic, optoelectronic
and thermodynamic properties of photovoltaic perovskite materials; establishment
of a computational framework enabling photovoltaic materials design more
reliably and efficiently; and synthesis strategies and protocols for split-anion
perovskite materials.