* 1706416
* Impacts of Engineered De-stratification on Estuarine Biogeochemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Lora Harris, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 364,700.00

Lakes, reservoirs, and coastal estuaries are all susceptible to poor water
quality as a result of nutrient pollution. In some cases, aquatic "dead zones"
are created where dissolved oxygen concentrations become so low that it
negatively impacts the abundance of organisms, the availability of nutrients,
and the organization of food webs. Engineered de-stratification is a
technological solution that includes the use of large scale aerators to mix the
water column and to force atmospheric oxygen into deep waters, thereby improving
oxygen conditions in these systems. This research project seeks to determine
both the intended and unintended consequences of engineered de-stratification,
especially in terms of its effects on oxygenation and the chemical cycles that
control greenhouse gas and toxin production. For example, changes to the oxygen
concentrations may affect the availability of mercury and methane in the
environment. Another objective of the research project is to collaborate with
county government and citizen scientists interested in studying and restoring
the Rock Creek estuary, which is connected to the Chesapeake Bay in Maryland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical step in understanding the tradeoffs associated
with engineered de-stratification is to document the impacts of de-
stratification on biogeochemistry and associated ecosystem responses. Large
engineered aeration systems have rarely been installed in tidal waters. This
research study capitalizes on a system installed in the Rock Creek estuary,
where this technology has been applied for nearly thirty years. The responses of
nitrogen, phosphorus, mercury, and methane pools to aeration is being
comprehensively documented, and both the ecosystem services (e.g.,
denitrification) and unintended consequences (e.g. greenhouse gas emissions)
associated with engineered de-stratification are being quantified. The
researchers are using a novel, user-controlled estuarine-scale de-stratification
system for testing dose-response relationships. They are focusing on
understanding the effects of aeration time and tidal timing on biogeochemical
responses. In optimizing aeration protocols the study will provide insights into
the effects of cycled oxygen depletion on nutrient and greenhouse gas cycling.
Data from the experiments will be used to enhance a modeling tool to extend
findings to other aquatic systems with chronic oxygen depletion. These new
efforts will reveal a new and comprehensive picture of how engineered de-
stratification can be efficiently utilized to alleviate oxygen depletion and
enhance nutrient removal services.