* 1706681
* IN-SITU RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY STUDY OF LITHIUM-AIR BATTERY WITH BI-CONTINUOUS SERS-ACTIVE ELECTRODE AND MEMBRANE
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Yu Zhu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,955.00

1706681 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Zhu, Yu &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Akron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-air batteries are promising high-density
energy storage systems. The theoretical energy density of lithium-air batteries
is comparable with that of gasoline. However, the current lithium-air battery
systems suffer from slow and irreversible electrochemical reactions on the
cathode and in the electrolyte solution. A fundamental understanding of the
reactions taking place in these systems is essential for designing better
electrodes and electrolytes that improve energy storage capacity and the number
of cycles before battery replacement. The experimental investigations seek to
monitor in real time chemical species on the cathode of lithium-air batteries to
provide a better understanding of the chemical reaction mechanisms that can lead
to improved battery designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal aims at exploring
the reactions taking place on the cathode of lithium-air batteries using in-situ
Raman spectroscopy. The use of polymer templates to fabricate well- organized
bi-continuous electrodes made of pristine chemical vapor deposited graphene,
gold, or transition metal interstitial compounds is proposed. To enhance the
Raman signal, the bi-continuous electrodes will be modified by the adsorption of
uniform and regularly assembled gold nanoparticles using either controlled
evaporation or template masking. The modified electrodes may allow the detection
of trace intermediate compounds by surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS).
In order to detect the intermediates and products formed in the electrolyte
solution, a SERS-active insulating membrane with similar structure as the
electrode will be applied to the assembled lithium-air battery. A suite of
characterization tools (including Raman, FTIR, TEM, XPS, and XRD) will enable
investigation of the materials on the air-cathode and electrolyte solution. Of
particular interest are intermediate compounds formed during the charging and
discharging processes that will enable addressing fundamental material
challenges associated with electrolyte/electrode stability. The studies may
provide an improved understanding of lithium-air battery cathode reaction
mechanisms and may lead to engineering solutions for high performance,
reversible lithium-air batteries. In addition to the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, outreach efforts are proposed that will include a
Science Olympiad weekend for students in grades 4-6 and activities through the
ACS SEED program targeting economically disadvantaged high school students in
the Akron, OH, area.