* 1706950
* Geometric Structure of the Turbulent Cascade
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Nicholas Ouellette, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2021
* USD 336,975.00

The majority of fluid flows in nature and in engineering applications are
turbulent. But despite being so commonplace, understanding and modeling
turbulence remains a significant challenge. Turbulent flows are distinct from
more general unsteady flows because they display a characteristic cascade of
energy from the large length scales at which energy is generated to the small
length scales on which it is dissipated by viscosity. Typically, this process is
described in an abstract way that makes it difficult to appreciate the
underlying physics. The goal of this proposed research is to recast the
turbulent energy cascade as a mechanical process, where large scales do work on
the small scales. This model immediately emphasizes the important role played by
geometry, since if the forces provided by the large scales are misaligned with
the flow direction, they can do no work. In this proposed research, the geometry
of the turbulent cascade will be studied in detail and its links to other
turbulent processes will be clarified. Ultimately, the results of this research
may lead to new strategies for turbulence modeling. The proposed research will
support the education and training of graduate students, and the results will be
folded into existing graduate courses. Additionally, the supported scientists
will participate in educational outreach activities coordinate through
Stanford's Bob and Norma Street Environmental Fluid Mechanics Laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposed research is to gain a
deeper understanding of how the geometric properties of scale-dependent
turbulent stresses and strain rates and, in particular, their relative alignment
control the turbulent cascade. Specifically, the alignment and possible spatial
ordering of the turbulent stress and strain rate will be characterized, an
understanding of how this alignment is modulated by advection will be developed,
and potential links between alignment and intermittency will be investigated.
These questions will be studied via theoretical work and analysis of data sets
for three-dimensional turbulence, two-dimensional turbulence, and unsteady,
random, and multiscale but non-turbulent velocity fields. By basing this
research on sound and transparent mechanical principles of work and energy
transfer, the results will bring new clarity to the origins of the detailed
structure of turbulence that is more interpretable than abstract approaches such
as multifractality.