* 1706050
* Networked Nanophotonic Devices for Stem Cell Regulation: From Optogenetics to Optogenomics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Michal Stachowiak, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2022
* USD 599,067.00

Major breakthroughs in the field of genomics, embryonic stem cell (ESC) biology,
optogenetics and biophotonics are enabling the control and monitoring of
biological processes through light. This project will develop the first steps
towards the control and monitoring of stem cell regulation processes with
single-cell resolution and real-time operation. Novel nanophotonic devices will
activate/inactivate gene expression and, thus, control stem cell differentiation
in neuronal cells. Light-controlled protein-protein interactions and
nanophotonic devices will be utilized to control genome function. New
discoveries and findings from this project will be incorporated into existing
and new courses, and a new cross-departmental course will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By incorporating light-actuated/light-emitting
proteins into cells, key biological processes at the sub-cellular level can be
controlled and monitored in real time. Cell development and fate can be
effectively regulated by targeting key genes in the cell pluripotency network.
Broadband sources will be utilized to illuminate two interleaved plasmonic nano-
antenna arrays designed to resonate at the required frequencies. Nano-lasers at
650 nm and 750 nm will be developed, which will provide spatial and temporal
control of the illuminated area. Nanophotonic devices and the optogenomic
constructs that are developed will be utilized for the first time to control
genome function through regulation of gene activities and DNA
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.