* 1706726
* GOALI: Omics- and metabolically-informed out-selection of Nitrospira spp. and Comammox bacteria from energy efficient engineered nitrogen removal processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Kartik Chandran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2020
* USD 380,045.00

PI Name: Kartik Chandran Proposal Number: 1706726

The wastewater treatment sector is in the midst of a renaissance to move
towards embedding energy and resource efficiency in the pursuit of clean water
and even becoming energy positive, i.e., producing energy from the water
treatment process. The focus of this project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the bacterial populations and their activities in energy-
efficient engineered wastewater treatment systems and use this understanding to
facilitate full-scale implementation of these systems at water utilities.
Potential benefits of this project include the possibility of widespread
adoption of enhanced wastewater treatment technologies and approaches in
utilities traditionally limited by energy availability or energy costs. This
project addresses the theme "reducing nitrogenous pollution in an
environmentally sustainable fashion," one of the grand engineering challenges
defined by the National Academy of Engineering. Technology developed from this
project is expected to contribute significantly to the nitrogen removal program
of Washington, D.C. and other utilities in the US. The PIs will develop
educational modules to introduce environmental microbiology research to high-
school students from minority schools in New York City. The PIs plan to help
bridge the gap between fundamental research and practical application of this
new paradigm in energy-efficient clean water by developing and implementing
educational modules directed at water quality professionals.

The application of the anammox process for the treatment of sewage or dilute
wastewater (mainstream deammonification) holds immense potential for scaling up
the energy-savings and reduced overall footprint typically associated with
anammox-based treatment of anaerobic digestion centrate or filtrate
(sidestreams). Nevertheless, the typical operational strategies associated with
selecting for aerobic and anaerobic ammonia oxidizing bacteria (AOB and AMX,
respectively) and concurrently selecting against nitrite oxidizing bacteria
(NOB) in sidestream systems do not apply to mainstream deammonification systems.
The PIs plan to develop a science-based understanding of the microbial ecology,
metabolism, biokinetics, and thermodynamics of NOB in mainstream
deammonification processes. Based on this fundamental work, the PIs plan to
develop metabolic and activated sludge models and employ these models for the
optimization of lab-, pilot- and full-scale mainstream deammonification
processes in New York City, Washington, D.C. and Odense, Denmark. This project
represents one of the first systematic attempts at full-scale and pilot-scale
implementation of NOB-outselection in the US supported by a fundamental-applied
research continuum. Using novel molecular techniques such as next generation
sequencing, systems biology (-omics) and conventional engineering based
approaches, the PIs plan to model NOB ecology, metabolism and thermodynamics.
The analytical and modeling effort will lead to a better understanding of the
specific mechanisms by which to engineer stable mainstream deammonification
microbial communities and processes. Ultimately, the results of this project can
help to promote widespread adaptation of mainstream deammonification for
biological nitrogen removal (BNR), based on a mechanistic understanding of the
constituent linked microbial and engineering systems.