* 1706513
* Next Generation Ca-P Cements for Treating Vertebral Body Fractures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Vijay Goel, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 01/31/2021
* USD 362,445.00

Award # 1706513 PI: Bhaduri

This project will develop and characterize a novel material for the treatment of
vertebral body compression fractures. This debilitating condition of the spine
causes severe pain, reduced mobility, and potentially compromised organ function
in a diverse segment of the population. The team will develop a next-generation,
calcium phosphate-based orthopedic cement composition that, when injected at the
fracture site, self-sets and develops strength within a short time without any
generation of heat that could damage the surrounding tissue. Furthermore, the
new material will be designed such that it has the ability to induce bone growth
at the site of the fracture, which will improve healing. The innovation in this
project is related to both the processing of the material and the choice of
compositions. Working together, these two aspects of biomaterials development
will create novel compositions with a diverse range of capabilities. These newly
developed and optimized materials will be tested in a biomechanical model to
mimic both normal and osteoporotic bone. The new material is expected to be cost
effective, as the starting materials are simple chemicals. This project will
integrate students of all levels, from high school through graduate students,
into the laboratory. In addition, a mentoring program will be established with
inner-city Toledo high schools to excite students about STEM fields,
particularly related to bioengineering and manufacturing. Finally, a co-op
program for undergraduate students will be developed in conjunction with the FDA
to provide students with experience in medical device regulation.

The goal of this project is to design, optimize, and fully characterize -
including through in vitro testing - novel compositions of a calcium phosphate-
based orthopedic cement. The cement will be predominantly dicalcium phosphate
anhydrous (CaHPO4, also known as monetite), which has optimized resorption
kinetics and so supports biodegradation of the cement as the natural bone heals.
The particles within the cement will be bonded with nano-silica to provide
strength and osteoconductive properties. Additional osteoconduction can be
generated due to the material?s ability to deliver bone morphogenic proteins to
the affected site. The specific scientific objectives will be to: 1) develop,
examine, and optimize the physical and mechanical characteristics of this next
generation, calcium phosphate-based injectable orthopedic cement; 2) perform
experimental studies on spinal models (both normal and osteoporotic) to
determine the in vitro performance of the various cement compositions; and 3)
evaluate the kinetics of bone morphogenic protein release from the cement as
well as its impact on cell attachment and proliferation to the material surface.