* 1706761
* Neurophotonic strategies for cell-resolved, non-invasive brain machine interfaces: multicolor bioluminescence delivered by gene therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Chris Schaffer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 583,210.00

Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) have the potential to enhance quality of life by
restoring functions lost to neurological disease. However, current minimally-
invasive BMIs (e.g. cortical surface electrodes) do not provide enough
information for complex control. BMIs that yield high information content (e.g.
implanted electrode arrays) damage brain tissue, limiting their lifespan. This
project will develop a next-generation BMI that uses light instead of
electricity, is less invasive and longer-lasting than implanted electrode
arrays, and is capable of high information-content recording. This proposal will
enhance teaching materials and summer programs with strong emphasis on
recruitment of UMR students (and those who did not have real lab research
experience). This could positively influence more students and attract them to
multidisciplinary sciences or STEM programs in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will virally express calcium-sensitive bioluminescent proteins in
neurons, so light is emitted with neural activity. To distinguish different
neurons, multiple colors of such sensors are stochastically expressed, so each
neuron contains different amounts of each color of the bioluminescent sensor,
yielding a unique spectral signature. To monitor neural activity, the wavelength
and intensity of emitted light is detected as a function of time. These data are
processed to yield information on the activity of a large ensemble of individual
neurons. This approach could provide a path to a long-term, robust, and high-
fidelity BMI.