* 1706087
* Collaborative Research:  Mechanisms of Gradient Sensing by 'Feel' in Cell Migration Directed by Extracellular Matrix
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jason Haugh, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2021
* USD 285,325.00

Cell migration is an important step in many processes in the body, such as the
healing of wounds and the response to infection. The cells are in contact with a
matrix that allows them to crawl and explore. To do so, cells must actively
sense matrix properties by touch and feel. An overarching goal of this
collaborative project is to unify or distinguish cell sensing of the quantity
(stickiness by touch) versus quality (stiffness by feel) of contacts with the
matrix. The multidisciplinary research will be integrated with graduate student
training, teaching of engineering courses, and outreach that will foster science
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell migration is a fundamental
process in tissue development and homeostasis. The molecular determinants of
chemotaxis, cell migration biased by a gradient of a soluble attractant, are
reasonably well understood, and a paradigm has emerged characterizing certain
intracellular signaling pathways as a molecular "compass". In contrast,
haptotaxis and durotaxis, migration directed by gradients of immobilized ligand
density and of mechanical stiffness, respectively, are poorly understood and
require a new paradigm, considering that cells must actively encounter and
respond to physical cues (i.e., by "feel") rather than by passive sensing of
diffusible ligands. Under Objective 1, the aim is to define feedback mechanisms
that control coupled cytoskeletal dynamics in migrating cells. It is
hypothesized that adhesion-mediated signaling pathways control the duration of
lamellipodial protrusion and are spatially coordinated by F-actin bundles. High-
resolution, live-cell microscopy and molecular perturbations of the putative
signaling and cytoskeletal processes will be applied to systematically relate
perturbations of putative mechanisms regulating the actin cytoskeleton to
changes in lamellipodial protrusion dynamics. These studies are expected to show
how cell motility is biased by physical cues. Under Objective 2, it is proposed
to elucidate the nature of haptotactic bias at the level of adhesion, signaling,
and cytoskeletal dynamics. It is hypothesized that F-actin bundles/filopodia
direct, and lamellipodia propagate, haptotactic exploration. A related
hypothesis is that the haptotactic bias (comparing up- vs. down-gradient)
manifests as differences in signaling and/or cytoskeletal dynamics, integrated
by adhesions. It is proposed to analyze the dynamics of adhesion, signaling, and
cytoskeletal structures during migration on haptotactic gradients generated
using microfluidic devices. These studies will characterize leading-edge
motility dynamics during haptotaxis, a poorly understood mode of directed
migration that is distinct from chemotaxis. Under Objective 3, the proposed work
will elucidate the molecular and biophysical determinants of durotaxis and
define features that are common or distinct between haptotaxis and durotaxis.
Hydrogels with gradients of crosslinking will be generated and integrated with
traction force microscopy, a method for measuring local stress in an elastic
gel. These studies will test the role of fascin-rich filopodia as sensory
organelles guiding durotactic migration. The results will further elucidate the
relationship between cell protrusion, focal adhesion dynamics, and traction
force exerted by durotaxing cells. The interdisciplinary nature of the project
offers a unique environment for the training of two graduate students, who will
be engaged in research and an outreach activity fostering science communication.