* 1706978
* Generating Nonnative Structures in Binary Ionic Liquid Mixtures for Tunable Phase Equilibria Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Jindal Shah, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 266,180.00

Ionic liquids are substances that are composed entirely of ions and can be
designed to exist as liquids by combining a wide range of cations and anions.
They have emerged as potentially environmentally benign chemicals due to their
essentially nonvolatile nature and unique physicochemical properties. By
judiciously selecting the cation, anion or functional groups on the ions,
desired physical, chemical and biological properties can be imparted to ionic
liquids making them truly designer solvents. Although such a combinatorial
approach can potentially be exploited to generate as many as one million ionic
liquids, a continuing challenge in the field of ionic liquids is that many ionic
liquids display unfavorable transport properties limiting their use in
industrial processes. Further, ionic liquids with transport properties in the
range of interest for industrial applications, such as gas separations, usually
contain fluorinated ions raising their production cost and environmental concern
due to toxicity and poor biodegradability. Binary mixtures of ionic liquids with
different compositions can potentially provide precise fine-tuning of the
molecular interactions to generate desired properties. According to one
estimate, there are one billion binary ionic liquid combinations; thus, it is
highly desirable to predict a priori the properties of binary ionic liquid
mixtures. However, at present, there is a lack of fundamental knowledge
regarding the design rules that can be applied to arrive at such a conclusion.
The proposed research is geared toward fulfilling this critical knowledge
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is guided by the hypothesis that
nonideality in the binary ionic liquid mixtures in terms of non-native molecular
interactions occurs when two ionic liquids differing widely in their hydrogen
bonding ability are combined; the nonideal behavior is reflected in the
nonlinear dependence of solubility of gases on the composition of the binary
mixture. The validity of the hypothesis will be tested by (i) determining the
extent to which novel interactions are established for binary mixtures composed
of ionic liquids differing widely in their hydrogen bonding ability and (ii)
evaluating the effect of such interactions on the phase equilibria properties of
binary ionic liquids mixtures with gases, such as carbon dioxide and methane.
Molecular dynamics simulations will be carried out to elucidate molecular level
interactions present in the mixtures composed of two ionic liquids while free-
energy calculations and Monte Carlo methods will be employed for calculation of
phase equilibria of substances in these mixtures. The proposed integration of
research and education aims at creating an intellectually stimulating
environment for training graduate and undergraduate students on understanding
the role of molecular phenomena in designing efficient chemical systems. The
proposed outreach plan is targeting students from diverse backgrounds and
underrepresented populations in STEM fields.