* 1706201
* Multi-rate Nonlinear Observers for Process Monitoring, with Application to Polymerization Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Yossef Elabd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Very often, critical quantities related to safety, product quality and/or
economic performance of a chemical process cannot be measured on line. However,
on-line measurements of other physical variables are always available, and these
must be used to estimate and monitor unmeasured critical quantities. In this
project, a dynamic model, with additional appropriate feedback terms from all
the on-line measurements, will be used to build a state observer to estimate the
state of the system, from which all pertinent critical quantities can be
estimated and monitored. The project aims at transforming current industrial
practice on process monitoring, by providing general algorithmic tools in a
unified framework, as well as practical guidelines for their application to
chemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims at (a) advancing the
theory of nonlinear observers and (b) enabling and expanding the applicability
of advanced nonlinear observers for model based monitoring of chemical
processes, including polymerization reactors. The first objective of the project
is the development of as systematic general methodology for the design of multi-
rate multi-delay nonlinear state observers for process monitoring. Meeting this
objective will involve theoretical research efforts, to advance methods and
results of nonlinear systems theory. The second objective involves testing and
evaluation of the practical applicability of the theoretical algorithmic
framework to chemical process monitoring applications. In particular, monitoring
of polymerization reactions will be the principal application area. Meeting this
objective will involve modeling, simulation and observer design by applying the
general algorithms of the theory part of the proposed project, as well as
experimental implementation and testing. The research hopes to advance the
theory and algorithms of nonlinear observers, including (a) the proper handling
of multi-rate measurements and (b) the proper handling of multi-delay
measurements in nonlinear observer design. It also aims at advancing the
practical application of nonlinear observers for monitoring product quality in
the operation of chemical processes, including polymerization reactor
monitoring, by enabling and improving the utilization of all available on-line
measurements. The results of the work will be broadly disseminated to
researchers in academia and industry through presentations at scientific
conferences, scholarly refereed journal publications and through a dedicated web
site for the project. In addition to graduate students, the PIs plan to recruit
underrepresented undergraduate students to pursue research in their
laboratories.