* 1706305
* Effects of Dispersant Molecular Structure on the Stabilization of Dispersions Against Agglomeration and Sedimentation
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Elias Franses, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Many industrially important processes involve suspensions of particles in a
liquid. These processes are often hampered by agglomeration of the particles and
sedimentation of the aggregates. Process engineers take steps to prevent
agglomeration and sedimentation by adding surfactants, compounds that lower the
surface tension between two liquids or between a liquid and a solid, that coat
the particles and inhibit their agglomeration. However, adding a surfactant can
also change the bulk properties of the suspension and make it more difficult to
process. This research project involves studying and alternative approach to
preventing agglomeration and sedimentation without changing significantly the
flow properties of the suspension. The idea is to find surfactants that
spontaneously form molecular structures or assemblies in the liquid that prevent
particle agglomeration, sedimentation, or both. The researchers are examining a
broad array of surfactant-particle systems and determining the characteristics
of the system that prevent agglomeration. The results will help enable process
engineers in such industrial areas as paints and inks, pharmaceuticals, and
cosmetics to design products that remain stable and maintain their beneficial
properties over long periods of time. The project also involves students at all
academic levels, including high school students, especially those from
traditionally underrepresented groups, who are being recruited to participate in
the project through Purdue's SEED program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to screen, evaluate, and select surfactant dispersants for
controlling agglomeration and sedimentation of suspended particles. The role of
surfactant molecular structure on the formation of assemblies such as micelles
and vesicles that can inhibit agglomeration and sedimentation of particles is
being investigated. A broad array of surfactants are being examined including
single and double hydrocarbon chains connected to single and double polar head
groups. Anionic, cationic, and nonionic surfactants with carbon chain lengths
from 8 to 16 are being studied. Characteristics of the particles, such as size,
composition, density and concentration, is also being included in the study.
Agglomerate size is being determined by dynamic light scattering and
spectroturbidimetry, and changes in rheological properties are being measured
using a constant stress rheometer. Cryo-transmission electron microscopy is
being used when appropriate to characterize vesicle and particle structures.
Computational studies using Brownian Dynamics and Stochastic Dynamics
simulations are being carried out to identify mechanisms of suspension
stabilization.