* 1706742
* Collaborative Research: Engineer a functional 3D vascularized islet organoid from pluripotent stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2018
* James Hoying, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

PIs: Banerjee, Ipsita / Rege, Kaushal / Hoying, James Proposal Numbers: 1706674
/ 1706268 / 1706742

Pancreatic islets are micro-organs that produce and release multiple hormones,
primarily insulin, into the blood stream. Deterioration of islet health and
function results in diabetes, which has become an epidemic healthcare problem
worldwide. A promising treatment of diabetes lies in islet transplantation--
where isolated islets from donors are transplanted into the patient. In the
absence of sufficient islet donors, the current focus is on generating islets in
the laboratory from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC). Pancreatic islets
primarily consist of hormone producing cells interlaced with a dense network of
capillaries for efficient transport of released hormones. In addition to
nutrient delivery, the islet vasculature plays a critical role in islet
development and function. Hence, when deriving islet-organoids from hPSCs, there
will be multiple benefits in engineering the intra-islet vasculature, which is
the objective of this project. This objective will be achieved by integration of
multiple novel techniques, including the aggregation of pancreatic cells into
spheroids and the inclusion of microvessel fragments (MFs) obtained from adipose
(fat) tissue to enhance vascularization. The most significant impact of the
regenerative organoids will be in cell therapy for diabetes. An even more
achievable goal is the use of functional islet organoids as an in-vitro model
for testing the efficacy and toxicity of drug compounds for diabetes. The
interdisciplinary faculty team, representing the University of Pittsburgh,
Arizona State University and the University of Louisville, will leverage the
multidisciplinary approach of this project to train students at the graduate and
undergraduate levels and to broaden outreach programs to increase opportunities
for a diverse population of students. The team will develop a joint summer
internship program, where minority students from each institution will intern in
the other two Universities, thereby enhancing collaborative opportunities as
well as student training.

The goal of this collaborative project is to engineer in-vitro vascularized
pancreatic islet organoids from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). Self-
organization of hPSCs will be engineered into heterogeneous three-dimensional
(3D) constructs with a physiological islet vascular network and endocrine
function. The team has developed a novel hydrogel system that closely mimics the
3D islet physiology through self-organization of hPSC derived pancreatic
progenitor cells. The hydrogel platform enables precise control over the 3D
culture configuration as well as allowing multicellular aggregation. This is a
substantive departure from status quo, where hPSCs are randomly aggregated in a
stirred suspension resulting in uncontrolled aggregates of varying size and
phenotype. In-vitro vascularization will be engineered by incorporating isolated
adipose-derived microvessel fragments within the engineered 3D cellular
construct. These microfragments retain the endothelial, vessel matrix
components, and supporting cells necessary for angiogenesis. This pre-embedment
and development of a vascular network is a substantive departure from status
quo, where in-vivo implantation and host vasculature integration is relied upon
for microvascular network formation. The project perhaps represents the first
attempt to generate in-vitro vascularized pancreatic islet organoids from hPSCs.
The Research Plan is organized around three aims: 1) to determine culture
conditions inducing aggregation of hPSC derived cells; 2) to induce islet-
specific microvascular network within the islet organoids; and 3) to induce and
characterize mature islet functionality (endocrine phenotype and glucose
responsive insulin production) in the vascularized organoids in vitro and in
vivo in an immunocompromised mouse model. It is hypothesized that adequate
reproduction of islet microenvironment within the organoid will induce islet-
specific vascular characteristics and phenotype in the adipose-derived
microvessels. Such regenerative islet organoids will be directly relevant for
pancreatic tissue and organ engineering, and methods developed have the
potential to transform the field of tissue engineering in general.