* 1706916
* Illuminating organelle dynamics through highly scattering bone: intravital wavefront optimized structured illumination imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Peter Kner, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 501,655.00

Mortensen 1706916&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes a range of
optical designs and engineering tasks to create an optimized microscope for use
in deep tissue imaging. If successful, the proposed work will extend super-
resolution structured illumination microscopy substantially and will provide a
significant biological advance for tracking and monitoring engineered stem cells
in deep tissues. In vivo optical imaging at depth with cellular level resolution
is a major challenge to the clinical translation of biophotonic technology and
the proposed resolution and depth of penetration metrics would be very
beneficial to the field. The PIs support a diverse group of trainees (including
high school students) and will develop two new courses on microscopy for
biologists and biology for microscopists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will benefit a range of fields including the skeletal biology,
hematopoietic and neuroscience communities. To enable sub-diffraction microscopy
in living bone marrow, three objectives will be pursued: 1.) A dedicated
2-photon microscope will be designed and built with a deformable mirror and
digital micromirror device. 2.) The wavefront shaping 2-photon scanning
microscope will be enhanced for live 2-photon structured illumination imaging
resulting in 150nm lateral resolution. 3.) The instrument will be tested and
validated by intravital imaging of mitochondria dynamics in Mesenchymal Stem
Cells (MSCs) in mouse bone.