* 1706378
* Effects of Curvature on Monolayer Morphology and Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Joseph Zasadzinski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2020
* USD 370,000.00

CBET - 1706378&lt;br/&gt;PI: Zasadzinski, Joseph A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
behavior of emulsions, foams, and other multiphase systems, including biological
materials, is strongly affected by surface-active molecules, such as
phospholipids and surfactants, at interfaces. For more than a century, the
behavior of molecules at flat interfaces has been studied using a Langmuir
trough. However, most interfaces in multiphase systems are curved, which affects
the distribution of the molecules on the interface and the properties of the
interface. This award will support the use of new tools to examine the
morphology and dynamics of molecular monolayers on bubbles with radii from 30 to
500 microns. A confocal microscope will be used to determine how the chemical
composition of the monolayer and molecular arrangements in the monolayer are
affected by the curved surface of the bubble. Atomic force microscopy and X-ray
diffraction measurements will help reveal how molecular packing is affected by
curvature. Variations in surface tension will be measured for a bubble whose
size is changed at different rates. Results from this research will help explain
how effects of interfacial curvature on monolayers influence the stability of
curved liquid surfaces in the lung, which is especially important in lung
inflammation resulting from disease or trauma. Results will also be useful in
understanding the stability and rheology of commercially important emulsions and
foams and the dynamics of tear films in the eye and wetting behavior of contact
lenses. The project will engage students at all academic levels, as well as
local high-school students and teachers. Instructional modules containing images
from the research will be prepared to illustrate the importance of material
properties on lung health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monolayers of phospholipids,
cholesterol, and fatty acids or alcohols can form coexisting, ordered, solid-
like domains in a continuous, disordered, liquid-like matrix, or two immiscible
liquid-like phases. On the flat interface of a Langmuir trough, the solid
domains resist coalescence due to a long-range electrostatic dipole-dipole
repulsion even though a measurable line tension acts to minimize the domain
perimeter. Recent results suggest that for bubbles smaller than 200 µm, the
connectivity of the solid phase domains changes to a mesh-like network with the
fluid phase domains disconnected and isolated from each other. This change in
morphology and connectivity of the solid phase alters the dynamic dilatational
modulus, which describes how the surface tension changes with interfacial area.
Very little is known about experimental values of the dilatational modulus of
mixed phospholipid, protein, fatty acid and cholesterol monolayers. Confocal
microscopy will be used to image highly curved bubble surfaces to determine how
interfacial curvature and monolayer composition alter the domain morphology, and
a new capillary pressure microtensiometer will be used to measure how this
morphology influences the dynamic dilatational modulus. Lateral phase separation
in monolayers is typical for clinical and native lung surfactants. The Laplace
pressure suggests that interconnected bubbles or alveoli of different radii are,
at best, metastable if the surface tension is constant. However, if the
dilatational modulus is sufficiently large, resistance to interfacial
compression can overcome the Laplace pressure and stabilize interconnected
alveoli. Hence, the dilatational modulus, and how it depends on monolayer
composition, morphology, interfacial curvature and changes in interfacial area
are essential to lung stability.