* 1706149
* Addressing Unresolved Scientific Challenges for CdTe-based Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Colin Wolden, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2021
* USD 336,051.00

Solar energy is the only renewable resource with the capacity to deliver carbon
neutral energy in the quantities required to supplant the power currently
generated by fossil fuels. Cadmium telluride (CdTe)-based photovoltaics have the
lowest cost of the commercially relevant technologies, with champion cell and
module efficiencies of 22.1% and 18.6%, respectively. Improvements in efficiency
and stability are required to accelerate further deployment in the marketplace.
The project addresses fundamental research questions required to further elevate
performance towards theoretical limits (~33%). The project will look at improved
material compositions to increase the power conversion efficiency of the device
while retaining durability and stability for long operational life. This program
will educate a PhD graduate student and several undergraduates in advanced
technology. Their research experiences will be broadened and enriched by
participation in collaborative programs offered by the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL) and the Molecular Foundry at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory (LBNL). The team will also use the solar research to engage in
outreach to K-12 students in the Denver public school system to inspire the next
generation of scientists and engineers.

The key innovation of this project is to develop ternary alloys with novel
attributes that cannot be obtained using conventional binary layers. These
alloys will be integrated throughout the device structure to improve both the
efficiency and the stability of these devices. This project addresses three
scientific challenges facing CdTe: (i) replacement of CdS to improve current
collection; (ii) extrinsic doping of CdTe to improve open circuit voltage; and
(iii) development of copper-free back contacts to improve stability. To improve
current collection, the PI will systematically explore magnesium zinc oxide
(MZO) alloys as buffer layers, focusing on tailoring its conduction band edge
and conductivity for this application. Further improvements in open circuit
voltage require increasing carrier concentration. Extrinsic doping of
polycrystalline CdTe will involve generation of doped source materials and the
use of dilute ternary alloys to facilitate dopant incorporation. Finally, the PI
will leverage the research group's understanding of current ZnTe-based back
contacts to design and implement effective contacts that do not employ copper
for enhanced stability. All of these studies will be informed by analysis
techniques including in situ XRD, spatially- and spectrally-resolved
measurements of carrier lifetime, and nanoscale characterization of structure
and composition using scanning TEM and atom probe tomography. These studies will
help establish the process-structure-property relationships for these under-
explored II-VI ternary alloys.