* 1706428
* Active Head Support for Children with Hypotonia
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Joshua Schultz, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2023
* USD 328,761.00

Children with certain developmental disabilities often do not possess the muscle
tone (or underlying muscle tension) in the neck necessary to hold their heads
erect. Without external support, the head falls to the chest, to the side, or
behind them. This brings about other complications, such as drooling and
inability to maintain normal gaze, and inhibits the child's ability to explore
the world, causing developmental delays. The current therapeutic practice is to
suspend the child's head from a rigid support using a cable and head strap. This
rigid suspension can only provide one passive level of support; how much it
helps to hold up the head cannot be easily modified in response to the wearer's
needs. While this does help eliminate some of the symptoms and complications of
poor head posture, it does nothing to help the child learn to control their head
by their own muscle power. It also prohibits the child from moving their head in
certain directions when desired. This research brings together trained
therapists and engineers who will investigate whether assisting the child to
raise their head from positions where it is difficult to do so (e.g. with the
head tilted far forward, back, or resting on the shoulder), and providing less
assistance where it is easier for the child to support the head on their own
will promote developing independent control of the head, with less need for
support over time. Researchers will measure the amount of assistance being
provided by the suspension device, construct a computer model that identifies
head poses requiring the most support and how the neck muscles work to support
the head, and build a suspension device that can be programmed with different
levels of support provided based on therapist input and the predictions of the
computer model. Children at the Little Light House, a development center for
children with special needs in Tulsa, OK who have low muscle tone base, will use
the device on a regular basis. They will be assessed to determine how well
varying the support provided to the head promotes the child's ability to develop
the muscular control needed to hold up their head independently. Outreach
activities will be conducted to University of Tulsa undergraduate students
involved in Make A Difference Engineering (MADE at TU), a student group
dedicated to using engineering skills to meet the needs of disabled persons.
Students from this group will be involved in non-safety-critical aspects of the
project. This will educate them about rehabilitation engineering research and
prepare them for graduate study and careers in this important
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes three objectives to support the
overall goal of developing a system to provide dynamic head/neck support for
individuals with hypotonia. First, a biomechanical model of the neck will be
developed that will integrate the muscles that provide appropriate head support
in normal individuals. This model will then be further developed to account for
changes due to hypotonia and the effect of a head support. Second, the model
will be validated for hypotonic conditions in the presence of a head support.
Finally, an active, dynamic head support device will be developed that can
respond to the pose of the head, an individual's intent, and therapist input to
promote strengthening of the neck muscles and an improved quality of life for
the individual. The model will be developed to be functionally accurate,
including appropriate muscles to fully model the function of the neck in
maintaining head posture and account for differences in the response of
hypotonic individuals. It will be developed in OpenSim using a combination of
cadaveric, radiographic, and in vivo studies and validated against measurements
made in collaboration with physical therapists. The device that is developed
will be evaluated in a clinical setting to determine if it supports the
rehabilitative goals of strengthening the neck and allowing more independent
head support over time.