* 1706634
* I-Corps: X-ray Diffraction based analyzer for pharmaceutical crystallization process
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Peter Zavalij, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to shorten
the time for new drug development, further ensure the pharmaceutical product
quality control, and provide a successful Process Analytical Technology (PAT)
tool to the pharmaceutical industry. There is a trend in the pharmaceutical
industry to apply Quality by Design and PAT tools for improving pharmaceutical
drug development and manufacturing. PAT is a system for designing, analyzing and
controlling manufacturing using real-time measurements of critical quality and
performance attributes of raw and in-process materials and fabrication processes
with the goal of ensuring final product quality. Successful development and
application of these PAT tools can enable pharmaceutical firms to speed up the
manufacturing process development, and build robustness into manufacturing
processes by reducing/eliminating manufacturing
errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project proposes to develop a
pharmaceutical analyzer system for use in drug development and manufacturing.
The key enabling technology is an x-ray optic to generate an intensive parallel
beam. By using parallel beam geometry, most of the standard sources of error in
the measurements are avoided, making the measurement results more reliable. The
large beam size from the optic also improves the measurement statistics in data
collection. A critical innovation for this analyzer is to optimize the whole
system configuration to carry out drug phase measurements by setting the
detectors at fixed angles (according to the drug) rather than scanning the whole
spectrum. The approach developed here enables the analyzer to continuously
measure the phase of drug with very high efficiency. It would provide the
information within minutes during production without complicated sample
preparation.