* 1706632
* Collaborative Research: Real Time Spectroscopic Studies of Hybrid MOF Photocatalysts for Solar Fuel Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jian Zhang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,816.00

In this project, the researchers will investigate a relatively new class of
materials known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) as to their suitability as
catalysts for the production of hydrogen as a sustainable fuel from sunlight and
water. The specific goals of this project are to examine how placement of the
photosensitizer and catalytic centers within zirconium-based MOFs influence both
the mechanism by which photocatalysis occurs and the corresponding efficiency of
the photocatalytic reaction. More broadly, the research will create a structural
model for future studies of real-time structure-function correlations for other
photoactive materials, impacting broadly on fields such as photocatalysis,
optoelectronic devices, and solar energy conversion technologies. In turn, this
research will help identify efficient materials for an eventual carbon-neutral,
economically-viable fuel industry driven by solar energy. The project will
include training and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students in
photocatalysis research, which will strengthen the U.S. pipeline of science-
educated students prepared to tackle next-generation problems in materials
science, sustainable chemistry, and energy science.

The project focuses on real-time spectroscopic studies of MOFs in which the
photosensitizer and catalytic center are well-organized within MOFs. The PIs
have identified highly robust Zr-based MOFs that contain coordinately
unsaturated Zr6-clusters as the structural prototype. Structural topology will
be used as a guide to insert both the photosensitizer and catalyst into the MOF
structure, in a controllable, step-wise fashion, to generate new hybrid MOF
photocatalysts. The charge separation and structural dynamics of the hybrid
materials will be investigated using time resolved optical and X-ray absorption
spectroscopies as well as in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy. These
techniques will be used to establish a direct correlation between the structure
of the hybrid catalysts and their catalytic efficiency for hydrogen production.
The proposed research will be integrated with educational activities that will
provide opportunities for undergraduate students, and encourage women to pursue
research and science careers. The graduate and undergraduate students working on
the project will receive interdisciplinary training in the fields of materials
chemistry, physical chemistry, and solar energy science.