* 1706562
* Magnetic microrollers as a platform for active transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Aleksandar Donev, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 419,984.00

CBET - 1706562&lt;br/&gt;PI: Donev, Aleksandar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspensions
of particles in a viscous liquid often exhibit unusual behavior in flow. This
award will study suspensions of magnetic particles that rotate in an applied
magnetic field. The rotation of the particles induces a flow in the surrounding
liquid. The investigators have found that an instability in the suspension leads
to the formations of loosely-packed aggregates of the particles, which can move
away from the rest of the suspension under guidance from the magnetic field. The
aggregates stay intact as they move, even though the particles inside an
aggregate do not touch each other. This leads to an interesting new way to
transport particles through a liquid that could be applied in microfluidic or
lab-on-a-chip systems where the small dimensions of the device often limit
transport of particulate phases. This award will support experimental studies to
study the generation of the aggregates, their motion, and the interactions of
the aggregates with obstacles they encounter in the flow. The experiments will
be complemented by numerical studies that will help interpret data and explore
the mechanisms of aggregate formation and motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A model
system of magnetic microllers near a wall will be used to explore a new platform
for active transport. Numerical simulations will be used to identify conditions
under which microroller aggregates are expected to form. Experiments will
validate the formation of the aggregates and demonstrate effects of different
particle shape on aggregation formation and transport. To simulate flow in a
structured environment, microroller transport will be studied in an array of
patterned posts in periodic, quasi-periodic, self-similar and disordered
patterns. The potential for using the microroller system for transporting
colloidal cargos will be investigated. The experiments and simulations of the
microroller system form visually appealing demonstrations that will be used in
hands on activities for elementary and high school students in the New York
area.