* 1706065
* Rapid colorimetric detection of biomarkers via catalytic disassembly of gold nanoparticle aggregates
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jeunghoon Lee, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2021
* USD 303,412.00

PI: Lee, Jeunghoon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1706065 &lt;br/&gt;One of the
challenges for medical science is to develop low-cost, point-of-care diagnostic
tools for diseases. This research project involves developing new, high
sensitivity approaches to detect key biological molecules that are markers for
disease states. The mechanism for sensing is based upon the disassembly of gold
nanoparticle (particles that have diameters on the order of nanometers)
aggregates held together by DNA strands. The proposed approach provides key
advantages to overcome the challenges of conventional color-based sensing
technologies that utilize nanoparticle aggregation. One advantage is that the
disassembly mechanism should be less prone to false positives. Another is the
fact that the surfaces of the nanoparticles can be functionalized with different
special recognition molecules that can target different types of diseases.Â  If
successful, the proposed method will result in an easy-to-read color change,
similar to a pregnancy test, for low-cost point-of-care cancer diagnostics,
among many other diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses
on creating a colorimetric sensing system driven by disassembly of gold
nanoparticle (AuNP) aggregates that can significantly increase the speed and the
sensitivity of biosensing compared to those based on AuNP aggregation. While
colorimetric sensing based on AuNP aggregation is very promising as a low-cost,
point-of-care diagnostic tool, adoption of this approach has been hindered by
slow speed and limited sensitivity due to the inherently slow diffusion of AuNP-
bound DNA strands and the size of aggregates required for visible changes in
optical properties. A colorimetric sensing system based on the disassembly of
AuNP aggregates is a potential solution to address both speed and sensitivity. A
DNA reaction network, which is a mixture of DNA strands programmed to undergo
cascading strand displacement reactions, is capable of signal amplification. The
proposed effort will integrate DNA reaction networks with AuNP disassembly to
achieve high sensitivity in biosensing. The proposed research consists of
developing and optimizing AuNP disassembly process, maximizing sensitivity and
specificity by minimizing DNA reaction network leakage, and designing and
testing aptamer transducer for detecting a wider variety of biomolecules. This
research will significantly improve the performance and broaden the utility of
AuNP-based colorimetric sensing systems in biomedical applications. The proposed
research will make DNA reaction networks competitive with immunoassays, and
promote interdisciplinary research between physical sciences and engineering
that involves underrepresented populations, such as women, minority, first-
generation, and non-traditional students.