* 1706193
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Discrete-Continuum Numerical Simulation of Granular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Kenneth Kamrin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 230,482.00

CBET - 1706689&lt;br/&gt;PI: Grinspun, Eitan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow of
granular materials is important in many manufacturing processes, especially in
the pharmaceutical, energy, and agricultural industries, and in naturally-
occurring processes such as avalanches, landslides and sediment transport.
Modeling the behavior of flowing granular materials is challenging because
observable measurable properties of the flowing material depend on microscopic
dynamics on the scale of the individual grains of the material. In the absence
of reliable models, the design of equipment to handle granular materials is
often based on heuristic approaches, which are not optimal and occasionally lead
to catastrophic failures. This award will support a new framework for predicting
the dynamics of granular systems that addresses small-scale and large-scale
phenomena at the same time. The new framework will be a hybrid approach that
combines models of granular materials as fluids with models of granular
materials as collections of discrete particles. The key challenge that will be
addressed is to discover the appropriate way to combine these approaches in a
hybrid model that accurately simulates well-defined prototype granular flows and
is validated against comparisons with industrial and geological scale granular
flow phenomena. Computer codes that are generated in the project will be shared
publicly, and the research team will engage students at various academic levels
to participate in the project, especially students from traditionally
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A hybrid framework for simulating
granular flows will be developed to obtain the efficiency of continuum
simulations at the macroscale and the accuracy and precision of discrete
particle simulations offer at the microscale. Four components of the
hybridization scheme will be explored: a coupling procedure that mechanically
handshakes the continuum regime and the particle regime along a reconciliation
zone, a homogenization operator that replaces a discrete element zone with a
continuum state, an enrichment operator that acts in the opposite direction, and
an oracle that determines where it is safe to homogenize and where enrichment to
discrete grains is needed. Components of the scheme will be separately tested
and validated against analytical results and experimental data. The overall
hybrid model will then be validated against large-scale granular phenomena with
the goal of accurately simulation flows up to the industrial- and geo-scales.
The results of this work and its associated computer codes will be made
available to practitioners and researchers in industry and geosciences and to
developers of cinematic realizations of granular flow phenomena.