* 1706921
* Computational platform for predictive magnetohydrodynamic drug targeting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Andreas Linninger, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 342,955.00

Special blood vessels, for example the blood brain barrier, in the head and
spine keep most compounds away from the brain and central nervous system.
Certain therapies for brain disorders may be ineffective, simply because the
medication cannot reach the brain. To overcome this barrier, this project
investigates new methods for the direct administration of therapeutic drugs into
the brain. The main strategy is to direct magnetized drugs to specific locations
using externally placed magnets, termed magnetic drug targeting to the brain.
This research project also seeks to create a computer program for the design,
optimization and testing of new therapeutics and delivery techniques. The
ability to improve drug delivery methods using computational models potentially
benefits all patients suffering from diseases related to the brain and helps
pharmaceutical companies meet regulatory demands by enabling them to carefully
evaluate potential side effects of new therapeutics. This research project also
contributes to the education of a new generation of engineering students. A drug
testing and simulation platform built on the University of Illinois at Chicago
campus offers research opportunities for undergraduate and high school students
and enables virtual experimentation with novel nanomedicine chemistry. In
addition, a new graduate course on drug transport within the bioengineering and
chemical engineering curricula is being created. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic
drug targeting for brain and central nervous system disorders is a promising
delivery method for steering and pinpointing therapeutics to desired locations
in the central nervous system. However, determining the parameters for optimal
biodistribution inside a living organism poses a formidable engineering
challenge. There is critical need to predict biodistribution under magnetic
guidance. Currently, two main problems prevent computational fluid dynamics
analysis from reliably predicting biodistribution in the central nervous system:
(1) magnetohydrodynamic forces acting on nanoparticle suspensions have not been
incorporated into existing computational fluid dynamics because they have not
been characterized; and (2) existing algorithms require impractical simulation
times exceeding central processing unit weeks or months because the mesh sizes
necessary to represent central nervous system anatomy are massive, and transport
equations exhibit both fast and slow dynamic modes. This research project
addresses these obstacles in three parts. First, a magneto-hydrodynamic
formulation based on concentrated solution theory is being developed to quantify
field effects that steer nanoparticles suspended in pulsating cerebrospinal
fluid flow. Then, parametric meshing is being implemented to generate smooth,
body-fitted computational grids that represent the anatomical domain concisely
at low central processing unit cost. Finally, problem decomposition is being
performed that divides fluid flow, magnetic field effects and drug transport
into three independently solvable sub-problems. The research results are being
used to create a computational platform to optimize targeted nanoparticle-drug
delivery to the central nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;