* 1706358
* Towards an improved understanding of tidal turbine dynamics in a turbulent marine environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Arindam Banerjee, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 453,025.00

Renewable energy technologies offer the promise of non-polluting and sustainable
alternatives to fossil and nuclear-fueled power plants. The objective of this
research project is to better understand the interactions between a tidal
turbine and the surrounding fluid environment. Tidal turbines are a relatively
new class of renewable energy devices that convert the motion of flowing water
in rivers or tides into energy.  This research is focused on addressing several
outstanding scientific challenges that need to be overcome so that these novel
devices can be developed and deployed.  In addition to the scientific
discoveries, the educational component of this research project involves
training the next generation of engineers and professionals through research,
teaching, and outreach activities. The outreach component involves partnering
with Lehigh University?s Office of Outreach and Northampton Community College in
the STAR (Students That Are Ready) program, which targets economically and
academically disadvantaged and/or at-risk 8th to 12th grade students. The social
impact of the long-term success of tidal turbine technology is significant. In
addition to the continental United States, commercialization of these
technologies may directly impact a major fraction of the world population as the
majority of large population centers are located either close to major rivers or
coastlines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The experimental design in this research
project is motivated by the need to couple near and far wake physics to turbine
performance at elevated levels of free-stream turbulence. Turbulence generation
techniques using active grids are being used to mimic hydraulic and natural in-
stream conditions. Diagnostics include a reaction torque-thrust sensor for
system analysis and time-resolved stereo particle image velocimetry for flow-
field measurements. A detailed understanding of the evolution of the wake is
vital when considering design of a tidal farm (similar to wind farms). Designing
an optimal farm layout in rivers is challenging as the useful zone for power
extraction may be restricted to a small footprint due to navigational
requirements. Existing engineering analysis do not fully capture the non-linear
interactions that arise due to such closely packed layouts or the associated
environmental impact. To enhance the scientific impact, the new data sets are
being made available to the scientific community to allow validation and
verification of advanced computational fluid dynamics models of flow around
tidal turbines.