* 1706097
* Reusing Non-Hazardous Industrial Waste in the U.S.: A Geo-Specific Estimate of Quantities and Benefits
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Marian Chertow, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,874.00

1706097 (Chertow). Nonhazardous industrial waste (NHIW), such as blast furnace
slag, food processing waste, and wood pulping residue, results from production
processes, and these secondary by-product materials can be, in most cases, a
tangible substitute for primary raw materials. Life cycle studies demonstrate
that NHIW reuse is a viable strategy for conserving natural resources and
achieving substantial reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Capturing the
largest possible benefits of NHIW reuse, however, requires bringing together
detailed knowledge of NHIW generation, NHIW reuse pathways, and system design at
a high geospatial resolution. This systems level knowledge of NHIW has not been
available previously in the United States, yet utilizing it would greatly
enhance the nation's resource recovery efforts. This project employs a novel,
data-driven approach to quantify the extent to which optimized NHIW reuse can
contribute to a more resource-efficient and sustainable industrial sector in the
U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1) delineate NHIW generation
throughout the US at a high geo-spatial resolution; (2) establish a rigorous
baseline for current NHIW disposition at a matching spatial resolution; (3)
design modules to assess the environmental impacts of transportation and
different NHIW reuse pathways; (4) evaluate NHIW reuse potential and resulting
environmental benefits based on empirical evidence and&lt;br/&gt;geo-spatial
constraints. Quantifying resource and climate impacts of NHIW reuse and
examining it spatially has broader impacts on three fronts. First, it offers a
sturdy foundation for assessing state and national material efficiency and GHG
emissions targets for public and private sector actors. Second, it enables state
and local officials to consider beneficial reuse as a routine, evidence-based
dimension of urban and rural development planning. Third, valuable educational
and outreach opportunities will be created based on the findings of this project
that will assist interested parties from school children to industrial leaders
seeking to recover more and dispose less.