* 1706388
* GOALI: Understanding and Controlling Heat Transport Mechanisms in Nano-Layered Materials for Energy Harvesting Thermal Barrier Coatings in Jet Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Ann Bolcavage, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 01/31/2021
* USD 334,308.00

With an exploding population and rapid advances in power consuming technologies,
our society faces a critical roadblock in continued advancement and future
sustainability. Major advances in materials, processes and systems must cleanly
increase energy generation efficiency, while decreasing the net wasted heat,
which will not only increase the energy used as work but also decrease the
consumption of nonrenewable resources. Therefore, a potential ideal path forward
in this world-wide energy crisis is to improve power production efficiency while
also harvesting the energy that is rejected as otherwise wasted heat. This
concept relies on improving the efficiency of existing technologies while
recycling energy to improve the net power production; that is, using byproducts
of energy sources to recycle and reuse. An example of advancements in energy
efficiency through "thermal first" engineering of material components of a
system is an aircraft engine, in which reductions in the thermal conductivities
of thermal barrier coating materials enable higher temperature operation of
turbines. These high operating temperatures translate directly to improvements
in power output. To address this critical issue, this project will focus on
advances in understanding of nano- and microscale thermal properties of thermal
barrier coatings comprised of high-temperature stable thermoelectric
nanomaterial systems as it relates to gas-turbine engine technologies. More
specifically, this project will develop the fundamental thermal transport
understanding of how phonon scattering processes are impacted by spatially
varying defects in novel nanoscale-layered oxide thermal barrier coatings
materials with ultralow thermal conductivities. This will result in material
solutions for thermal barrier coatings that exhibit superior thermochemical
protection while not relying on expensive rare earth elements that are typical
in current state-of-the-art thermal barrier coatings. Furthermore, the ability
of this class to materials to generate a thermoelectric response will enable
power generation from the temperature gradients produced in the engine
environments, thus allowing for recycling the otherwise wasted heat impinging on
the turbine blades. This proposed work has far-reaching societal implications by
both improving engine efficiency and advancing the field of high temperature
waste heat recovery via oxide nanomaterials. Furthermore, the integration of our
proposed industry and academic collaboration into curricula, outreach, and
conference organization will maximize this broader impact through involvement
from underrepresented groups in K-12 classrooms around Virginia.

In partnership with Rolls-Royce, this project will advance the foundational
understanding of phonon scattering and thermal transport in nanoscale layered
structures with systematic experiments that demonstrate the interplay between
crystal boundary scattering, phase purity, and vacancy and dopant scattering
over a range of length scales and temperatures. The knowledge-base of how
structural imperfections affect the thermal conductivity in naturally layered,
anisotropic atomic structures with ultra-low thermal conductivities is lacking,
especially at elevated temperatures relevant to engine environments where
phonon-defect scattering can become more pronounced. Thus, part of this
intellectual merit lies in understanding phonon transport processes in classes
of nano-layered perovskite oxides that can exhibit thermoelectric responses at
elevated temperatures, while assessing the applicability of current theories of
phonon-defect and interface scattering in crystals as applied to these classes
of thermoelectric materials. Therefore, additional intellectual merit of this
proposed work will be the development and implementation of a procedure to
extend time-domain thermoreflectance measurements to environments relevant to
gas-turbine engine operation. These proposed advances, with further material
integration and engine specific guidance from Rolls-Royce, will lead to the
assessment of a potentially disruptive material solution in the form of a novel
thermoelectric thermal barrier coating based on oxide nanomaterials.