* 1706453
* Lift Management for Unsteady Translating Wings Using a Rotating, Swept Wing Tip
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Matthew Ringuette, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 305,658.00

Drone aircraft have an ever-increasing role in society, with both civilian and
defense applications. A key research area is the development of small-scale,
agile drones that can maneuver alone or in groups in complex environments. Such
scenarios include search-and-rescue operations, tracking a toxic gas plume, or
collecting large-scale data such as city traffic patterns. However, these
vehicles are susceptible to loss of control during maneuvers because of
turbulence and wind gusts. This project will seek to better understand and
prevent this loss of control by modifying the wing-tip shape in real-time in
order to control the lift force in these scenarios. Imaging and lift
measurements in a water tank with a scaled wing model will lead to a predictive
mathematical model for improved future flight-control systems. This project also
has an outreach plan that focuses on mentoring female high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate students and engaging them through hands-on
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to
investigate the viability of a variable wing tip to control the flow coherence
and lift for a dynamically-stalled wing during high-angle-of-attack, unsteady
translation. In this scenario, a swirling, low-pressure leading-edge vortex
forms over the wing and yields large lift, but then sheds. The proposed moveable
wingtip will exploit tip-vortex control to increase lift for high-angle-of-
attack maneuvers or reduce lift for gust alleviation. The proposed variable wing
tip is unique, combining rotation with aft sweep, which should produce a more
attached and coherent vortex flow and substantial lift control. Experiments will
be performed with scaled models in a water tank, using dye visualization, force
measurements, and stereo particle image velocimetry for 3D velocity
reconstructions. The experimental results will be used to develop a predictive
model for improved flight-control methods.