* 1706612
* INFEWS N/P/H20: Nitrogen and Phosphorus Dynamics in Restored Floodplains of Intensively Managed Watersheds
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Venkatesh Merwade, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 363,589.00

1706612 (McMillan). Excess nitrogen and phosphorus in receiving waters (streams,
rivers, lakes, etc.) is associated with high nutrient inputs (e.g., fertilizer,
food and animal waste, sewage overflows) in watersheds that are unsustainably
and intensively managed for agriculture and urban uses. Sustainably restoring
floodplains shows great promise to improve water quality and multiple ecosystem
(e.g., floodplain soils) services, however a clear understanding and
quantification of the cumulative effects of inundation on nitrogen and
phosphorus dynamics is critically needed. Therefore, the goal of this research
is to determine the functional relationships that exist between sources and
sinks of nutrients (e.g., denitrification, phosphorus release) and natural
system drivers (e.g., hydrodynamic and biogeochemical). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve this goal, this project seeks to (1) quantify how hydrologic
connectivity varies across spatial and temporal scales in a river floodplain
system, (2) characterize the relative role of hydrodynamic versus biogeochemical
processes on the rates of nitrogen and phosphorus inputs, removal and release in
floodplain soils, and (3) determine the cumulative effect on the retention or
release of nitrogen and phosphorus at the river-floodplain system scale. The
research will consist of three major components to link physical and
biogeochemical controls of nitrogen and phosphorus dynamics in restored riverine
floodplains. The first component will apply a 2-dimensional model of the Wabash-
Tippecanoe River confluence to predict the time and lateral extent of inundation
as well as magnitude and direction of surface velocity and groundwater flow to
quantify hydraulic residence time and lateral water flux. The second component
will quantify key processes responsible for nutrient flux in the floodplain
system, including nitrogen removal via denitrification, phosphorus
uptake/release, and the soil properties that could help predict these processes.
Nitrogen and phosphorus response variables and potential predictors variables
will be linked in the third component to identify the controls on processes
using a multivariate statistical approach. A systems analysis approach will be
used to apply these relationships to aggregate fluxes at the monthly scale and
determine net floodplain function (e.g., source/sink behavior). Through this
research, critical information will be provided that is needed to sustainably
restore floodplain ecosystems that maximize water quality improvements for both
nitrogen and phosphorus. Impacts of this research are potentially far-reaching
as communities and regulatory agencies invest in mitigation projects to reduce
nutrient loads to downstream lakes and coastal zones where eutrophication
impacts are occurring.