* 1706926
* Molecular Understanding of Ion Intercalation Processes in Rechargeable Aluminum-Carbon Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Robert Messinger, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

One of the great challenges facing the Nation is to develop novel technologies
that transform how renewable sourced energy can be sustainably and economically
stored on a massive scale. Rechargeable batteries, which store energy
electrochemically, have revolutionized consumer electronics. For greater scale
applications including electric vehicles and grid-scale storage of renewable
energy sources, substantial improvements are required for the performance
properties of energy density, lifetime, and cost. Aluminum metal is a
potentially ideal battery electrode material because it is earth abundant, non-
flammable, non-toxic, low cost, and can store more charge per unit volume than
other common metals. Recently, research on rechargeable batteries composed of
aluminum metal and carbon electrodes has been published. However, mechanistic
aspects of how the battery stores charge within the carbon electrodes are poorly
understood. This project seeks to elucidate the fundamental processes
underpinning how the carbon electrodes store and release ions and energy,
particularly at the molecular level. These scientific insights will be used to
design and synthesize novel carbon electrodes that will result in rechargeable
aluminum-carbon batteries with improved energy storage properties. For
educational outreach, high school and undergraduate students will collaborate
with university researchers and receive advanced training on electrochemical
systems. This research will be disseminated to a broader audience by high school
demonstrations and on the City University of New York (CUNY) TV station, which
is publically broadcast across New York City. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objectives of this project are to understand ion intercalation
processes in rechargeable aluminum-carbon batteries at the molecular level, and
to use these insights to design new carbon electrode structures with improved
energy storage properties. Aluminum-graphite batteries using ionic liquid
electrolytes will first be studied to reveal insights into the chemical and
structural changes that occur within the battery electrolyte and electrode
materials as a function of state-of-charge and cycle number. The molecular-level
environments, ion speciation and dynamics, and structures of intercalated carbon
electrodes will be characterized by multi-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), electron microscopy, and other
techniques. These properties will be correlated with bulk electrochemical
properties and device performance, yielding new multi-scale understanding.
Alternative non-corrosive electrolyte systems will be investigated, which will
enable studies of how mixtures of different ionic and solvent species
participate and/or affect the intercalation processes. Lastly, novel carbon
electrodes based on graphene and carbon nanotubes will be synthesized and tested
in aluminum-carbon batteries. In particular, the role of local carbon structures
and the effects of disorder on bulk electrochemical properties will be
understood and controlled to yield improved electrode materials. Answers to the
fundamental scientific questions posed in this work will enable researchers to
better understand whether aluminum-carbon batteries could become practical
energy storage systems.