* 1706819
* INFEWS N/P/H2O: Development of Sustainable Nutrient Extraction and Recovery Devices (NERDs) for Municipal and Agricultural Wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Lee Blaney, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 311,347.00

PI Name: Lee Blaney&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1706819&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient pollution is intricately tied to national and global issues,
including water, energy, food, political, and economic security. In this project
the PI will develop, optimize, and test innovative nutrient extraction and
recovery devices (NERDs) to effectively recover fertilizer products rich in
nitrogen and phosphorus from urban and agricultural waste streams. The recovered
fertilizers will be assessed for heavy metals and contaminants of emerging
concern (e.g., antibiotics, hormones, etc.) to prevent other human and
ecological health concerns, such as endocrine disruption and antibiotic
resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to
develop, test, and optimize a Donnan membrane principle-based process for
recovery of phosphorus, nitrogen, and potassium from municipal wastewater, waste
activated sludge, and agricultural waste. NERD reactors selectively concentrate
and recover nutrients by exploiting electrochemical potential gradients across
ion exchange membranes. The PI will systematically investigate several aspects
of NERDs: (1) the capacity and rate of phosphorus, magnesium, ammonium, and
potassium recovery from well-defined solutions, (2) the selective recovery of
struvite and potassium struvite from synthetic wastewaters in batch and
continuous flow modes to generate fertilizers with customizable nitrogen-to-
phosphorus-to-potassium ratios, and (3) the application of NERD process
chemistry to recover nutrients from real wastewater effluent, waste activated
sludge, and animal manures and assessment of the co-recovery of traditional and
emerging contaminants. The transformative nature of this project stems from the
team?s completely innovative approach to nutrient recovery. The low energy,
chemical, and water requirements of their process suggest that NERDs will be an
attractive option for municipal wastewater treatment plants and agricultural
operations in the developed and developing world; furthermore, the team believes
that this novel technique can also be employed for phosphorus remediation. The
significance of this work stems from the need for a new approach to capture and
recycle nitrogen and phosphorus to prevent pollution of drinking water
resources, protect environmental systems and aquatic habitat, and preclude loss
of revenue streams from fishing, shrimping, and tourism industries.