* 1706891
* Engineering biocatalytic nanoreactor
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Stefan Lutz, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2020
* USD 360,582.00

Compartmentalization is a critical component of cellular function, enabling a
multitude of biochemical reactions to occur at specific location in the cell at
specific times. Reproducing such performance with one or more biological and
chemical catalysts in the lab and in industry offers tremendous opportunities
for future developments of green and sustainable chemical processes. The
proposed project draws inspiration from nature by exploring bacterial "capsules"
as containers for the orderly immobilization of catalysts. The capsules are
nanometer-scale, hollow spheres with protein shells that assemble spontaneously.
Protein engineering strategies will be explored to tailor these nanostructures
to the specific reaction sequences of interest. The goals are to improve the
selective passage of raw materials through the shell, and to reproducibly
"decorate" the interior side of the shell with specific reaction catalysts. In
combination, these efforts will produce engineered nano-scale reactor vessels
that can be designed to perform a variety of industrially interesting reaction
sequences. There will also be STEM career development efforts that will involve
students from K-12 through college age. These include Science Days at an
elementary school, protein modeling competitions for local high school students,
undergraduate research experiences, and protein design and 3D printing
activities at the Annual Atlanta Science Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will explore the impact of catalytic performance of (bio) catalysts upon
encapsulation in and controlled surface-immobilization on protein-based
encapsulin nanocompartments. Protein engineering strategies ranging from random
mutagenesis and incremental truncation to protein design will be employed to
remodel nanocompartments for enhanced substrate and product permeability and to
create new opportunities for functional diversification via artificial affinity
sites on the encapsulin surfaces. Beyond single particles, the assembly of
nanocompartments into multi-dimensional nanoreactor assemblies for high-density
biocatalyst systems will be explored. Using a combination of biophysical
methods, as well as biocatalytic and biosensory systems, the impact of these
engineering efforts on the structure of nanocompartments themselves and the
function of the associated catalysts will be assessed. By integrating design
parameters into this system that offer the potential for high enantioselectivity
and reduced separation costs, this technology would have significant
implications for therapeutic drug development.