* 1706125
* Engineering a secretion-based, high-titer protein production process in bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Danielle Tullman Ercek, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 305,408.00

Protein production is a growing, multi-billion dollar industry that supplies
tailored enzymes, such as those used in pharmaceuticals, detergents, textile
manufacturing, and environmentally-friendly chemical production. New methods,
utilizing bacteria as "protein factories", have the potential to dramatically
reduce manufacturing costs and the development time for new protein products. A
critical barrier to realizing these benefits is identification of a cost-
effective way to separate desired functional proteins from the remaining
contents of their host cells. Secreting protein products directly out of the
cell is a promising method toward this goal. This work proposes to engineer a
protein secretion system in a laboratory strain of bacteria, Salmonella
enterica, for efficient and low-cost production of proteins. Success would
produce a path for agile design and production of proteins for a number of
industries. Moreover, this work will train students at all levels for careers in
biotechnology, as the investigators will participate in programs bringing
cutting-edge science related to this work to the general public via museums,
community talks, and science festivals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled
transport of proteins from the inside of the cell to the outside is a challenge
that nature has overcome in several ways, but that scientists have yet to fully
explore. This proposal focuses on engineering the type III secretion system of
Salmonella enterica to secrete non-native proteins at high quantity and low
cost. The specific objectives are to 1) increase the protein yields achieved
with bacterial production and secretion, 2) optimize control over the secretion
process to enable scale up to industrial scales, and 3) develop a suite of
molecular biology tools for the high-throughput production of a broad set of
proteins. Transforming the type III secretion system to enable efficient
production of desired proteins will improve understanding of the mechanisms
governing this process. Such information is critical not only to molecular
biologists as they construct a detailed picture of cellular function, but also
to synthetic biologists who wish to engineer organisms with greater levels of
complexity and extracellular interaction than previously possible. This work
will result in new constructs, protocols, and strains to be shared with other
scientists for protein production at both the industrial and research scales.