* 1706802
* A Universal Nucleic Acid Recognition Platform for Detection of Pathogenic Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Karin Chumbimuni-Torres, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2021
* USD 218,408.00

The goal of this research is to develop a low-cost and highly sensitive and
selective point-of-care (POC) device that will detect disease-causing bacteria
at room temperature. The success of the project requires differentiation between
harmless and disease-causing bacteria, and is possible by detection of tiny
differences in bacterial RNA (genetic material). The proposed research presents
a sensor device with a simple design that consists of a universal nucleic acid
probe and two intermediary strands of nucleic acids organized in such a way that
changes in their natural association can be used to measure the presence the
disease-causing bacteria. Broader impacts for education and the community
include the development of the outreach program called GRoW uP in the Central
Florida area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches for detecting pathogens,
such as nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), offer high sensitivity, but
often produce false-positive results, and require expensive instruments and
trained personnel. Furthermore, these approaches cannot differentiate between
the point mutations that distinguish the RNA of the pathogenic from the non-
pathogenic bacteria. This is especially difficult at ambient temperatures and
for RNA that forms secondary structure. The goal of this proposal is to develop
a specific and sensitive universal point-of-care (POC) platform for the rapid
and accurate detection of pathogenic bacteria. The approach uses a binary probe
with high sequence recognition specificity that is necessary to differentiate
point mutations and is amenable to analysis of folded RNA. The new methodology
will exceed the performance of current state-of-the-art approaches for RNA
sensing in the following aspects: (i) it will exhibit zero false-negative
responses, thus improving sensitivity and reducing limits of detection (LOD);
(ii) it will enable accurate recognition of point mutations at ambient
temperatures even in structured (folded) RNA and DNA; (iii) it will enable
detection of multiple analytes using a single universal probe in a re-usable
format and thus reduce the assay cost. The proposed work builds upon the PI?s
recent improvements on the self-assembling DNA 4J fluorescent sensor by
converting the system to an electrochemical biosensor (4J E-biosensor).
Advantages of the 4J E-biosensor include the capability of performing multiple
tests with zero signal background and the potential for on-site testing while
offering fast, simple, low-power, portable, and inexpensive detection. The novel
sensor platform will advance the ability to detect ribosomal RNA and thus, have
unprecedented impact in environmental, health diagnosis, national defense and
food safety applications. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed work will
expose students to different areas of chemistry, including electrochemistry,
biochemistry, computational simulations, sensing applications, and nanomaterial
sciences. The PI proposes to use this research as a motivation to continue and
expand her self-developed GRoW uP program. The program will provide research
opportunities to high school students and teachers through partnerships
established with Orange Public School District. The PI will also implement an
outreach program in conjunction with the Orlando Science Center and the Seminole
County Library to impact hundreds of young people across multi-ethnic Orlando
and Central Florida. Dissemination of the results from this investigation will
be through publications in high-impact peer-reviewed journals and national and
international conferences.