* 1706219
* CBET-EPSRC A Game-Changing Approach for Tunable Membrane Development: Novel Covalent Organic Framework Active Layers Supported by Solvent Resistant Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* William Dichtel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2021
* USD 449,998.00

Title: CBET-EPSRC A Game-Changing Approach for Tunable Membrane Development:
Novel Covalent Organic Framework Active Layers Supported by Solvent Resistant
Materials &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1706219 Marinas &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface
and groundwater may be purified to drinking water quality standards via
nanofiltration, a pressure-driven process which relies on a membrane as a
physical barrier to remove contaminants from water. The membrane allows water to
pass through its nanometer size pores at a higher rate compared to dissolved
and/or suspended solutes, resulting in purification of the water that passes
through the membrane. To achieve even higher water quality, more selective
reverse osmosis membranes have sub-nanometer pores, which require higher applied
pressure to facilitate water transport across the membrane. There is a general
trade-off between permeability of the membrane to water versus impermeability to
contaminants: smaller pore sizes retain a broader range of contaminants but
decrease water throughput per unit time and/or increases energy consumption; in
contrast, larger pore sizes lead to less contaminant rejection but higher water
permeability or lower energy consumption. State of the art membranes are made
from polymers, for which the spaces between the polymeric chains act as the
pores that filter the contaminants. As these pores are formed via the three-
dimensional arrangement of polymer chains, the pore size is not easily
controlled on a molecular level. Current membranes have a limited lifetime, due
to the negative effects of biofouling, mechanical compaction, and chemical
degradation. Biofouling is a result of the deposition of organic contaminants
and nutrients on the membrane and the subsequent growth of a biofilm that
creates a barrier for subsequent water permeation through the membrane; polymer
compaction results in pore tightening in the amorphous portion of membranes that
leads to reduced water permeability; and chemical degradation is a process
exacerbated by the use of harsh chemicals during cleaning of fouled membranes
that ultimately results in higher permeability to contaminants. To address these
concerns, this project will develop novel membranes that enable a molecular-
level design of pore size and shape and the incorporation of fouling-resistant
chemical functional groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project capitalizes upon a
new interfacial polymerization process that synthesizes covalent organic
frameworks in a high-surface area thin polymeric film. Unlike other polymeric
materials, these frameworks are highly crystalline with well-defined surface
chemistry and a regular pore structure, this regularity enables molecular level
design, which in turn will allow for optimized retention of particular solutes
combined with high water permeability across the membrane. The frameworks could
also be modified to incorporate anti-fouling surface chemistry and to decrease
pore size. The key advance of this collaborative project is to develop the thin
active covalent organic framework layer in concert with a polymeric support that
is stable in the solvents used for the polymerization process and during
membrane cleaning. The project scope of work includes synthesis of novel
membranes with various building blocks, tuning of pore size and surface
chemistry by altering the covalent organic framework, and the identification of
solvent stable support media. Various surface analysis techniques will be used
for the physicochemical characterization of the resulting membranes, and
optimization of the interfacial polymerization process to control the interface
between the covalent organic framework and the support. The resulting membranes
will be tested for performance with aqueous solutions of model contaminants.
This international collaboration, facilitated by an inter-agency agreement
between the U.S. and U.K., brings together membrane and polymer synthesis
experts from two countries to develop this new class of membranes while building
an international research network and providing students with a unique
international educational opportunity.