* 1706889
* GOALI: Boosting granulation and performance of upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor: Significance of direct interspecies electron transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Eric Powell, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 304,231.00

PI Name: Haluk Beyenal&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1706889&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactors are used
commercially in the conversion of high-strength organic wastes to methane.
Despite their success, UASB reactors still suffer from long start-up times,
incomplete substrate removal, and impurity of the produced biogas. Most of the
biological reactions in UASB reactors happen at the sludge granules. There is
limited knowledge of the microscale biological and electron transfer processes
in granules, and it is currently difficult to control electron transfer
processes to improve granulation and substrate conversion to methane in the UASB
reactor. The PIs will focus on understanding electron transfer processes in
granules using unique research tools and techniques developed by their research
group in addition to environmental microbiology and electrochemical techniques.
The project will involve undergraduate and graduate students in research and
prepare them for careers in the fields of microbioelectrochemistry and anaerobic
digestion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to
quantify the electron transfer rates and determine the electron transfer
mechanisms in granules using novel techniques. The PIs will use this knowledge
to improve performance of microbial communities in granules and to develop
innovative bioelectrochemical anaerobic digesters. They plan to use
microelectrodes capable of spatially quantifying the microscale chemical
gradients, conductivity, and extracellular electron transfer rates within
granules, and they will use electrochemical techniques to enrich and qualify
electrogenic organisms for the UASB reactors. To achieve these goals, they will
1) determine the electron transfer mechanisms in anaerobic methanogenic granules
by quantifying and spatially mapping conductivity and chemical gradients and
identifying the role of microbial populations, 2) evaluate the contribution of
conductive material in the electron transfer processes and performance of UASB
reactors, and 3) develop a novel integrated bioelectrochemical reactor/UASB
reactor. The knowledge gained from the successful completion of the project will
have an immediate impact on the biogas yields and sustainability of the UASB
reactors and will be applicable to new and existing anaerobic digester
technology. The PIs plan to disseminate their research to industry through a
collaborating company, which will provide internships for undergraduate and
graduate students. Interaction with the industrial partner will help promote
commercialization of the bioelectrochemical digester technology.