* 1706801
* Multi-scale modeling of multiphase flows and fluid-structure interactions in the lung
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Hideki Fujioka, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 391,263.00

CBET - 1706801&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gaver, Donald P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical
ventilation is a common therapy in serious lung disorders. While it can help
sustain pulmonary function, mechanical ventilation can also induce lung injury
by imposing large mechanical stresses on fragile pulmonary tissues. Therefore,
developing protocols that optimize ventilator performance while minimizing the
risk of injury could benefit many patients who undergo mechanical ventilation.
This award will support the development of computational and experimental
techniques to analyze the flow of air and liquid on the scale of individual
passageways in the lung and incorporate results of those studies into models
that predict overall lung performance during mechanical ventilation. The
predictive tools developed in this project could provide a foundation for a
personalized medical approach toward safe mechanical ventilation. In addition,
the project will provide educational activities for K-12 students and
opportunities for other students, especially those from underrepresented groups,
at all academic levels to participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
variety of lung ailments involve abnormalities in the fluid that lines
passageways through the lung. A computationally efficient, reduced-dimension,
multi-scale model will be developed to dynamically simulate heterogeneous lung
inflation and deflation by incorporating multiphase flows and fluid-structure
interactions between liquid and tissue components. The model will simulate an
anatomically based model of the lung, including tissue and liquid components.
New experiments will be conducted to analyze multiphase flow in fluid-lined
channels including such phenomena as airway closure, viscous fluid plug motion
and propagation, and airway reopening, including effects of dynamic surface
tension and other physicochemical interactions. Results from these experiments
and previous ones will be combined with theoretical models into an organ-level
model of the lung. Large-scale simulations of multi-scale and macro-scale
phenomena in the lung under normal and disease states will be conducted to
generate predictions that can be compared with well-established physiological
measurements. Results of the project will not only provide a tool to predict
ventilator performance, but also could lead to new predictive insights into lung
function.