* 1706905
* SuSCheM: Environmentally Sustainable Pathways for Extracting Valuable Elements from Electronic Wastes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alan West, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

1706905 (Park). E-waste (e.g., cell phones and PCs), which is the fastest
growing waste segment in the United States, is emerging as a major environmental
challenge in today's society. A novel approach to reclaim valuable components
such as metals and chemicals from existing products and wastes, also known as
urban mining, is essential for the sustainable treatment of e-waste. By
recovering metals and chemicals from waste streams with integrated material
looping cycles, a number of benefits can be accrued: environmental
sustainability achieved via the reuse of metals and chemicals, reduced need for
natural ores, reduced environmental contamination, and energy savings for metal
extraction (10-15% less energy is needed for metal recovery from e-waste than
ores), and reduced health hazards from direct disposal of those wastes. The
integrated e-waste treatment scheme to be created by this project involves the
systematic elemental mapping and characterization of e-wastes, chemically
enhanced leaching of metals using innovative ligand systems and safer solvents,
and tailored precipitation and electrowinning of metals. Finally, the overall
environmental impact of the proposed technology will be investigated via a
comprehensive life cycle analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the
present three-year study is to establish an innovative, integrated,
environmentally sustainable e-waste processing scheme that allows for the
efficient treatment and recovery of metals and chemicals from e-waste. If
successful, the proposed technology will significantly reduce the landfilling of
e-wastes, the emissions from hazardous halogenated flame retardant plastics, and
the need for toxic chemicals, while allowing for enhanced recovery of valuable
materials from e-waste. The fundamental understanding obtained from this study
will provide important insights into other material/waste recycle schemes
involving complex chemistry and structures. As an integral part of the project,
the team's educational and outreach activities are inseparably linked to the
research plan. The four main goals in this effort include: to promote the
international research and educational collaborations in the proposed research
area; to motivate K-12 students, particularly female and minority students, to
pursue a career in science and engineering; to provide academic research
experience for both graduate and undergraduate students; and to enable the
development of a new curriculum reflecting an increasing interest in green
energy and environmental issues. To achieve these goals, the PIs have planned
specific programs including: (a) K-12 outreach via a new kids' journal called
Frontiers for Young Minds where kids from 8 to 15 will be engaged in scientific
journal publication by serving as reviewers; and, (b) the development of MOOC
Masters program on energy and material sustainability to be hosted at multi-
institutions in USA, Europe, China and Korea.