* 1706058
* Engineering microbial co-cultures for complex natural product biosynthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Haoran Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 350,846.00

Many naturally-occurring pharmaceutical molecules (for example: antibiotics,
anti-cancer drugs) are the result of a long sequence of reactions that add,
piece by piece, different subunits to the growing molecule, in a fashion similar
to an industrial assembly line. When production occurs in a single organism, it
places a large burden on the organism to provide all of the raw materials and
energy needed to complete construction. This project will investigate a strategy
that creates organisms capable of efficiently producing a particular subunit of
the larger drug molecule, "subcontracts" production of subunits to multiple
organisms, then brings the subunits together to create the final product. If
successful, this could dramatically improve the efficiency of large molecule
drug production, and could also increase the speed of identification of more
effective drug molecules. This project will also expand the development of a
STEM-trained workforce through targeted outreach and engagement of high school
and college students from under-represented populations in the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed study aims to adapt engineered E.
coli strains to constitute co-cultures for production of three representative
natural products with characteristically long and complicated biosynthetic
pathways. Each biosynthetic pathway is divided into two independent modules,
each of which is accommodated in a different, specialized E. coli strain. Such
designed pathway modularization allows for reduction of metabolic burden and
improvement of biosynthetic performance of the co-culture strains, as each
strain is only responsible for one portion of the biosynthesis. The involved
strains will also be metabolically engineered individually to meet the needs of
the designated pathway enzymes and maximize their bioconversion capabilities.
Moreover, the biosynthetic strength of the individual pathway modules will be
balanced for bioproduction optimization through manipulation of the relative
ratio of the co-culture populations. The microbial systems will be scaled up to
investigate population stability and bioproduction behavior under high cell
density conditions. This project offers outstanding potential to design and
engineer the production of complex molecules. The fundamental knowledge gained
regarding the dynamic regulation of population ratios and metabolic activity in
mixed populations will provide insight into the behavior of natural microbial
mixed populations, which will have implications for a wide variety of industrial
and environmentally-important processes.