* 1706039
* Thermal Evaporation around Optically-Excited Functionalized Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Hsueh-Chia Chang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 356,000.00

Optical absorber-assisted thermal evaporation can enable a variety of innovative
renewable energy applications, ranging from water purification to chemical
fractionation. Many of these applications can catalyze new industries and hence
drive global economic growth. For example, the ability to use solar energy for
fresh water production will tackle many challenges in the water-energy nexus.
The present project is motivated by a recently observed liquid evaporation using
highly localized heating effect from functionalized light absorbing
nanoparticles. In such a demonstration, water vapor was generated while the bulk
temperature remained at about 30 degrees C. The underlying physics is not yet
understood, and the mechanism is related to the convoluted multi-phase (liquid-
vapor-solid) thermal and mass transport, which needs this multi-disciplinary
study to unlock. The fundamental thermal transport science to be gained from
this project is expected to guide the development of new technologies to utilize
solar energy, resulting in significant broader impacts on applications. This
project will enable the education and training of graduate students and
undergraduate students from under-represented groups in the
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is driven by the hypothesis that
enhanced interfacial thermal transport and the self-assembled monolayer defect-
assisted nucleation combine to enhance bubble generation and improve the overall
evaporation effect. To test this hypothesis, the objectives of this proposal are
to (1) understand the fundamental relationship between the surface
functionalization, thermal transport and the subsequently mass transport in
bubble dynamics through a combination of molecular simulations and mesoscale
hydrodynamics modeling; and (2) validate such a relationship through experiments
on vapor generation around photo-excited functionalized nanoparticles. This
project will employ a combination of molecular simulation, mesoscale modeling
and experimental validation to achieve a multi-scale understanding of this
fundamental problem with unprecedented resolution.