* 1706910
* Design of Surface-Nanoengineered Hybrid Membranes for High-Performance Redox Flow Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Sangil Kim, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2022
* USD 299,003.00

The demand for electricity is steadily increasing, driven by both population
growth and greater dissemination of modern electrical devices to an increasing
fraction of the population. A growth of renewable energy technologies will help
to accommodate this growing demand for electricity, provided that energy storage
technologies address the intermittency of solar and wind power. The proverbial
energy storage technology is the battery, which generally conducts electrons
extracted from a solid-state material through a precisely defined conduit which
creates electricity. However, the use of existing batteries on the scale needed
for the electrical power grid is not practical. Liquid flow batteries offer an
alternative for energy storage, and have attracted recent attention due to
design flexibility and safe large-scale operation. For commercialization, the
performance of the membrane that conducts ions and electrons to complete the
electrical circuit needs to be improved. Specifically, existing polymer-based
ion exchange membranes have poor mechanical stability and low ion selectivity
that limit performance and decrease energy efficiency. This project will
interface novel uniform two-dimensional nanostructures into existing membrane,
while also developing transport models to fundamentally understand the ion
transport in these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deposit
nanopatterns of one-atom-thick boron nitride two-dimensional materials onto
existing ion exchange membranes. The boron nitride will selectively increase
proton conductivity over transport of the vanadium ion. Nanochannels will be
engineered onto the surface of the membrane to retain water in order to decouple
ion conductivity and selectivity. Electrochemical performance of the hybrid
membranes will be benchmarked against industry-standards, for both energy
efficiency and stability. Results will be used to enhance the fundamental
understanding of ion transport through the materials. The project will support
and train one graduate student and several undergraduate students, and
complementary hands-on research experiences for high school teachers will help
to disseminate the research methods to a broader community.