* 1706157
* Linking how the mechanics of high rate and impulse of loading to the brain leads to varying types and levels of damage to neuronal structure and function.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Bryan Pfister, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2021
* USD 309,777.00

PI: Pfister, Bryan &lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1706157 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every
fifteen seconds, someone suffers a traumatic brain injury (TBI) -- leading to
over 5.3 million Americans coping with varying severity of brain injuries.
Compared to severe TBI, little is known about the consequences of mild TBI or
blast TBI on neuronal function that can then lead to cognitive deficits and
changes in behavior. In addition, there is wide variability in patient outcomes
after a TBI. Injury severity may in part depend on how the head is hit. Indeed,
the mechanical nature of injury to the head varies greatly from motor vehicle
accidents, falls, sports, assaults, and exposure to blasts. The cause of TBI has
mostly been described in terms of tissue strains due to the brain motion in the
skull. Distinctively different biomechanical insults to the head will translate
to unique loading and deformation patterns throughout the brain. The project
goal is to define how the mechanical loading and deformation of neuronal cells
associated with motor vehicle accidents (non-impact) differ from high rate and
impulse loading associated with blunt impact (sport concussion) and blast
exposure (extreme rate) in terms of the effect on structure and function of
neuronal cells. With appropriate models and information establishing how
biomechanics plays an important role in neuronal structure and function, the TBI
community will be able to replicate injury as needed for their studies in order
to better understand various injury outcomes. This research will include the
participation of engineering students at all levels, senior capstone design
projects, and a summer programs for undergraduate and high school students. The
PI prioritizes and has experience with including and accommodating students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to severe forms of traumatic brain
injury (TBI), little is known about the consequences of mild TBI or blast TBI on
cellular properties, neural networks, and behavior -- the dysfunction at the
core of cognitive deficits. Mild injuries do not show the overt tissue damage
present in severe cases, and diagnoses are often missed or uncertain. The
variations in TBI are also an important biomechanical problem. The mechanical
nature of injury to the head can vary greatly between motor vehicle accidents,
falls, sports, assaults, and exposure to blasts. The project hypothesizes that
the magnitude, rate and impulse of the local mechanics each contribute to cause
different alterations in neuronal structure and function that underlie the
variety of outcomes seen in TBI patients. Neuronal and axon pathology have been
well characterized in animal models from large brain deformations that are
typically associated with head rotations. Accordingly, the known mechanisms of
TBI have mostly been described in terms of tissue strains. Only recently has
research begun exploring blunt impact and blast modes of injury, but with little
focus on how the associated high rate and impulse loading causes damage at the
neuronal level. This project focuses on defining how these vastly different
biomechanical loading parameters affect structure and function of the neuron,
which may shed light on different mechanisms of injury that may be important to
the diversity of patient outcomes in head injury. Defining studies make use of
an in vitro, 3D neuronal culture model of blast injury and an established in
vitro stretch injury model to replicate strains, rates and impulses of three
modes (non-impact, blunt pact and blast exposure) of injury. The specific aims
are to: 1) create a dose curve of cell viability to blast exposure (vs.
overpressure and impulse) in a 3D in vitro blast model; 2) investigate the
importance of high strain rate and impulse loading to alterations in neuronal
structure; and 3) investigate the importance of high strain rate and impulse
loading on neuronal electrical activity.