* 1706762
* Collaborative Research: The Roles of Inter-limb Jets and Body Angles in Metachronal Paddling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Arvind Santhanakrishnan, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 254,000.00

Commercial underwater drones typically rely on a single propeller element. If
this element were to fail, then the drone would be lost. In contrast, the
existence of multiple propulsion elements would permit continued use upon
failure of a single propeller. Natural aquatic organisms illustrate a unique
opportunity to use multiple propulsion elements to generate small-scale jets.
Krill, shrimp, and crayfish, all use several pairs of limbs in highly
coordinated motion to swim. The animal rhythmically oscillates its limbs from
the tail-to-head at low velocity, with the timing of each pair delayed relative
to its neighbors. Nature?s design uses much less energy than our engineered
underwater drones. Mechanical elements, such as gears and timing belts, could be
used to cost effectively mimic nature?s design. However, the underlying fluid
dynamics of this metachronal (sequential) paddling is not well-understood. A
limited number of studies have suggested limb morphology, the precision timing
of the paddling sequence, and the generation of jets in the wake of the organism
all contribute to this unique propulsion mechanism. This research project
examines how coordination of adjacent limbs interact with the flow past the body
to generate propulsive jets in the wake. Uncovering the underlying fluid dynamic
principles of metachronal paddling will enable scalability to engineered
devices, allowing for efficient design of miniaturized, bio-inspired autonomous
underwater drones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project examines how the
coordinated motion of multiple oscillating paddles merge with large-scale flow
past a submerged object to generate propulsive forces. A combination of
experiments with both live animals and robotic models will be used. Tomographic
particle image velocimetry measurements of free-swimming aquatic organisms will
be used to validate flow fields predicted by physical models. Self-propelled
metachronal swimming robots will be used to examine the flow for individual and
collective motion of the robots. Mechanical performance with respect to body
angles, swimming speeds, and neighbor distances in individual and small groups
of metachronal paddling robots will be examined. A primary project outcome will
be the fluid dynamics mechanism by which aquatic organisms achieve large body
speeds by paddling individual limbs at low velocity. The outcomes of this
research will enable engineers to design and coordinate the motion of multiple
propellers on engineered devices. In addition, the research project trains
undergraduate and graduate students to conduct interdisciplinary research in
bioengineering. Existing mechanisms at both institutions (NSF-funded Oklahoma
Louis-Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and Georgia Tech FOCUS program)
are being used to recruit under-represented students for the project, and the
researchers are participating in outreach activities to high school students and
their teachers.