* 1706968
* High Performance Polymer Electrolytes through High Dielectric Polymers and Blends
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Nathaniel Lynd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

High capacity batteries are key to increasing the range and performance of
sustainable transportation technologies. The use of polymer electrolytes is a
promising strategy to increase the capacity and safety of lithium batteries.
This combined theoretical and experimental project will fill the gaps in
fundamental understanding of ion conduction in pure polymers and their blends to
improve performance for real-world applications. A polymer blending strategy
enables the combination of favorable characteristics at blend compositions that
maximize electrolyte performance. The combined use of theory and experiment in
this project increases the efficiency of discovery, the depth of fundamental
understanding, and speeds progress on this economically and environmentally
important field of research in energy storage. The results of the proposed
fundamental research will be directly applicable to development of more
efficiently conducting polymer electrolytes for deployment in lithium batteries.
Such advances can potentially impact applications as diverse as cellphone
batteries, development of electric cars, and large scale grid storage. To
complement the research efforts, the PIs will carry out educational and outreach
activities. These will include graduate and undergraduate student research
initiatives aimed at synergistic theoretical-experimental activities, the
development of a new educational module on polymer electrolytes and sustainable
energy resources, and outreach efforts on sustainable energy and batteries that
are directed towards K-12 audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the advantages
of polymer electrolytes in the context of lithium batteries, the continuing
challenge for macromolecular electrolytes has been to increase ionic
conductivity. The project will present new concepts which motivate the design of
new materials that would both advance fundamental understanding of polymer
electrolytes and enable appreciable improvements in storage capacity. The
overall hypothesis of the research program is predicated on the observation that
ionic conductivity in a homologous series of polyethers was shown to depend
primarily on the dielectric constant and not glass-transition temperature or
viscosity of the parent polymer. Significantly, this suggested the hypothesis
that there could be parametric regimes or classes of polymeric materials in
which the transport of ions is only limited by the solubility and dissociation
of the ions themselves, and that further increases in ionic conductivity would
be possible by enhancing the inherent dielectric constant of the material.
Ultimately, increases in dielectric constant may be accompanied by an increase
in the glass-transition temperature and that the resulting slow segmental
dynamics of the polymer will hinder ion conduction. The project includes study
of blends of high-dielectric polymeric materials with low-viscosity analogs to
achieve further enhancement in ion conductivities not limited by polymer
segmental dynamics. The ultimate result of the integrated study on ion transport
in polymer materials will identify the importance of the polymer dielectric
constant upon ion conductivities, and provide a new quantitative understanding
of ion transport as a function of polymer properties. Furthermore, the research
will exploit the non-ideal conductivity characteristics of blends that will lead
to a new understanding of the conductivity characteristics of polymer mixtures
and may unite the understanding of ion transport in polymer electrolytes with
those of small molecule electrolytes.