* 1706960
* NSF/CBET-BSF: Overcoming the Major Challenges to Algal Biohydrogen Production
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Kevin Redding, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2021
* USD 412,609.00

Hydrogen (H2) is a promising renewable fuel and a valuable commodity industrial
gas used in many chemical process industry technologies (e.g. fertilizer
synthesis, petroleum refining). The current industrial method to produce
hydrogen is steam reformation of natural gas. This produces carbon dioxide while
consuming methane, a high-value fuel. In contrast, hydrogen production by
photosynthetic microbes makes use of sunlight and abundant resources (e.g.
wastewater or seawater) and avoids competition with agriculture for food
production. This technology approach has technical barriers to improved
performance. As part of the photosynthesis process, molecular oxygen, O2, is
formed that poisons the enzymes that produce the hydrogen. The goal of this
project is to overcome these limitations. The strategy that will be used is to
link the protein machines in the algal cells that make hydrogen to other
proteins that could make hydrogen production more efficient. The learnings of
this project will also be shared with an outreach program to K-12 students and
their teachers for an active learning laboratory project by working with ASU's
Global Institute of Sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For industrial
competitiveness, algal hydrogen production must be increased by at least 5-fold.
Two major challenges limit efficient biological H2 production: inactivation of
the hydrogenase enzyme by O2; and limited electron flow from the photosynthetic
apparatus to the hydrogenase. To address the first challenge, the hypothesis is
that the enzyme can be protected by local microoxic environments created by
nearby O2 uptake mechanisms. Several complementary ways to reduce O2 at the
vicinity of the hydrogenase will be pursued including use of chimeric proteins
in which the hydrogenase is joined with a partner protein capable of reducing O2
or reactive oxygen species (e.g. glucose oxidase, flavodiiron protein). These
chimeras will first be tested in vitro and then the most promising ones will be
expressed in vivo. Rapid molecular and spectroscopic tests will be used to
identify limitations to light-driven hydrogen production in the engineered
strains. Several genetic modifications will be utilized to rectify identified
limitations in electron flow or H2 production activity. Complementary sets of
expertise in the two research groups in the US and Israel will be put to use in
the creation, analysis, and optimization of the engineered algal cells. Together
the two groups will determine the optimal way to arrange the various new
components to make sustained high-level bio-hydrogen production a reality.