* 1707469
* 2017 Molecular Mechanisms in Evolution Gordon Research Conference at Stonehill College Easton, MA
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Andrew Murray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This project will support the participation of graduate students, postdocs,
young investigator and underrepresented groups in the third Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) and the first Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Molecular
Mechanisms in Evolution. The GRS and GRC will be held at Stonehill College,
Easton, MA on June 10-11, and June 11-16, 2017, respectively. The GRC and GRS
will bring together researchers who will present and discuss the latest findings
and diverse perspectives on the molecular bases of evolutionary change. The GRS,
which is primarily attended by graduate students and postdocs, will feature oral
and poster presentations accompanied by informal and formal discussions with
around 60 attendees. Most of the GRS participants are expected to attend the
GRC. The GRC will feature invited talks by the leading scientists in the field,
and a selection of short talks from the abstracts, thereby offering young
scientists opportunities for visibility and idea exchange. The GRC program will
also include poster presentations accompanied by informal and formal
discussions. The GRC and GRS will promote international and national
collaborations between physicists and biologists of diverse disciplines to
promote systematic and quantitative analyses of biological processes,
intensified theory building, and deeper understanding of evolution in disease
and basic biology. The GRC and GRS will provide networking opportunities,
inspiration and connections for young scientists, as well as mentoring and
perspectives on cutting-edge new research for young participants at a critical
stage in their careers. The requested funds will be used to defray the costs of
a diverse group of graduate students, postdocs, new investigators, women, and
minority participants in the GRC and GRS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of the GRC and GRS is to provide conditions for major advancement in
our understanding of fundamental questions in evolutionary biology. To reach
this goal, the organizers will bring together scientists from different
disciplines: molecular and evolutionary biology, physics, mathematics and
medicine, in order to create an intellectual environment which catalyses
original thought, and to initiate collaborations that go beyond the means and
competencies of individual groups. This will also be the place for productive
discussions of researchers with controversial viewpoints. Understanding
evolutionary processes lays the foundation for comprehending the history of life
on earth and of the mechanisms that produce its unity and diversity. The GRC and
GRS sessions address a wide range of topics: origins of life, evolution of
mutation and recombination rates, stress-inducible genetic variation, non-
genetic variation and inheritance, phenotypic noise, evolution of novelty,
evolution of complexity, cancer, aging, experimental evolution and evolutionary
contingency. The themes of the GRC and GRS have been chosen to represent the key
problems in the field and to stimulate the exchange of ideas between diverse
groups of scientists. This is of greatest importance: without such a community
researchers may be unaware of the important recent discoveries and cutting-edge
technological developments outside their respective scientific
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Cellular
Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.