* 1707405
* NeuroNex Innovation Award: A National Resource for Mesoscale and Connectomic Brain Mapping
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Narayanan Kasthuri, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 02/29/2020
* USD 799,999.00

Mapping brains at arbitrary scales from the cellular composition of entire
brains to reconstructing every synapse is a powerful tool for understanding
brain function and dysfunction. However, the financial, engineering and
computational barriers to new brain mapping technologies are far beyond the
reach of most laboratories and even universities and institutions. A NeruoHub at
a national lab, Argonne National Lab (ANL), could provide widespread access to
such technologies. Specifically, the Hub will leverage the brightest hard X-ray
source and one of the fastest computers at ANL, to provide mesoscale maps that
detail the locations of every cell, their shapes and ultimately their
connections with each other in large volumes to entire brains. The Hub will
craft these technologies for brain mapping across diverse species, specifically
the nervous system of the octopus. Enabling comparative studies across brain
regions and species like the octopus will provide insights into what is general
and what is idiosyncratic, and can reveal novel solutions when applied to
species with distinctive perceptual or behavioral capabilities. Finally, the Hub
will nurture and develop the relationship between neuroscience and the national
lab system. For decades, many other fields of science have benefitted from
strong collaborative relationships with the national lab system, leveraging
large-scale resources to significantly advance their respective fields.
Neuroscience has not. The Hub will establish the first pipeline for providing
access and introduction to the broader neuroscience and national lab
communities, paving the way for future collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is to develop sample
preparation protocols for staining large volumes to entire octopus brains with
heavy metals (e.g. osmium, lead, and uranium), embedding in plastic, and imaging
with synchrotron source micro- and nano-x-ray microscopy followed by automated
serial section electron microscopy. Development of new protocols will leverage
existing protocols and imaging approaches for mammalian brains while also
developing capabilities at ANL for 100nm resolution projection x-ray microscopy.
Where possible, reconstructions of neurons and their processes from micro- and
nano-X-ray datasets will be validated with automated large volume serial
electron microscopy. In tandem existing machine learning algorithms used for
tracing neurons and their processes will be scaled onto Argonne High Performance
Computers for analyses of X-ray datasets.