* 1707226
* I-Corps: Algorithms and software for resolving intersection problems in computer aided design
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,08/31/2017
* Richard Crawford, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it
allows users of Computer-Aided Design (CAD) systems to create product models
that can be used directly in downstream applications. Current workflows require
extensive manual repair of geometric models before they can be used for
Computer-Aided Engineering/Manufacturing. Within the US automotive industry
alone nearly $600M/year is spent in direct cost and lost productivity on
mitigating CAD problems. Entire business units or job shops are employed to deal
with this expensive problem by repairing or reworking gap-ridden geometric
models. Commercializing the algorithm developed will result in improved
productivity in the engineering design process, resulting in better products
that are designed more quickly than is possible with current CAD
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on development and
commercialization of a novel software algorithm that resolves a ubiquitous
problem in the Computer-Aided Design (CAD) industry, the gaps that arise at the
intersections of surfaces in CAD models. The majority of modern geometric
modeling relies on parametric freeform surfaces built as complex combinations of
much simpler geometric shapes. However, the intersection of freeform surfaces in
CAD currently results in highly approximated, incomplete solutions. The approach
developed here is based on a thorough understanding of the parametric space
underlying the geometry of most modern CAD models. The algorithm classifies and
segments the intersection curve in parametric space, then reconstructs the
intersecting surfaces such that their boundaries are guaranteed to lie on the
intersection curve to the tolerance set by the user of the CAD system. The
approach solves the problem in a way that produces objects in the same form as
that of the original models, making them available in the modeler's native
software package.