* 1707919
* OP: Full Temporal Characterization of Interacting Photon Wavefunctions Using Real-Time Multi-Mode Quantum Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Eden Figueroa, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 320,000.00

The field of quantum information science is rapidly advancing because of the
anticipated impacts that will come from new quantum technologies such as secure
communication protocols, improved measurement systems, and revolutionary
computing methods. Many of these technologies require nonlinear optical
phenomena and sources of correlated light quanta, or photons. This project will
pioneer new ways to generate and characterize complex quantum states of light.
One aim is to use optical cavities surrounding a sample of cold atoms in order
to enhance the way one light beam can control the phase shift for another light
beam. A second aim is to use a graphical processor unit (GPU) for real-time
characterization of quantum states of light. This will serve as a benchmarking
tool for quantum networks, and allow on-the-fly tuning of operational parameters
in sophisticated networks of quantum gates and memories. Developing tools for
real-time characterization of quantum networks trains students working on this
project to use cutting-edge technologies from computer engineering, atomic
physics, and photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three main
thrusts. First, the deployment of different novel physical platforms in which
single-photon level quantum nonlinearities can be observed. Second, the design
and implementation of state-of-the-art characterization tools that make it
possible to explore the quantum process tomography of the gate processes in an
extended Hilbert space. Third, the realization of experiments to develop
reliable quantum gate operations with single photon fields. An overarching goal
of this project is to understand the physics governing atom-mediated photon-
photon interactions in a framework with multiple optical frequency modes. To
study the performance of quantum phase gates, the team will use GPU hardware to
develop quantum state evaluation tools. This approach will also enable real-time
characterization of phase-shift operations using interacting photons.