* 1707641
* Synthesis of Second-Order Optical Nonlinearities with Electronic Metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,000.00

Nontechnical description: The ongoing explosion in generation of big data relies
on development of new information processing techniques and technologies that
can compute and communicate large volumes of information with unprecedented
speed. The current trend in achieving such performances depends on seamless
integration of electronics and photonic (optical) technologies. However, the
state of the art photonic technologies are costly, bulky, fragile in their
alignment, and difficult to integrate with electronic systems, both in terms of
cost effective manufacturing and in terms of delivery and retrieval of massive
volumes of data that photonic circuits can process. To overcome these
deficiencies, the current trend emphasizes the construction of photonic
subsystems directly on an electronic processor chip, with the same manufacturing
process as the surrounding electronics. Development of photonic materials with
substantial nonlinear characteristics is essential for the construction of
integrated, high speed photonic devices and systems for ultrafast information
processing of big data. The project provides scientific training for students at
graduate and undergraduate levels as well as serves as a platform for outreach,
education and collaborative efforts with middle and high schools. Engagement of
students of diverse ethnicity, gender and economic backgrounds in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) is enabled through various
ongoing student and teacher training activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Optical materials with large second-order nonlinear
susceptibilities are essential for the construction of integrated, CMOS
compatible, high speed photonic devices for ultrafast on-chip modulation,
switching and wave mixing of optical fields. Such nonlinear optical materials
can be constructed by engineering the electronic band structure of
semiconductors via either fixed charges at dielectric/semiconductor interfaces
or gradient of work functions at metal/semiconductor interfaces. This project
focuses on the design, fabrication and testing of nonlinear metamaterials, in
free-space and guided wave configurations, for operation in the visible and
near-IR regions. Additionally, relationships between the electrical and optical
properties of the metamaterials are investigated in order to design electrically
tuned optical nonlinearities for novel applications such as ultrafast switching.
The overall goal of this project is to further advance nonlinear optical
metamaterial science and technology, with focus on three specific approach
objectives. The first objective focuses on theoretical analysis and modeling of
metamaterials by engineering nanostructure composition exploiting various CMOS
compatible materials; the second addresses development of nanofabrication
methods of these metamaterials; lastly, the third objective targets experimental
validation of the theoretical predictions and testing of the fabricated
nonlinear metamaterials. This study also paves the way for development of
numerous applications of metamaterials including modulation, switching, and wave
mixing of optical fields. The PI continues to be committed to outreach,
education and collaborative efforts within the university as well as with San
Diego middle and high schools, through ongoing REU, RET and summer teaching
programs.