* 1707490
* Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization of Acidic Monomers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 432,000.00

Radical polymerization is a chemical reaction that sequentially adds together
small molecules (called monomers) to form long polymer chains that consist of
hundreds or thousands of repeating units. Radical polymerization is a powerful
synthetic method. It is used to make nearly half of all polymers (plastics),
about 100 million tons worldwide each year. Atom transfer radical polymerization
(ATRP) is a special type of radical polymerization that can prepare polymers
with precisely controlled chain lengths. In addition, depending on the chemical
structure of the monomer, it can produce a variety of shapes, such as stars,
combs, brushes or rings and each of these has specialty applications. While ATRP
is a common technique, some monomers, especially those with acidic
functionalities, are difficult to polymerize using ATRP. Polymers formed from
acidic monomers are desirable because they have unique properties that make them
useful in a variety of applications. With the support of the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Matyjaszewski at Carnegie Mellon University is developing ATRP methods for the
controlled polymerization of acidic monomers. The project, which could enable
the creation of new commercially-scaled plastics that benefit society, trains
undergraduate and graduate students in polymer science. The research team also
works with members of the Controlled Radical Polymerization (CRP) Consortium at
Carnegie Mellon University to develop new materials for use in a range of
industrial markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual challenge of this
research comprises understanding, improving, and expanding direct ATRP of acidic
monomers without neutralization or protection. Controlled ATRP of acidic
monomers requires a fundamental understanding of the kinetics and thermodynamics
of ATRP and the associated side reactions. New copper catalyst complexes are
developed to achieve higher selectivity and stability under acidic conditions.
Iron catalysts and metal-free organic photoredox catalysts are studied to
further reduce an environmental impact of ATRP. New synthetic pathways are
explored to economically produce acidic polymers by direct ATRP of unprotected
monomers. The new polymers with well-controlled complex architectures, including
organic-inorganic hybrids such as nanocomposites, functionalized surfaces, and
bioconjugates are of both academic and commercial importance. The process saves
time and energy and reduces cost in academic and industrial laboratories. The
results of this research are disseminated through Professor Matyjaszewski's
website, timely publications, student presentations at (inter)national
conferences, and through the industrial CRP Consortium at Carnegie Mellon
University.