* 1707573
* Search for an Electric Dipole Moment of 199Hg
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Blayne Heckel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 573,999.00

Compelling scientific evidence points to the conclusion that the universe
evolved from a "Big Bang" some 13 billion years ago. A major unanswered question
associated with the Big Bang hypothesis is why there is more matter in the
universe than anti-matter; they should have been created in equal quantities.
The likely answer to this question is that there is an unknown force in nature,
extremely weak, that favors matter over anti-matter. It is straightforward to
show that if this new force exists, it will endow elementary particles and atoms
with a property known as an "electric dipole moment", a small separation of
electric charge along the spin axis of the particle or atom. A measurement of
the electric dipole moment of 199Hg (the spin Â½ isotope of mercury atoms) will
provide unambiguous evidence for this new force that breaks the symmetry between
matter and anti-matter. The project serves the national interest by promoting
the progress of science. The study of the particles that constitute the universe
and the laws of nature that govern interactions between the particles serve to
advance our understanding of the physical world and stimulate the development of
technologies that have arisen from that understanding. Previous experiments have
not been sensitive enough to detect the electric dipole moment of atoms or
particles. The 199Hg project will constitute the most sensitive electric dipole
moment search ever conducted. As such, it will provide excellent training for
students in state-of-the-art experimental atomic physics techniques and high
precision measurement techniques. The project will advance the field of nuclear
spin magnetometry, which has broad application to measurements of magnetic
fields in general. Society will benefit from the training of a new generation of
scientists and from a more complete understanding of the universe we live
in.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High precision table-top experiments, such as this
199Hg project, provide a complementary path to particle accelerators for probing
the underlying symmetries and forces of nature. An electric dipole moment of an
atom can only exist if time-reversal (T) symmetry is violated, and T symmetry
violation is directly related to the matter/anti-matter asymmetry (through the
CPT theorem). One measures an electric dipole moment by observing a change in
the atomic Larmor (spin precession) frequency of the 199Hg atoms as an external
electric field is applied to vapor cells that contain the atoms. This experiment
will use a stack of four vapor cells in a common magnetic field. Oppositely
directed electric fields will be applied to the two innermost vapor cells while
the outer two cells, with no electric fields, will serve as co-magnetometers.
The atoms will be spin polarized using resonant 254 nm laser light and the
Larmor frequencies will be read-out by the optical rotation of the polarization
of non-resonant laser light that traverses the vapor cells. A previous
experiment, limited by gradients in the magnetic field, achieved an upper limit
on the electric dipole moment of 199Hg of less than 3 x 10-30 e-cm. this new
experiment will improve the magnetic field uniformity to push the experimental
sensitivity into the 10-31 e-cm range.