* 1707571
* Gravitation and Black Hole Electrodynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Maria Rodriguez, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 135,270.00

Relativistic jets are central to the evolution of astrophysical systems, from
stellar to galactic scales. Identifying the mechanisms that generate matter
flows at the edge of rapidly rotating black holes and how the electromagnetic
fields originate and organize in space can significantly advance our knowledge
in mathematical physics, gravitation, and astrophysics. Recent measurements
suggest that nearly extremal (i.e., spinning at almost the maximum theoretical
limit) black holes exist in nature, and consequently nearly extremal black holes
could be detected in future astrophysical experiments. The Blandford-Znajek (BZ)
model - a mechanism for electromagnetic energy extraction from a rotating black
hole - is considered to be the most promising framework to explain the energy
observed in quasars and, as the numerical simulations indicate, the most
efficient way to extract energy from a rotating black hole. In spite of these
findings, few theoretical works have systematically addressed the BZ energy
extraction mechanisms for (near-)extremal black holes, and it still remains
difficult to develop an intuitive picture of how the electromagnetic fields
originate and organize in space. It is the overall aim of this project to amend
this situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research on
relativistic outflow mechanisms near Kerr black holes. Firstly, it will provide
BZ models with a general theoretical framework by constructing an action
principle for the electromagnetic fields. Secondly, it will study the genesis of
energy extraction in black hole by defining the solution space and domain of
operation at the edge of (near-)extreme black holes. Lastly, it will develop an
intuitive picture of how the flow of electromagnetic energy and charge current
originates and organizes in space by finding extensions and novel solutions of
the newly discovered purely electromagnetic version of the BZ process. Realizing
these proposed goals will open a new window on the study of general relativity
in the strong field regime and outflow processes at the edge of black holes.
Combined with the unprecedented observational data that will soon become
available the present interdisciplinary theoretical research has the potential
to radically enhance our knowledge of the fundamental theory and to impact the
astronomical measurements of spinning black holes.