* 1707652
* Holomorphic Invariants in Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Lenhard Ng, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 355,674.00

Symplectic geometry is an area of mathematics that dates back to the 19th
century and the modern formulation in physics of Newtonian mechanics. In the
past few decades, it has become an exciting and fundamental area of mathematical
research, due in part to close connections with many other parts of mathematics
as well as physics. Symplectic geometry has had especially striking recent
applications to low-dimensional topology, the mathematical study of three- and
four-dimensional spaces. The Principal Investigator will pursue one particularly
promising technique along these lines, in the setting of the theory of knots, or
loops of string that are tied together at their ends. This technique has proven
to be of interest to the physics community, providing tantalizing clues of an
as-yet-undiscovered framework that combines portions of mathematics (in
particular, symplectic geometry) and theoretical physics (in particular, string
theory, which provides a model for the fundamental forces that shape the
universe). The present project will work to uncover this framework, facilitating
the exchange of ideas between mathematics and physics. As part of this project,
the Principal Investigator will also promote the training of future
mathematicians, running research programs and mathematical competitions for both
undergraduate students and local high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
unifying approach to symplectic geometry in this project is provided by
holomorphic curves. Since pioneering work by Gromov in the 1980s, holomorphic
curves have become a central tool in symplectic geometry, combining powerful
analytical and geometric techniques with a computable combinatorial flavor. The
research supported by this award applies holomorphic curves to the setting of
knots. Previous work by the Principal Investigator and collaborators led to the
development of knot contact homology, a powerful knot invariant in the spirit of
Symplectic Field Theory, which has evolved into a subject that has many
unexpected and intriguing connections to various areas of mathematics and
physics. Recent results have opened the door to a detailed exploration of these
connections, which will be carried out in this project. Within symplectic
geometry, knot contact homology motivates a close study of a new type of Floer
theory (partially wrapped Floer homology); in knot theory, it is conjecturally
related to topological concepts like Seifert genus and concordance; in
topological string theory, it is conjectured to be determined by a certain
Calabi-Yau manifold that has been the object of much study in recent years.
Besides tackling these conjectures, the Principal Investigator will pursue a
related project, following on a recently discovered connection between
constructible sheaves (from algebraic geometry) on one side, and holomorphic
curves on the other. This project will develop this connection, in particular
working to define an analogue of the Fukaya category for contact manifolds and
applying this to facilitate computations in Fukaya categories and mirror
symmetry.