* 1707812
* Investigations in Proton-Proton Collisions at the Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Joey Huston, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,505,955.00

Particle physics considers a vast range of scientific questions, from subatomic
to cosmic scales. The Michigan State University (MSU) Group supported through
this award investigates such questions through experimentation at the highest
available collision energies at accelerators. These studies are relevant to the
understanding of the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting
fraction of a second just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as
we do now. To meet the challenges of this quest, new theories are advanced, new
detectors and accelerators are developed and built, and new computing and
analytical methodologies are created, all of which have significant broader
impact for the training of young scientists in the near term and the advancement
of technological benefits to society over the longer term.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012 at the CERN Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) located in Geneva, Switzerland, completed the standard
model of particle physics. Now elucidating the dynamics underlying this model
stands as a major challenge for particle physics. Precision measurements,
especially the production and decay of the Higgs boson, and searches for new
particles and forces dominate the energy frontier mission.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Michigan State University (MSU) particle physics group
is engaged in this research at the LHC as members of the ATLAS experiment. The
group is making significant contributions to ongoing experimental operations, to
new and planned upgrades of the experiment, to large-scale computing, and to
physics analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSU group is targeting its physics
studies under four general categories: the search for new vector bosons; the
study of Higgs boson production and decay; the physics of top quarks, singly and
in pairs; and the study of the strong interactions, especially jet production in
association with vector bosons and heavy quarks. The group has a strong track
record of collaboration with theoretical physicists on both quantum
chromodynamics and electroweak processes. This is an important bridge between
experimental and theoretical understanding of ongoing
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of the MSU high energy physics group
have traditionally had a strong involvement in education and outreach, and the
group has been especially innovative in informal education. A notable element of
these activities has been the development of a planetarium show on the ATLAS
experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). In collaboration with other US
groups on the ATLAS experiment, the group has also just developed a major
planetarium production on dark matter.