* 1707336
* One-Dimensional Gases of Dysprosium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Benjamin Lev, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 487,000.00

This project will study the interface between quantum mechanics and
thermodynamics. This is a cutting edge research direction because the way
quantum systems come into equilibrium, or "thermalize", remains a mystery. The
picture is clearer for isolated classical systems. For example, in classical
dynamics if a system of interacting particles explores all possible
configurations, then it can thermalize. Such a system is also said to be
"chaotic" and to lack "integrability", which means the particle trajectories
cannot be predicted with a sequence of integrals. For integrable systems, future
dynamics can be predicted. Interestingly, however, if the conditions for
integrability are weakly broken, there are still scenarios for which stable
dynamics can be predicted. This is a consequence of the celebrated Kolmogorov-
Arnold-Moser (KAM) theorem, which shows that small perturbations are
insufficient to render the system chaotic. This effect is largely responsible
for the orbital stability for our own solar system. Since quantum physics
describes dynamics too, it is natural to ask if there is an analogue to the KAM
theorem for quantum systems. This project will explore this question by first
creating a quantum integrable system using a gas of ultracold atoms confined in
one-dimensional traps. Changes to the system's behavior will then be caused by
adjusting magnetic long-range interactions between the atoms. The time it takes
for the gas to thermalize after a momentum kick will provide a measure of the
breakdown of integrability in the system. This work will have an impact on
quantum information processing, and other technologies that rely on the
predictability of quantum dynamics. Students working on this project will also
benefit from research training that will prepare them for jobs in high tech
industry or academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this
team will confine atoms of dysprosium (Dy), the most magnetic element, in two-
dimensional optical lattices. The energy gap to the first transverse motional
excited state will be larger than the gas temperature and chemical potential,
ensuring that the gas in each cigar-shaped tube is in the quasi-1D regime. For
large-enough scattering lengths, the gas will approximately realize the Tonks-
Girardeau limit of the integrable Lieb-Liniger model. A magnetic field will set
the angle of the dipoles with respect to the tube axis. The magnitude of the
magnetic dipole-dipole interaction can be tuned by this angle, allowing us to
control the integrability-breaking perturbation strength. A Bragg diffraction
pulse will split the gas in two. These parts of the gas will collide every 10 ms
due to weak longitudinal harmonic confinement. This dipolar version of the
quantum Newton's cradle experiment will allow this team to explore analogs of
the classical KAM scenario in the quantum realm. Moreover, spin-orbit coupling
(previously demonstrated by this group with Dy) will be introduced in attempts
to induce p-wave superfluidity near Feshbach resonances in one-dimensional gases
of fermionic Dy. In this way, one-dimensional atomic systems will be used to
explore novel types of superfluids that arise when the spin of the atom depends
on the direction the atom is moving. This is important because exotic
superfluids such as these support unusual excitations that may be useful for
quantum information processing.