* 1707558
* Experimental Studies of the Higgs Mechanism in the Standard Model and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Robert Schamberger, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,349,998.00

Particle physics considers a vast range of scientific questions, from subatomic
to cosmic scales. The State University of New York at Stony Brook Group
supported through this award investigates such questions through experimentation
at the highest available collision energies at the Large Hadron Collider (the
LHC) at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland. These studies are relevant to the
understanding of the Universe at its most fundamental level in the fleeting
fraction of a second just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as
we do now. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHC is now operating at the highest
collision energy ever achieved with man-made accelerators, 13 trillion electron
volts or 13 TeV, and goals of the experimental program are to understand the
nature of the Higgs Boson, discovered there in 2012, and to search for new
physics beyond the Standard Model of Elementary Particle Physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of the Stony Brook group is aimed to address
these scientific goals from data collected with the ATLAS experiment, one of the
major multipurpose detectors at the LHC. They seek answers to such questions as:
is the newly discovered Higgs particle the one predicted by the Standard Model
of particle physics or is it a part of a larger theoretical picture that
includes new particles? Why is the observed mass of the Higgs boson so low,
found to be 126 billion electron volts, or roughly 135 times the mass of the
proton? What are the detailed properties of the force carriers of the
electroweak interaction, the W and Z bosons, at high energy? These questions are
critical to our understanding of the full context of the Standard Model of
particle physics and to new physics that lies beyond the Standard
Model.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, the Stony Brook group is providing
managerial leadership for current upgrades of the ATLAS detector, to be ready by
the end of the decade. These upgrades will allow the operation of ATLAS at ever
higher beam collision rates to significantly increase the physics discovery
capabilities of the experimental program. This effort provides for the
participation and contribution of many university groups in the US, through
support of technical personnel and education and training of young scientific
researchers in the development and deployment of new, state-of-the-art
instrumentation.