* 1707969
* IsoDAR Neutrino Target R&amp;D and Engineering
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Michael Shaevitz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2024
* USD 412,063.00

Neutrinos from accelerators and nuclear reactors have played a central role in
our understanding of the properties of these elusive, hard-to-observe
fundamental particles. Three different types of neutrino are known to exist,
having been detected through their interaction via one of the known forces of
nature. A fourth type of neutrino has been postulated, a so-called light sterile
neutrino, that is presumed to only interact via gravity. This award funds the
R&amp;D and engineering necessary to bring the IsoDAR (Isotope Decay-At-Rest)
experiment from the stage of a Conceptual Design Report to a Preliminary Design
Report. IsoDAR is a novel, pure electron-antineutrino source that, when paired
with an underground detector, allows for searches for sterile neutrinos and non-
standard interactions. The issue that needs to be addressed is the high
intensity targeting on a neutrino production target which has, so far, been
studied with simulations and some initial engineering
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associated with this project, this program
addresses four areas: 1) development of a globally competitive STEM workforce;
2) increased participation of women and minorities; 3) increased partnerships
between academia and industry; and 4) improved well-being of individuals in
society. This project will include a graduate student and students from the
summer REU program, which averages 75% female participants. It will give them
the opportunity to apprentice with industry contractors. Finally, this work has
relevance for strong industrial collaboration because of the use of bright
accelerators for isotope production and Accelerator Driven Systems (ADS)
technology, applied, for example, to driving thorium reactors, thus supporting
the development of safe nuclear energy sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IsoDAR
antineutrino rates seem achievable with the proposed proton beam rates, but
target cooling and radiation safety issues need more design work coupled with
simulations. In addition, the target region has to use difficult materials such
as lithium and beryllium to allow a large amount of 8Li to be produced. Thus,
the design of the neutrino production target needs to be carefully engineered.
The work being funded in this award is to bring the target engineering and
cooling simulations to the level of a full detailed design with realistic
costing. It will also fund a prototype test of the cooling simulation. The
proposed target and cooling design study will explore the feasibility of new
methods to target very high intensity beams. This is of high intellectual merit
since high power targetry is an important question throughout the Intensity
Frontier program. Thus, this award has the potential to be transformative in
multiple areas of particle physics. In addition, developing a high intensity
antineutrino source that can be taken to any large hydrogen-based neutrino
detector will open up a large range possible future experiments.