* 1707790
* Neutrino Physics at Syracuse University
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Mitchell Soderberg, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2021
* USD 858,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was recently confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently
exists leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the
Standard Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact with
practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and were
once thought to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were believed
to have an antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the Standard
Model predicted that there were actually three different kinds of neutrinos that
were distinguishable through the different interactions that they did undergo
whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have totally changed
our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a mass and because
they do, they can actually change from one type to another. Detailed
measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino experiments,
form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the Standard
Model. Such measurements lie at the heart of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently a large interest in experimental
particle physics in Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPC) spurred in
part by the proposed Long Baseline Neutrino Experiment (LBNE) project at Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL) and in neutrino physics in general. This
award supports work which refines LArTPC technology, using a test beam and at
the MicroBooNE experiment at FNAL. LArTPC detector technology is scalable to the
very large masses (perhaps 10 kiloTons) needed by next generation neutrino
experiments and is capable of recording three-dimensional digital images of
particle trajectories. The MicroBooNE will have an active volume of 80 tons of
liquid argon and 8256 wires spread over three instrumented wireplanes making up
the Time Projection Chamber. MicroBooNE will make a variety of interesting
physics measurements, as well as serving as a proving ground for new hardware
techniques relevant for future experiments. Among MicroBooNE's primary physics
goals is to provide a cross-check of the "low-energy excess" of electron
neutrino events previously identified by the MiniBooNE experiment. There have
been recent "hints" that there may be a new type of neutrino, the so-called
sterile neutrino. The MicroBoone experiment, with the superior LArTPC, should
clarify the situation: either rule out or confirm the sterile neutrino evidence.
Another aspect of the work in this award is the development of a large LArTPC
detector at CERN called ProtoDUNE. This award will provide one post-doctoral
fellow to work on the installation and commissioning of the Proto-DUNE detector.
The lessons learned here will inform the future DUNE detector
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work will involve
graduate students and undergraduates supported by this project receiving first-
hand experience with High Energy Physics detector development, while also having
access to MicroBooNE data that the graduate students will use for their
dissertation analyses. The Syracuse group will continue with several outreach
efforts as part of this proposal. The group maintains an outreach webpage that
includes an "Ask-a-A-Physicist" questionnaire form as well as an active QuarkNet
program.