* 1707938
* Classical and Quantum Aspects of Black Holes, Horizons and Asymptotic Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Andrew Strominger, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 249,901.00

Strominger and collaborators will investigate the infinitely many symmetries of
nature implied by the Einstein equations for the gravitational field and
discovered under the last grant cycle. These arise at the boundaries of
spacetime, both at infinite light like distances and near the horizon of a
rapidly spinning black hole. The theoretical research has potential applications
to gravitational waves, gravitational memory, upcoming astronomical observations
at the Event Horizon telescope. The Event Horizon telescope is an initiative to
create observations of black holes of unparalleled resolution using an array of
radio antennas located across the globe. The work supported by this award will
also tackle Hawking?s black hole information paradox, which posits that
information may not be conserved in a black hole. In the last few years, this
group has discovered an exact triangular equivalence of three phenomena which
recur ubiquitously across a wide variety of physical systems and have been
separately studied for over a half century: memory, soft theorems, and
asymptotic symmetries. Soft theorems in quantum field theory relate any multi-
particle scattering process with the insertion of a 'soft' (i.e. low-energy)
particle such as a graviton to the same process without the soft
particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asymptotic symmetries (such as BMS) are
diffeomorphisms which act nontrivially on the physical data at infinity. The
soft theorems can be derived as the quantum matrix elements of the conservation
laws associated to the asymptotic symmetries. Hence they have the same physical
content. The third corner of the triangle is closed by noting that The
Braginsky-Thorne formula for the gravitational memory effect is precisely the
Fourier transform in time of the Weinberg soft graviton theorem. There are many
recurring instances of the triangle: in QED, Yang-Mills theory, gravity, in any
number of dimensions, with or without supersymmetry, with leading, subleading or
subsubleading soft theorems in one corner, and quantum triangles involving
anomalies. This discovery of the equivalence of previously well-understood
phenomena enables us to discover brand new phenomena. Given one corner of the
triangle, we now know how to find the other two. This project investigates
gravitational triangles. Applied to black holes, the triangular structure was
shown to imply that, far from being bald featureless objects, even classical
black holes carry an infinite head of 'soft hair'. The absence of any such
distinguishing features was presumed in Hawking's 1975 argument for information
loss, which is therefore invalidated. This insight suggests new lines of
investigation into the black hole information paradox which the group will
pursue. In another direction, astronomical observation suggests the existence of
near-extreme Kerr black holes whose horizons spin at nearly the speed of light.
General relativity implies that the dynamics of the high-redshift, near-horizon
region of extreme Kerr, which includes the innermost stable circular orbit
(ISCO), is governed by an infinite-dimensional emergent conformal symmetry.
Symmetries of physical systems in general may both usefully characterize and
have striking consequences for observational data. Precision black hole
spectroscopy has advanced to the stage where astronomers are beginning to
observe -- with a variety of ingenious methods -- the regions of spacetime
governed by this conformal symmetry. The proposed project will undertake a
systematic exploration of potential observational consequences of the conformal
symmetry, in particular for the Event Horizon telescope which is already in the
early stages of data collection.