* 1707978
* RUI: Musical Acoustics: Coupled Oscillators, Mandolin Bridges, and Holographic Interferometry
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Stephen Tufte, Lewis and Clark College
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 211,649.00

This project is an experimental investigation of the acoustic properties of
string instruments, in particular of the mandolin, which provides research
experiences and training for undergraduate students. A musical instrument can be
thought of as a system of coupled oscillators. In the case of the mandolin, the
strings are set into oscillation with a plectrum and contain energy in a
harmonic series of frequencies. The bridge of the instrument is set into
vibration by the strings and in turn conveys the energy to the front plate of
the mandolin. The front plate radiates sound but also couples to the back plate
through the ribs of the instrument; both surfaces set the air inside the body of
the instrument into oscillation. The instrument is thus modeled as a collection
of harmonic oscillators coupled to each other through the bridge, ribs, or by
direct contact between plate and air. The PI is studying the coupling between
two tuned strings, their coupled interaction with the bridge and soundboard, and
the two-slope decay. He is measuring the input of mechanical impedance at the
bridge and the structural modal shapes of the body and the coupling between the
plates and the air cavity. The ultimate objective of the proposed work is to
understand how the mechanical properties of the instrument and its construction
determine the character of the musical chords and identify potential
improvements in bridge design for the mandolin, and other string instruments.
The theory of coupled oscillators and the phenomenon of resonance is a central
and broadly applicable subject in dynamics. The mandolin provides a rich and
fascinating experimental arena for the application of dynamics and one that is
accessible to measurement with instrumentation available to undergraduate
physics departments. This project will provide transformative experiences to
undergraduate students by captivating their interest in hands-on research and
then providing rigorous training in its methods. A significant outcome of this
project is to invest in the next generation of our nation's STEM workforce. The
students will be exposed to a wide variety of experimental techniques and
scientific instruments as well as advanced theoretical concepts, all broadly
applicable throughout physics and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
investigating the acoustics of the mandolin, the PI and his students will carry
out a detailed study of the coupling of the doubled strings using high-speed
video, and the musical implications of these interactions will be elucidated.
These results will also shed light on other musical instruments with doubled
strings, such as the lute, oud, and 12-string guitar. Measurements of the sound
spectrum and bridge impedance combine to characterize the transfer of mechanical
energy from string motions through the bridge to the motions of the instrument
body that ultimately produce sound. Experiments to understand in detail the
connection between the mechanical properties of the bridge and the resulting
sound spectrum aim to identify potential improvements in bridge design. Details
of the resulting body motions, the modes of vibration, will be studied using
holographic interferometry. A study of the coupling of low-frequency plate modes
of the mandolin?s front and back surfaces with the Helmholtz modes due to
oscillations of air within the body will be compared to the classic studies of
guitars.