* 1707581
* GOALI: Integrated Circuit Silicon Nanowire Thermoelectric Generators for On-chip Micropower Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Mark Lee, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 12/31/2021
* USD 354,093.00

Thermoelectric generators are of great scientific and technological interest to
society because they can recycle some of the unwanted waste heat generated from
the operation of machinery, electronics, living organisms, etc. back into useful
electrical power. One of the major challenges limiting widespread use of
thermoelectric devices is the difficulty in adapting materials having excellent
thermoelectric properties into industrially and economically scalable
production. The ideal would be to make thermoelectric generators in an
industrial production manner similar to what is done with silicon in commercial
integrated circuit technology. Recently it was discovered that silicon in the
form of a very small wire (called a nanowire) has good thermoelectric
characteristics and can be potentially integrated with existing silicon
electronics. The main goal of this project is to determine how to fulfill that
potential and pioneer a route towards integrating silicon nanowire based
thermoelectric generators having useful performance characteristics into
existing industrial silicon technology. The development of efficient silicon
integrated circuit thermoelectric devices scalable to industrial production will
open up numerous applications of immediate and future benefit to industry,
including improving energy efficiency in large scale electronics by harvesting
waste heat, regulating temperature build up in high power electronics, and
establishing an environmentally ¡°green¡± way to power microelectronic circuits.
This research also provides a uniquely valuable cross-disciplinary training
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students. This project will expose
students to an industrial perspective and approach to research, which will be
particularly valuable to both students and society when they enter the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated circuit thermoelectric (TE)
generators (IC TEG) have compelling importance as an on-chip, small form factor
way to energize or actuate microcircuits and sensors or regulate on-chip
temperature in a localized manner. Most current research in TEGs focuses on
developing materials having a high TE figure-of-merit ZT. Widely studied high ZT
materials such as Bi2Te3 have ZT slightly larger than 1 but are incompatible
with industrial Si processing and thus are difficult to incorporate as
microelectronic TEGs in a commercially scalable manner. Recently it was found
that Si nanowires (SiNWs) can have ZT up to 0.6. While this opens a route
towards silicon TEGs, the ZT of SiNWs is highly sensitive to fabrication, being
typically ¡Ü 0.3 in practical circumstances. However, how well a TEG converts
temperature difference into electrical power tends to be limited not only by ZT
but by parasitic device impedances that degrade heat input and electrical power
output. These impedances can be designed and controlled in Si processing, so the
performance of SiNW TEGs could be made competitive with higher ZT materials by
carefully optimizing the electrical and thermal impedance matches. This project
seeks to maximize SiNW based IC TEG voltage/power generation not simply through
a materials approach but by understanding, controlling, and optimizing TEG
design, parasitic losses, and impedance matching aspects. The SiNW TEG circuits
to be studied were fabricated with baseline industrial silicon technology and
thus can be integrated into larger circuits in a highly compact, monolithic, and
controlled manner. The main goal is to demonstrate SiNW IC TEGs useful to the
microelectronics industry and fabricated in a commercially scalable manner.