* 1707149
* GOALI: Landfill Leachate Treatment with Solid Waste Generated Biochar
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* R. Scott Summers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 340,450.00

1707149&lt;br/&gt;Cook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trash in the US is typically sent to
landfills, and while in a landfill this trash produces further wastes that
require treatment, such as fugitive air emissions and wastewater (also called
leachate). Some of this trash can be turned into biochar, which is a charcoal
produced from organic matter such as food and yard wastes, that can remove
pollutants from wastewater (i.e., by sorption processes). This biochar can be
used to treat the landfill leachate, which will reduce pollutants and provide a
source of energy. In collaboration with an industry partner, the PIs will
complete the fundamental research and technology development needed to design
more cost-efficient, environmentally sustainable, and reliable waste management
and leachate treatment systems. Overall, it will help the industry overcome
challenges posed by current waste management systems and support further
innovation in this field to reduce costs and negative environmental impacts and
to provide a reliable energy source from waste. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collection and treatment of landfill leachate are required to minimize negative
environmental impacts, especially on groundwater and surface water. Heavily
polluted leachates require advanced treatment, such as adsorption. Overall,
treatment needs to be reliable, cost-effective, and simple. While granular
activated carbon can adsorb many contaminants, it is relatively expensive and
often produced from non-renewable coal. Biochar, an alternative adsorbent, can
be cost-effective, produced from waste, and environmentally beneficial.
Diverting organic matter from landfills to biochar, results in carbon
sequestration, reduces landfill methane emissions, and allows for the renewable
production of energy and of water treatment adsorbents. The overall objective of
this work is to identify and develop a more cost-effective and environmentally
sustainable landfill leachate treatment process and organic solid waste
management approach. This work has three main tasks: (1) evaluate biochar
adsorption treatment based on raw waste material, ash pre-treatment, and
temperature; (2) evaluate biochar and regenerated biochar adsorption and
biodegradation treatment capacity using an experimental setup that replicates
full-scale performance; and (3) evaluate current waste management systems to
compare the life cycle costs and environmental impacts of the different leachate
treatment systems and develop criteria for full-scale implementation to reduce
costs and environmental impacts compared with current technologies. This work
includes both fundamental and applied research that will help landfill managers
determine the most effective and sustainable organic solids waste management and
leachate treatment options. The PIs work will develop an innovative leachate
treatment option by conceptualizing a new adsorption and biodegradation approach
using biochar and by generating data to show how to improve landfill leachate
treatment. The PIs will identify criteria for optimizing the leachate treatment
process and solid waste management processes. It is expected that this work will
advance knowledge in biochar development and solid waste management systems.
Through collaboration with the industry partner, the PIs will develop a suite of
educational experiences including landfill tours, industry relevant and
professional mentoring of students, industry input on curriculum development,
and guest lectures by the industrial collaborator. It is expected that this
project will support innovation by simultaneously using organic waste to: (i)
treat landfill leachate, (ii) produce energy, and (iii) reduce waste
accumulation and contamination, thereby reducing overall costs and environmental
degradation that currently have significant negative impacts on local and global
communities.