* 1707400
* NeuroNex Theory Team: Inferring interactions between neurons, stimuli, and behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2023
* Kresimir Josic, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 11/30/2023
* USD 4,912,639.00

Scientists have learned much about how the activity of individual neurons
relates to sensations, thoughts, feelings, and behavior. However, all neurons
live and function within the enormous web that is the brain. Scientists are
still far from understanding how the complex, dynamic dance between the cells
that form this web makes us who we are. While new technologies allow scientists
to observe the activity of massive numbers of neurons in living brains, they
still cannot make sense of such data. The goal of this NeuroNex Theory team is
to develop a new lens - a set of mathematical and computational tools - for
making sense of the dynamic brain activity data. These techniques will allow
them to deduce when and how observed neurons interact, how these interactions
are altered by stimuli, and how they may govern behavior. The resulting
combination of revolutionary experimental and mathematical tools will provide
neuroscientists with unprecedented insights into the brain's distributed neural
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NeuroNex Theory team will develop
statistical tools that will provide insights into the computations performed by
neuronal ensembles, by relating what the animal observes to recorded neural
activity as well as how the neural activity relates to behavior. They will
validate the methods using simulated neuronal networks, and apply them to
recordings from the mouse brain. The team will also develop and test their
approach using modern deep neural networks (convolutional nets and recurrent
architectures) that achieve or exceed human performance in many hard tasks. This
will allow them to quantify how interactions in these artificial networks change
with the stimulus, and compare and contrast the results with data from animals.
This is a broad set of goals that requires a combination of approaches and
diverse expertise. The team therefore consists of experimental and theoretical
neuroscientists, mathematicians, and statisticians who will work together
closely. The true test of this work will be the impact it will have on brain
science in general. The team is therefore committed to sharing their techniques,
code and data. They have also assembled a group of End Users to be early
adopters and testers of these methods. This NeuroNex Theory Team award is funded
as part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's Understanding the Brain activities.