* 1707668
* Improving Data Quality of Advanced LIGO Gravitational-Wave Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Marco Cavaglia, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 02/28/2019
* USD 240,000.00

This award focuses on a specific task which is mission critical for the success
of gravitational-wave astrophysics in the next few years: the improvement of
data quality collected by the LIGO Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(LIGO) detectors in future observing runs. Research will focus on (1) using
existing techniques to identify and remove non-astrophysical noise in the data
stream, and (2) developing new methods to build predictive models for detector
noise. Broader impacts on the development of gravitational-wave astrophysics
will consist in improving LIGO's search pipelines and the performance of the
detectors. Educational and public outreach initiatives will strengthen programs
aimed at yielding knowledgeable teachers with enough physics content to
effectively teach physics courses in school. New initiatives to promote science
among diverse segments of the population will be developed through
collaborations with educators in other disciplines.

Removing non-astrophysical artifacts from gravitational-wave data is crucial for
reducing instrumental noise non-stationarity, extending the detector network
duty cycle, and increasing the statistical significance of gravitational-wave
candidate events. Improvements in these areas, in turn, boost parameter
estimation of the gravitational-wave detections and enable refined astrophysical
interpretations of the signals. Personnel funded under this award will analyze
data from LIGO detector output and auxiliary sensors with the goal to isolate
and identify sources of noise affecting LIGO's gravitational-wave searches.
Results from these investigations will be fed back to LIGO Laboratory
commissioners and instrumentation researchers to assist in the mitigation of
instrumental and environmental disturbances. At the same time, Mississippi
students and researchers will develop new, fast, reliable and accurate methods
to model instrumental noise in interferometric gravitational-wave detectors.
Machine learning-based algorithms, such as genetic programming, will be used to
build predictive models to uncover the origin of non-astrophysical noise in the
detectors.