* 1707588
* Carrier dynamics and fast switching by dipole engineering in solution processed thin film transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Suchismita Guha, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 05/31/2021
* USD 364,914.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: Low-cost, large area, solution processed,
thin film polymer transistors are emerging as a next-generation technology,
allowing electronic components to be integrated into flexible substrates.
However, polymer thin film transistors suffer from low switching times,
rendering their use in analytical and digital logic circuits problematic. Fast
switching times in polymer transistors may be achieved by miniaturizing the
device size, but this requires nanolithography, which is impractical for low-
cost printing methods. This project utilizes low-cost strategies for materials
engineering to improve switching times by orders of magnitude compared to the
present state-of-the-art thin film polymer transistors, which will open up the
printed polymer circuit technology for many new applications. Furthermore, a new
experimental method based on non-linear optics will be developed for probing and
visualizing the motion of charges in polymer transistors. This technique allows
an accurate determination of the carrier mobility, which is a crucial parameter
that controls switching times. The connection between technology and education
will be reinforced by designing projects where undergraduate students will print
polymer logic circuits as part of their Advanced Physics Laboratory course. The
international scope will provide US students transferable skills that are
essential for employment in industry and academia. Graduate and undergraduate
students will gain expertise in a multidisciplinary range of technical skills,
and thus be trained to contribute to the US workforce in the area of flexible
electronics. Hands-on workshops for high school students and mentoring programs
for underrepresented graduate students will also be part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The objective of this program is to
improve switching times in all-polymer thin film transistors and to develop a
non-linear optical method for visualization of carrier transport. Dipole
engineering of the dielectric layer, using low-cost solvent processing and
poling polymer ferroelectric dielectrics, is likely to have a transformative
impact on technology where fast switching times may be realized in long-channel
printable thin film organic field-effect transistors and logic circuits. A new
series of side-chain substituted donor-acceptor copolymers will be used as the
active semiconductor layer. Carrier mobilities of organic semiconductors in
field-effect transistors are strongly impacted by device geometry,
physical/chemical attributes of the organic semiconductor, and the various
interfaces: metal-semiconductor and semiconductor-insulator. Transient electric
field-induced second-harmonic generation methods, based on the third-order
susceptibility, will be established, allowing direct and selective probing of
dynamic carrier motion in field-effect transistors. This technique will be a
powerful methodology for visualizing transport in a new generation of donor-
acceptor ambipolar transistors and pave the way for predicting accurate carrier
mobilities, free from contact resistance issues and device geometrical factors.
Grazing angle X-ray scattering studies from polymer films in transistor
architectures will reveal not just the structure of the polymer, but also the
changes in structure upon bias stress.