* 1707296
* CAREER: Understanding and Addressing Geographic Inequalities in Location-Aware Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Brent Hecht, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2023
* USD 458,079.00

This research project will explore the current limitations of location-aware
technologies, seek to understand the causal dynamics at work, and propose
computational and sociotechnical improvements. Local search systems, peer
economy platforms, intelligent routing techniques and other geographic
algorithms and systems increasingly mediate our knowledge of and interactions
with the physical world. However, evidence has begun to emerge that these
technologies work better in some types of areas (e.g. urban) than in others
(e.g. rural). If successful, this research will lead to a wide variety of
benefits for areas currently under-served by location-aware technologies,
benefits ranging from algorithms that are more accurate in under-served areas to
new employment opportunities that involve performing on-the-ground tasks
associated with location-aware technologies. The work will also provide
technology designers with new tools and techniques - such as new geographic data
structures and strategies for handling geographic data sparsity - that will help
them ensure that the location-aware technologies of the future are maximally
effective everywhere and for everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
focus on two families of location aware-technologies: volunteered geographic
information-based technologies and location-aware peer economy technologies. The
projects include work that will (1) model and address coverage gaps in
geographically-referenced user-generated content, (2) increase our understanding
of how algorithms can unintentionally adopt biased (e.g. urban-focused)
worldviews and, critically, identify ways to correct for these biases, and (3)
shed light on the geographic variation of price and service quality in important
peer economy technologies like ride-sharing systems and peer-to-peer borrowing
and rental platforms, and develop solutions for under-served areas. This project
integrates research and teaching activities, and will develop new material for
an existing massive open online course, which reaches a large and diverse
audience.