* 1707169
* A Novel Strategy for High Performance Cost-Competitive Solar Water Splitting Enabled with Integrated Bifacial GaAs Photoelectrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jongseung Yoon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2020
* USD 325,147.00

Solar-powered production of hydrogen from water offers the potential to enable
solar power, which is available on a transient basis, to be stored in the form
of a chemical fuel. This capability would allow the energy to be stored
temporarily, then deployed during times of high demand but relatively low
availability of sunlight. Efficient and cost-effective solar-powered production
of hydrogen from water remains a scientific and technological challenge with
issues of efficiency, cost, and materials durability. This project will
investigate fundamental concepts from the field of semiconductor electronics to
enable new approaches to make efficient, low-cost photoelectrodes for splitting
water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen using the energy in sunlight. Among
materials systems considered, III-V compound semiconductors represent one of the
most promising materials for high efficiency solar-driven water splitting due to
excellent materials properties pertaining to their favorable interaction with
sunlight and efficient photocarrier generation. This fundamental research
project aims to develop a high performance, cost-competitive materials platform
for III-V photoelectrodes that can address the technology challenges. The
multidisciplinary themes of the research will be integrated with the PI's
comprehensive teaching and outreach efforts including training for undergraduate
and graduate student researchers with a special emphasis on broadening
participation of students from underrepresented groups in STEM, as well as
summer educational program for educationally-disadvantaged high school students.
The scientific and engineering advances achieved in this project will contribute
to the continuing efforts to make the technology of solar hydrogen generation
cost-effective and therefore address the future energy demand of society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to explore novel
strategies for III-V compound semiconductor photoelectrodes that can address
fundamental challenges in cost and durability. The electrode design and
fabrication strategies would relax the stringent materials requirements at the
semiconductor/electrolyte interface in ways that provide unique pathways to
improve their stability, while allowing substantial reduction in materials cost.
To achieve this goal, the project will (1) research a novel materials platform
of III-V photoelectrodes based on printed assemblies of ultrathin GaAs-based
epitaxial materials, (2) study at a fundamental level the photoelectrochemical
behaviors of integrated bifacial GaAs photoelectrodes in solar-driven water
splitting at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface, (3) establish design
criteria and fundamental understanding of charge separation and transport,
electronic band configuration, and photonic enhanced light absorption, (4)
explore novel passivation mechanisms using optically thick metals and metal
oxides, and (5) investigate integration pathways to tandem systems for
unassisted solar water splitting through strategic assemblies of interconnected
GaAs photoelectrodes. The outcomes of the project will provide a firm foundation
for fundamental understanding of photoelectrochemical water splitting processes
with ultrathin GaAs nanomembrane photoelectrodes, and elucidate mechanisms of
performance- and stability enhancements by synergistic contributions from
specialized epitaxial design, nanoscale photon management, and bifacial
electrode configuration. Techniques of transfer printing for deterministic
materials assembly will expand materials options in the design of efficient
solar water splitting systems but also provide diverse integration pathways for
enhanced cost-effectiveness, system performance, and stability.