* 1707271
* Fundamental Processes In Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Thomas O'Neil, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports a program of theory and experiments to develop detailed
understanding of waves and particle confinement in a plasma -- a gas of freely
interacting electrically charged particles -- placed in a magnetic trap. The
studies will characterize wave damping caused by individual particles bouncing
end-to-end in the trap at different frequencies. The plasma transport and loss
caused by internal magnetic irregularities will also be analyzed and measured.
This research program has broad connections to fluid physics, atomic physics,
anti-matter production, and fusion plasmas for power generation, and provides a
stimulating environment for graduate and undergraduate student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be performed on two non-neutral
plasma devices: the camera-diagnosed electron plasma apparatus "CamV" and on the
laser-diagnosed Magnesium ion plasma apparatus "IV". Analytical theory and
medium-scale simulation results will be directly compared to the experiments
over a broad range of parameters. The goal is to identify limitations in the
theory, and to stimulate new theory where needed. In particular, this research
will elucidate the effects of internal potential variations, as bounce-harmonic
Landau damping depends sensitively on the particle trajectories. Further,
magnetic irregularities leading to topological separatrices are endemic to both
quasi-neutral and non-neutral plasmas, and the novel "chaotic superbanana"
transport to be studied here occurs even in nearly collisionless plasmas. This
award to support an undergraduate student is made under the NSF/DOE Partnership
in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering and is complementary to a DOE award made
under the joint program.