* 1707312
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Optical technologies for large scale, noninvasive recording of neural activity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Chris Schaffer, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2023
* USD 9,000,000.00

Nervous systems evolved to solve many of the same problems in species as diverse
as worms, fishes, and humans. Using collections of neurons, from 100 or fewer in
small invertebrates to hundreds of millions in humans, animals behave in ways
that allow survival and reproduction in demanding and often hostile
environments. A major hurdle to revealing the principles by which diverse
species achieve these goals is being able to monitor the structure and function
with high resolution throughout the brain - a necessity because behavior emerges
from broad interactions of neurons across brains, even in the simplest
organisms. A team of investigators will push optical imaging to this goal
through the development of a NeuroNex Neurotechnology Hub at Cornell University.
Experts from physics, engineering and biology will work together to develop,
demonstrate the utility of, and disseminate to other neuroscientists a suite of
imaging tools that will overcome current technology barriers in studying how
brains work. Furthermore, the Hub will provide a unique opportunity to educate
the next generation of neuroscience researchers to work in interdisciplinary
teams that combine the neuroscience, technology development, and big data
analysis expertise required to make progress in understanding the brain.
Graduate student trainees will also receive instruction in science communication
and mentoring in career planning. Opportunities for undergraduate researchers
will be provided and the PIs and other project members will become actively
engaged in outreach to local-area schools, the broad public, and
policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large scale, noninvasive recording of neural
activity in awake and behaving animals is essential to understand the function
of the nervous system. This NeuroNex Neurotechnology Hub will develop and
disseminate innovative neurotechnologies for noninvasive recording of neural
activity across a large depth and volume, at multiple places in the central and
peripheral nervous system, and with high spatial and temporal resolution. The
newly developed optical imaging technologies will be employed in behaving animal
models across multiple species in different phyla, including mammals, teleost
fish, flies, and birds, and will be demonstrated by attacking important
neuroscience questions in fruit fly, zebrafish, and mice. We will create a new
lab, the Laboratory for Innovative Neurotechnology at Cornell (LINC), which will
be shared by the Hub PIs and serve as the physical embodiment of the hub, and
close the loop between technology development and biological questions. LINC
will serve as a hub for dissemination by hosting, connecting, and training
researchers and developers across multiple disciplines from both academia and
industry. The dissemination of these new technologies will catalyze studies of
how brains produce behavior in species across a broad range of sizes throughout
animal phylogeny. This NeuroNex Neurotechnology Hub award is co-funded by the
Division of Emerging Frontiers within the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems within the Directorate of Engineering as part of the BRAIN Initiative
and NSF's Understanding the Brain activities.