* 1707505
* Neutrino Astrophysics at the University of Maryland
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Gregory Sullivan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2020
* USD 988,000.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
particle astrophysics group has a record of providing research and educational
opportunities for students and early career scientists, as well as engaging the
public and K-12 students to share the wonder of science. The impact of this work
spans significantly beyond the field of neutrino astrophysics to the broader
scientific category of multi-messenger and multi-wavelength astrophysics. A key
element of this broader impact is the ongoing effort to develop a robust real-
time neutrino alert and response system for the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group plays an important role in the
operation of the detector and management of the IceCube and Askaryan Radio Array
(ARA) collaborations. This award will support continued analysis of IceCube data
focusing on searches for neutrino emission from GRBs, real-time neutrino
searches with increased alerts to the astronomical community, and searches for
extremely high energy cosmogenic neutrinos. The search for cosmogenic neutrino
signals in IceCube remains a critical area of scientific importance, where
additional work is required to disentangle the observed astrophysical neutrino
flux from potential cosmogenic signals. Research efforts here overlap with their
work on the ARA radio detector and its mission to detect and measure cosmogenic
neutrinos.