* 1707900
* Control of Flagellated Bacteria Motion in Anisotropic Fluids
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Leonid Berlyand, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Bacteria are the most abundant organisms on Earth and they significantly
influence carbon cycling and sequestration, decomposition of biomass, and
transformation of contaminants in the environment. They form human microbiota
and also cause many infectious diseases. Bacteria often swim in environments
with properties which are very different from those of an isotropic fluid. For
example, many biological fluids (e.g., mucus, DNA solutions) behave as liquid
crystals (LC). The purpose of this project is a comprehensive study of
interactions between bacteria and anisotropic fluids by combining quantitative
in vitro experiments and multi-scale computational modeling. The combination of
these research tools will lead to a much better understanding of the generic
features of bacteria-fluid and bacteria-surface interactions in anisotropic
biological fluids. There will be two main research thrusts: experimental and
theoretical. The experimental thrust will be based on the recently discovered
method of the LC nanoscopy which enables simultaneous observation of bacterial
trajectories and their flagella. The PIs have a long history of collaboration:
joint papers, joint supervision of graduate students and postdocs, as well as
joint grants. The knowledge gained in this work may lead to practical concepts
based on novel bio-inspired materials. The proposed work will prepare the next
generation of scientists by providing interdisciplinary training for graduate
and undergraduate students as well as for postdocs. These beginning scientists
will work interactively with the PIs on theoretical and experimental thrusts and
attend courses and workshops organized by the PIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work combines novel experimental, analytical and numerical methods. The
experimental thrust will result in a much better understanding of motion of
bacteria in anisotropic biological fluids exemplified by a nematic liquid
crystal. In addition to obvious significance to fundamental studies of self-
propelled biological systems, this work will have merits for bio-medical
research, for example how the bacteria move in biological fluids and adhere to
surfaces of internal organs. The proposed multi-scale computational analysis and
development of numerical techniques will be useful for the discovery of active
bio-inspired materials combining living (bacteria) and synthetic (liquid
crystal) components. Understanding the interplay between the flexibility of
self-propelled elements and anisotropy of the suspending fluid is important for
the prediction of novel materials properties of these materials. The theoretical
thrust will be based on the multi-scale model coupling the well-established
Leslie-Ericksen equations for the LC and an extension of the computational model
of a flagellated bacterium in an isotropic fluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in
the Division of Physics and the Cellular Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences.