* 1707854
* Quantum Coherence with Holmium Atoms: Magic Traps, Clocks, and Entanglement
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 510,000.00

This research project will study the properties of holmium atoms. The holmium
atom has one of the most complex internal structures of any element, and
therefore could be valuable for several new technologies. This research team
will explore how holmium's complex structure can be used to develop new methods
for atomic timekeeping and for quantum memory. The first application is
important because atomic clocks are the most accurate time and frequency
standards, and they provide the basis for technologies such as the Global
Positioning System (GPS). The second application is important because it could
help enable quantum communication networks. Experimental methods using lasers
and electromagnetic fields will be developed to cool and trap holmium atoms, to
prepare them in different internal states, and to measure interactions between
holmium atoms. This will enable the research team to make more precise
measurements of holmium atoms' collisional properties and the sensitivity to
magnetic fields for various transitions between holmium atomic energy levels.
This project will also train scientists in modern techniques of atomic physics
and prepare students for careers in academia and industry. The results of this
research will be disseminated to the local public in the Madison, Wisconsin,
area through open houses in the Physics dDpartment, through visits to local
schools, and by providing internships for local high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rare earth element Holmium (Ho) has a 128-dimensional
ground state manifold, the largest of any stable atomic isotope. Experiments
will use a Magneto-Optical Trap of Ho atoms. Optical control techniques using rf
and microwave fields will be developed to prepare specific Zeeman substates in
the 128-dimensional ground manifold. A pair of states to be used for an optical
clock transition will be magnetically trapped in a configuration that makes the
energy difference of the states insensitive to magnetic field noise. An array of
magnetic traps will be created using lithographically defined chip structures
with current carrying wires. Rydberg states will be probed using two-photon
excitation, and dressing techniques for creating long range atomic interactions
will be studied. These techniques have the potential to create entangled many
body states for improved precision of the clock transition.