* 1707542
* Excitation of Molecules by Strong Laser Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* George Gibson, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 372,561.00

Understanding how light interacts with matter is important in scientific
research and applications. For example, one of the most vital processes in
nature is the absorption of solar energy by plants in photosynthesis. Scientists
use lasers to make forms of light with special properties that are used in
research and technologies such as optical communications. The research supported
in this project will investigate how extremely intense laser light interacts
with small molecules. Insight will be gained into three main areas. 1) When
molecules interact with intense laser light, the molecules can, in turn,
generate new types of radiation with unique properties. In this case, the
generated light can have very short wavelengths and very short durations in
time. These properties can be used to study very fast processes such as chemical
reactions. 2) Intense laser light can drive processes in molecules in a way that
allows more to be learned about the structure of molecules. 3) Intense laser
light can be used to control the vibrational motions of molecules, which is one
of the properties of molecules used for storing and transferring energy. Energy
transfer in molecules will be better understood at the fundamental level by
controlling molecular vibrations. 4) The techniques and instrumentation used in
these experiments provide excellent training for students to acquire skills used
in many industries and research laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses specifically on strong field processes that give rise to excitation in
molecules. Although the excitation of molecules by strong fields is ubiquitous,
there is not nearly as much experimental and theoretical work on this compared
to other areas of strong field physics. Moreover, the range of possible
mechanisms for excitation remains largely unexplored. However, there is
increasing interest in this field, as one pathway to excitation involves inner
orbital ionization. It turns out that excitation can be so significant that it
can lead to lasing in the atmosphere by intense laser beam filaments.
Nevertheless, the exact process by which inversions are formed in nitrogen is
still not fully understood. The common theme to all of these goals is to
understand the excitation of molecules by strong laser fields and the dependence
of this excitation on internuclear separation. Successful outcomes of these
experiments should greatly expand the understanding of how intense light
interacts with matter, particularly regarding molecular structure and dynamics.