* 1707992
* Quantum Gases of Bosonic and Fermionic Lithium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Randall Hulet, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 589,345.00

For electrons in solids it is well known that quantum many-body interactions
cause material properties such as conductivity and magnetism. For atoms in a
gas, however, it is difficult to observe quantum many-body effects unless the
atoms are very cold, because hot atoms behave more like ordinary ballistic
particles. This project will cool lithium atoms below one millionth of a degree
Kelvin and manipulate gases of ultra-cold atoms in optical traps in order to
study how quantum mechanics influences large collections of atoms. This will
advance the science known as quantum many-body physics. The advantage of using
ultra-cold atoms is that their temperature, density, and traps can be readily
controlled and adjusted. This is important because it will help physicists
understand phenomena such as superconductivity and exotic types of magnetism. In
particular, this project will study how magnetism and superconductivity co-
exist. This will improve the fundamental understanding of high-temperature
superconductors, and may enable fabrication of new materials that superconduct
at even higher temperatures. Another part of this project will probe how quantum
many-body phenomena affect the propagation of collective waves known as
solitons. This part of the project is important because it could lead to
improved sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both parts of this project will use an
isotope of lithium, in one case a boson, while in the other a fermion. The goal
of the proposed boson experiment is to explore the role of near-integrability in
bright matter-wave solitons, either fundamental ones or higher-order soliton
breathers. The plan is to create a breather using a protocol developed by
theoretical collaborators, and to explore its interactions with a beam splitter
formed from a blue-detuned light sheet. The goals are both fundamental and
technological. One goal is to create a mesoscopic (N = 100-300) quantum object
and observe its properties in a novel one-dimensional interferometer using the
light sheet as a beam splitter. If the center-of-mass energy of the soliton is
below the binding energy of a single atom, it will not fragment upon interacting
with the beam splitter, but rather tunnel and reflect in its entirety, thus
creating a Schrödinger cat state. In the second part of this project, this
laboratory will implement new ideas for creating and directly detecting the
exotic superconducting state known as FFLO (Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov
state) with a spin-imbalanced Fermi gas. While FFLO is prevalent in 1D, both
quantum and thermal fluctuations tend to destroy long-range order in lower
dimensions. The recent determination from this laboratory of the phase diagram
of the 1D-3D dimensional crossover in a gas of spin-polarized fermions points to
a region in parameter space where FFLO is both prevalent and stable. The next
goal for this team is to detect the periodic domain walls occupied by the
unpaired fermions in time-of-flight expansion in 1D. This would constitute the
first direct evidence for FFLO.