* 1707660
* Conformational Equilibria of Biologically Relevant Oligosaccharides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Anthony Serianni, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Anthony Serianni from the University of Notre Dame
to investigate the three-dimensional shape of sugar molecules in solution.
Beyond their nutritional value, sugars play numerous other critical roles in
biology. For example, they are attached to the outside of cells like an
identification number for cell-cell recognition. Recognition depends on the
specific shapes the molecules adopt on the cell surface. They fit together much
like the pieces of a puzzle. The shapes of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and
protein molecules are determined routinely, but sugar structures defy solution
so far. The research targets the discovery of a general method for the
determination of sugar structures in solution based on both experiments and
theory. When the experimental structures match the theoretical ones, there is
confidence that the shape is obtained correctly. This new approach is entirely
general, applicable to any sugar in solution. Senior investigators, postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students and undergraduates with interests and expertise in
experimental and computational science collaborate to achieve the goals of the
project. Research by Professor Serianni has been commercialized at Omicron
Biochemicals, Inc., which he cofounded in 1982. Omicron prepares sugars and
their derivatives based on novel reactions. These sugars are used in fundamental
chemical, biochemical and biological research, in biomedical and clinical
studies, and in the development of diagnostic tools. Omicron regularly
collaborates with the Professor Serianni's laboratory at Notre Dame by providing
synthetic expertise and reagents to support fundamental and applied studies of
sugar chemistry and biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
uses stable isotopically labeled oligosaccharides, nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spin-couplings, and density functional theory calculations and circular
statistics to determine conformational populations of the flexible domains of
oligosaccharides in solution. This experimental approach is possible because
saccharides contain multiple redundant NMR spin-couplings that report on the
same conformational domain, allowing quantitative treatments that yield
populational models. Depending on the domain, single- and multi-state models are
tested. Once a given domain is parameterized (e.g., an O-glycosidic linkage),
its conformational properties are investigated in different structural contexts
to determine the degree to which it adapts conformationally to environmental
cues. Experimentally-derived models are compared to those obtained from
molecular dynamics simulations to validate the latter. This work may lead to new
experiment-based conformational classifications of O-glycosidic linkages in
oligosaccharides, and to a deeper understanding of the multiple factors that
influence oligosaccharide conformation in solution.