* 1707947
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Social Vulnerability - Reducing Uncertainty and Validating Indicators
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/07/2016,07/31/2018
* Christopher Emrich, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 07/31/2018
* USD 40,513.00

The objective of this collaborative research study is to improve the reliability
of social vulnerability indicators by reducing uncertainties in input data and
methods, and validating output metrics. Social vulnerability has been receiving
increasing attention by disaster planners at local, state, and federal levels as
they seek to reduce adverse impacts of natural hazards. Yet far too little is
currently understood about the robustness of the leading vulnerability
indicators, both in terms of the approaches used to build them and their ability
to adequately represent real world conditions. There is a critical need for
methodological advancements to improve the precision and accuracy of social
vulnerability indicators. Without such advancements, the use of social
vulnerability indicators in disaster mitigation, preparedness, and recovery
could mislead decision-making. Based on a study area of the Southeast U.S., the
project will develop novel regionalization routines and apply global sensitivity
analysis and multiple regression to census data inputs and output vulnerability
indicators. The research is expected to generate new understanding of the
critical inputs and decision points in social vulnerability modeling, the level
of agreement of resultant indicators with observed disaster outcomes, and the
influence of uncertainty in social vulnerability modeling. By narrowing the
existing gap between vulnerability models and real-world practice, improved
social vulnerability indicators will allow for better disaster planning and
interventions that account for the most vulnerable
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has great potential to transform
dominant approaches for the measurement of social vulnerability to hazards. The
finalized methodology will be made widely accessible to both researchers and the
public through an internet-GIS application that generates user-customizable
vulnerability indices. The improved vulnerability metrics will also be shared
with state and federal disaster planners through existing relationships with the
research team. The study contributes to training the next generation of hazards
researchers through the direct involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students, including those from groups historically underrepresented in graduate
research and education. The project findings will be integrated into the
classroom through the development of learning modules for existing courses that
explore urban geography and interactions between hazards and society.