* 1707605
* Statistical Problems in Large Volatility Matrix Estimation and Quantum Annealing Based Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Yazhen Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 12/31/2021
* USD 108,646.00

As the modern "data deluge" grows, the importance of statistics continues to
increase, and uses of statistical methods rapidly evolve. The new era of data
science poses great challenges to traditional statistical tools and
computational techniques; yet, at the same time, the data deluge presents
unprecedented opportunities to statistics. This project plans to advance
research at the frontiers of science with innovative statistical and
computational approaches that address the challenges encountered in handling
complex problems with big data. The project's statistical research on quantum
computing and high-frequency finance will address practical problems, and the
projects will create advanced effective statistical tools with direct
applications in fields including finance, quantum computation, and quantum
information. This project seeks to conduct novel research on quantum annealing
and statistical inference about large-dimensional matrices. The goals entail
developing statistical methodologies, computing techniques, and theories for (i)
statistical inference for large diffusion covariance matrices with applications
to high-frequency finance, and (ii) statistical research on quantum annealing in
quantum computation and quantum information. The project will develop
rigorously-supported statistical methods and computational techniques,
furthering the theoretical underpinning of these important topics.