* 1707167
* Computer Simulations of G-proteins and Molecular Machines
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Arieh Warshel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

The understanding of how active processes in the cell govern and control major
biological functions, such as signaling and molecular motors, is a central
question in biophysics. For example, a detailed understanding is needed of the
control and mediation of life processes by G-proteins, where complexes of these
proteins with their cofactors regulate signal transduction and transport
processes in the cell. Similarly, it is important to understand how ATP is used
to fuel biological machines and control key cellular processes. A detailed
understanding is also needed for the origin of the directional motions of
biological motors that generate forces in muscular, cardiac and neural cells.
Progress in understanding these processes require a close interaction between
theory and experiment. This project aims to elucidate how biological molecules
control cellular function at the molecular level using state of the art
computational approaches using experimental data to validate the findings.
Outcomes of this project will be disseminated via general scientific lectures
and outreach activities. In addition, simulation packages will be made available
to the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Powerful multiscale models,
including quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approaches for exploring
chemical processes in G-proteins and coarse grained models for studies of energy
transduction have been previously developed by the investigator and his research
group. Such developments will now be used to quantify the chemical and
conformational coupling in the motor protein F1-ATPase and to explore the force
generation in myosin and its relationship to muscles action. In addition, the
allosteric activation process of GPCRs and its effect on the binding of GDP and
GTP to G-proteins, as well as the action of EF-Tu and EF-G, which play major
role in controlling the ribosome function, will be explored. The detailed
quantitative understanding resulting from this project is likely to have a
strong impact on advancing fundamental biological knowledge, as well as having
potential biomedical implications.