* 1707569
* Biogenic volatile organic compounds and the fate of ozone in the changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Alan Fried, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 03/31/2023
* USD 599,680.00

Most vegetation emit fragrant gases known as volatile organic compounds.
Typically, the release of these gases increase with warmer weather. Temperature
measurements have shown that the Arctic is warming faster than most of the
planet from climate Change and it therefore it seems likely that the emissions
of these compounds will increase more so than in other places. The investigators
will study which compounds are emitted from arctic tundra vegetation and how the
emissions of these compounds are dependent on weather, time of day, and season.
The investigators will also explore how these compounds react in the atmosphere
and what the products of these reactions are. A particular focus will be on the
role that these gases play on boundary layer ozone, which is an important
greenhouse gas and atmospheric oxidant. This research will be conducted at the
Toolik Research Station, an ecological research site in northern Alaska. These
studies will improve our understanding of how the natural environment in the
Arctic interacts with the atmosphere. The broader impacts include graduate
student education and support for a young faculty member at the University of
Montana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During previous Arctic work, these investigators
have observed a clear diurnal signal in summertime boundary layer ozone.
Attempts to relate this observation to the diurnal evolution of the atmospheric
boundary layer have not been successful. These investigators propose that the
daily emissions of biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC) from vegetation,
and the subsequent chemical reactions in the atmospheric boundary layer, can
explain this observation. A field campaign is proposed to quantify BVOC and NOx
emissions at the Toolik Lake Long Term Ecological Research Station, located on
the North Slope of Alaska. Continuous, 2-hourly ambient records of these BVOC
will be obtained over two growing seasons. 3D-turbulence measurements and
tethered balloon profiling will yield the first direct, continuous
characterization of boundary layer mixing dynamics and mixing depth. Integration
of observations into two hierarchic models will yield new insights into the fate
of ozone in the Arctic atmosphere and its sensitivity to BVOC and NOx, and will
provide advances in the understanding of atmospheric chemistry and oxidation in
the Arctic atmosphere.