* 1707803
* Collaborative Research (RUI): Search for Exotic Transient Spin-dependent Signals from Ultralight Dark Matter Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Jason Stalnaker, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 04/30/2021
* USD 235,028.00

A host of astrophysical and cosmological measurements have conclusively
established that over 85% of all matter in the Universe is dark matter.
Understanding the nature of dark matter is one of the greatest challenges of
modern physics and is of paramount importance in understanding the origin and
structure of the universe. A theoretically well-motivated possibility is that
the dark matter consists of ultralight fields, corresponding to particles of
very low mass. The mass-energy associated with dark matter is then primarily
stored in oscillations of the dark matter field or in localized defects. If the
dark matter takes this form, then instead of being bathed in a uniform dark
matter flux, terrestrial detectors will witness transient events when the Earth
passes through a dark matter clump or a kind of domain wall such as is found in
a magnetized material such as nickel. This award provides support to operate,
expand, and significantly upgrade a network of geographically separated, time-
synchronized atomic magnetometers to search for correlated transient signals
heralding new physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both institutions have a strong
history of diversity, with CSU - East Bay being the most diverse university in
the continental United States and Oberlin College being the first college to
admit African American students and women in a co-educational setting on a
regular basis. The proposed research programs are at the vanguard of attracting
and retaining women and underrepresented minority
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Global Network of Optical Magnetometers to
search for Exotic physics (GNOME) is sensitive to nuclear and electron spin
couplings to various exotic particles and fields. To date, no such search for
transient spin-dependent interactions has ever been carried out, making the
proposed research a completely novel experimental window on new physics. In
addition to carrying out a dedicated long-term search using the existing GNOME
during the first year of the grant, the GNOME will be upgraded in order to
dramatically improve its sensitivity.