* 1707695
* Optimized coordination and scheduling of traffic evolving on complex guidepath networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Spiridon Reveliotis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

In many contemporary industrial and distribution applications, the material
handling operations are executed automatically by fleet of robotized agents
(e.g., mobile robots, vehicles circulating on elevated monorail systems, or
complex arrays of gantry cranes) circulating over a guidepath network that is
defined either by the physical structure of the material handling system (as in
the case of the monorail and the gantry crane systems), or defined externally in
an effort to separate the corresponding traffic from the surrounding
environment. As these material handling systems increase in scale and
operational complexity, there is an emergent need for a more systematic
methodology that will support expedient and safe traffic for the traveling
agents, while taking into consideration all the constraints and limitations that
arise from the constricted nature of the underlying guidepath network and of the
limited maneuvering capabilities of the agents themselves. Furthermore, similar
traffic dynamics and control needs arise in the operational context of quantum
computing systems. In that case, the ionized atoms (or qubits) that carry the
elementary information to be processed in those systems, must be transported to
different locations in order to interact with each other or with certain
external fields, and this transport must be performed through a network of
carefully defined and allocated tunnels (more formally known as ion traps);
these tunnels and the corresponding allocation of them to the traveling qubits
intends to protect the processed information by isolating the qubits from their
surrounding environment and preventing unintended interaction among them. The
successful completion of the proposed research program will develop a complete
methodology for effective and efficient real-time coordination and scheduling of
the traffic that takes place in the aforementioned application environments. In
particular, the expected results will enable safe, orderly and expedient
traveling for the system agents in the face of all the complexity of the
underlying operations, which will further lead to higher levels of flexibility,
robustness and productivity for these operations. Furthermore, the project will
employ a graduate student who will carry out a Ph.D. thesis on the proposed set
of problems, and the obtained results will be implemented on a high-fidelity
simulator of a quantum computer that is developed by a group of researchers at
the Georgia Tech Research Institute and have an active collaboration with the PI
and the aforementioned graduate student. In addition, the PI will leverage his
affiliation with the College-Industry Council on Material Handling Education in
order to promote the obtained results to the relevant material handling
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To effectively meet the research objectives
outlined in the previous paragraph, the proposed research program will
substantially complement and extend the current theory on the real-time
coordination and scheduling of complex traffic systems. In the proposed modeling
and analysis paradigm, the considered traffic management problems will be
represented as sequential resource allocation problems where the running
processes are the trips executed by the system agents, and the allocated
resources are the various segments of the guidepath network that are needed for
the execution of these trips. This allocation must be controlled for logical
correctness, that in the considered problem context translates to the
establishment of safety and liveness for the underlying traffic, and also for
expediency, which translates to delay minimization and high throughput for the
requested transports. All these requirements will be met through the employment,
extension and integration of ideas and results coming from the areas of (i)
logical control of complex resource allocation systems, (ii) (combinatorial)
scheduling theory, and (iii) the embedding of these results in a novel model
predictive control framework.