* 1707184
* Analysis and Synthesis of Systems Sustainable Over Sets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Vasilios Manousiouthakis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2020
* USD 323,457.00

The complex nature of sustainability suggests that its assessment can benefit
from the incorporation of human input into the assessment process. The novel
concept of "sustainability over sets" (SOS) meets this challenge. This concept
is flexible, comprehensive, and can readily incorporate human input. The SOS
concept opens a new chapter in environmental and ecological sustainability. In
addition, the involvement of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students occurs
through the creation of new projects, infrastructures utilized in summer
research programs, environmental sustainability courses, and upper level
mathematics and optimization classes. The project also provides training for
involved individuals, by exposing them to high level mathematics and computer
programming concepts, methods, and software. The project researchers are
facilitating the placement of participants in graduate schools, and in
university faculty positions. Assistance on these fronts is provided by the UCLA
Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity (CEED) and the UCLA High
School Summer Research Program (HSSRP).   This research project focuses on the
analysis and synthesis of sustainable systems through the novel concept of
sustainability over sets (SOS). The SOS concept is first formally defined, and
then mathematically quantified for memory-less, spatially uniform systems, and
demonstrated in system sustainability assessment. The research focuses on the
continued conceptual development and analysis of the SOS concept; extension of
its applicability to systems that are spatially distributed and/or have memory;
applications and case studies on ecological, biological, and societal systems;
and development of sustainable system synthesis methodologies. SOS is readily
quantifiable, thus enabling definitive (yes or no) answers to the question "is a
system sustainable?" The concept of invariant sets plays a key role in this
quantification process, leading to simple mathematical criteria for
sustainability assessment, in particular for rectangular sets for which
definitive (yes or no) answers can be given to the question "does there exist a
set over which the system is sustainable?"  The project also helps K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students, by creating new projects, and
infrastructure to be utilized in summer research programs, environmental
sustainability courses, and upper level mathematics and optimization classes.