* 1707371
* RI: Small: Automated Optimization of Programs and Processing Tools in Answer Set Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Miroslaw Truszczynski, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 553,496.00

Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a form of knowledge representation and
declarative constraint programming used to represent and solve constraint
satisfaction problems. ASP has its roots in the need to support fast design of
robust and reliable software solutions for complex knowledge-intensive
applications. It provides a high-level programming paradigm for modeling an
application domain as a theory in a language of logic, and leaves all
computational concerns to automated reasoning. ASP has been used in a variety of
scientific and industrial applications, including product configuration,
decision support systems, and repairing large-scale biological
networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve both the specific
encoding of the ASP problems, and the performance of the underlying automated
reasoner or solver. The project focuses on three related research thrusts, each
of which leverages the high-level problem description of ASP. 1) Research in
program rewriting will generate alternative encodings for a given problem; 2)
the development of solver portfolios will improve overall reasoning performance
and provide robustness through availability of alternate solvers for the ASP
domain encodings; and 3) parameter tuning will be investigated to improve the
performance of individual solvers. The project will establish an evaluation
platform to systematically implement and validate each of these research
activities. This evaluation platform will be comprised of both experiment
encodings and a collection of benchmark problems from techniques in constraint
satisfaction and logic programming as well as related solver competitions.