* 1707127
* GOALI: Emission, transport and trapping of platinum group derived mobile species in automotive exhaust catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Se Oh, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2021
* USD 337,500.00

Next-generation fuel-efficient combustion engines require improved catalytic
converters in the exhaust system. The proposed research addresses the design of
these catalysts by employing novel porous structures. The overarching goal is to
reduce exhaust emissions while minimizing impact on fuel economy and reducing
the need for precious metals such as Pt and Pd. The proposed research is an
industry-university collaboration between GM Global R&amp;D and the University
of New Mexico. The project will provide opportunities for students and early
career researchers to learn about the challenges in implementing new
technologies for exhaust emissions control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
challenge being addressed here impacts the entire class of heterogeneous
catalysts used for meeting the needs for energy, materials and fuels. Automotive
exhaust catalysts are subjected to elevated temperatures that lead to growth of
nanoparticle size through Ostwald ripening and to loss of activity. The research
will look into the role of pore structure and chemistry in the transport of
mobile species during Ostwald ripening and in the trapping of the mobile species
to limit the growth of particles. Model porous catalysts will be synthesized
with systematic control of the size of the pores and the connectivity of the
pore network. The transport rates of the mobile species will be studied.
Modifying the surface chemistry can influence the diffusive transport and can
also effectively trap the mobile species once they get emitted from
nanoparticles. The overall outcome from these model studies is a decrease in
particle growth rates due to decreased transport rates in pores. Insights from
these model porous catalysts will be translated to powder catalysts and tested
under realistic conditions using the facilities of the industry partner. The
close participation of industry and university researchers is critical for
validating the concepts and models. GM has committed significant resources in
terms of people time and access to facilities, to enable this research to be
successful. The partnership will help address significant unknowns in the
understanding of catalyst sintering, and will lead to advances in the synthesis
of novel catalysts with improved reactivity and more efficient use of precious
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by the Grant Opportunities
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI).