* 1707878
* RUI: Ultracold Atoms in Ring-Shaped Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kunal Das, Kutztown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 135,000.00

Upheavals of familiar technologies are expected in coming years due to the
dramatically enhanced control of atomic, molecular and photonic systems. Among
these anticipated revolutions is that in sensor technology, affecting a wide
array of devices regularly used to detect and measure everything from electric
currents, magnetic and gravitational fields, and light intensities, to name a
few examples. The key element driving these developments is quantum
entanglement, the strange correlations between observable properties of even
widely-separated quantum systems. While entanglement is ubiquitous in quantum
systems, it is also extremely delicate, and can be altered or spoiled by
interactions of the quantum system with its environment. This delicacy is
precisely what makes exquisitely controlled quantum systems the source of
potentially revolutionary sensor technology. This project concerns simple
sensors formed by entangled ultracold atoms confined in ring-shaped traps. The
ring-shape allows for the interference of counter-propagating matter waves,
forming a kind of interferometer which has exquisite sensitivity to interactions
between the atoms. Additional applications of the results to quantum information
processing and to new quantum materials will also be explored. The PI will
actively train and involve numerous undergraduate students in physics research
at a low cost university, and expand on success under prior grants to leverage
this experience to channel students into STEM career paths, including many from
under-represented demographics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
will conduct a comprehensive study of phenomena realizable with ultracold atoms
trapped in lattices with a global topology that is multiply-connected, such as
rings, cylinders or tori. The non-trivial topology naturally introduces periodic
and twisted boundary conditions with the inclusion of effective flux via gauge
fields or rotation, and reveals coherent and non-local features of quantum
states. Within this general context, a broad range of topics will be examined.
Models with ring-shaped geometry have played a crucial role in understanding the
influences of topology and gauge freedoms in non-relativistic physics. This
research will develop and extend those models for viable implementation with
cold atoms to probe scenarios often inaccessible when such models were
conceived. The phenomena to be so studied will include artificial gauge fields,
quantum Hall effect, anyon physics, quantum pumps, Hofstadter model, and
Aharonov-Bohm and geometric phase effects. Spin-squeezing, that can bypass
uncertainty limits, and nonlinear dynamics will be examined in the novel context
of counter-circulating collective modes of atoms sharing the same physical
space. Where possible, the phenomena will be examined dynamically with evolution
in time and space, noting that time can add or substitute for other degrees of
freedom. Treating rings as artificial atoms, counterparts will be established in
external degrees of freedom for phenomena usually associated with internal ones.