* 1707042
* Nutrient dynamics along a river continuum: combining sensor data, experiments, and time series analyses to identify local to watershed scale drivers of nutrient cycling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* David Van Horn, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 329,740.00

PI Name: Ricardo Gonzalez-Pinzon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1707042&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
spatially and temporally holistic, watershed-level understanding of nutrient
dynamics in arid land river networks. Excess nutrient loading is one of the most
common and disruptive disturbances to river ecosystems, and the negative impacts
extend to downstream lakes, aquifers and coastal waters that are highly
susceptible to nutrient loading. Results from this project will provide methods
to assess the transport and fate of carbon and nutrients in river networks,
promote a more complete understanding of the complex connections between water
resources, food production, and nutrient cycles, and provide information about
ways to reduce pollution and increase nutrient
recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will leverage existing state-of-the-art
sensor technology to continuously monitor water quality parameters, nitrate,
phosphate, and dissolved organic carbon for two years along a river continuum
that spans four orders of magnitude in mean annual discharge, ~2000 m in
altitude, and ~500 km of stream length. Every three weeks during this period a
recently developed, high-information-yield field experiment will be conducted at
each study site to quantify nutrient uptake parameters at the hourly time scale.
A time-series analysis toolbox will then be used to combine the continuous water
quality data with the hourly experimental data to quantify how stream metabolism
and nutrient uptake dynamics vary along the river continuum at a variety of time
scales and to identify the most important factors in creating this variability.
This project will advance the current understanding of nutrient dynamics in
streams due to the use of: 1) multi-year, all season monitoring, which will
expand the traditional trend of collecting data for short time periods, 2)
simultaneous monitoring of numerous stream orders, 3) multi-parameter data
collection, which will provide necessary context to more fully understand
nutrient dynamics considering transport and stoichiometric constraints, and 4)
state-of-the-art time-series analyses that enable the construction of
parsimonious models capable of representing temporal (multi-season) and spatial
(entire continuum) nutrient uptake and transport processes.