* 1707703
* New regimes of quantum optomechanics using superfluid-filled cavities
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Jack Harris, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 475,847.00

The work supported by this award will seek to deepen the understanding of how
light waves can be used to control sound waves, and vice versa. The team will
use "optomechanical" control to study the quantum behavior of macroscopic
objects. This is an area of particular interest for fundamental science and for
potential technological applications. From a fundamental point of view, the laws
of quantum mechanics describe a world in which objects may behave as though they
are in multiple places at once, and in which measurements unavoidably disturb
the object that is measured. These strange effects are most obvious in the
behavior of small objects, and tend to become more obscured the larger the
object is. Nevertheless, quantum mechanics predicts that these effects can be
observed in any object that is sufficiently well isolated from heat and
friction, and which is measured with sufficient sensitivity. In this project,
quantum effects in the motion of a small volume of superfluid liquid helium will
be studied. Superfluid liquid helium can be cooled to exceptionally low
temperatures and offers extremely low levels of friction. Additionally,
superfluid liquid helium is compatible with ultrasensitive laser-based
measurements that are ideally suited to induce, control, and measure the
liquid's quantum motion. Studying the quantum motion of macroscopic objects (and
liquid objects in particular) will represent important scientific progress, as
it will explore long-standing questions about our ability to access and control
quantum effects in a new class of objects. It will also allow the team to
explore the how to develop superfluid optomechanical devices for applications
such as advanced sensing and communications
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to access
qualitatively new regimes of quantum optomechanics. Specifically, the team will
study non-Gaussian quantum effects in the motion of macroscopic objects, both
when this motion can be described in terms of conventional normal modes and when
this description breaks down. To accomplish this, they will use optomechanical
devices that consist of a miniature Fabry-Perot cavity filled (or partially
filled) with superfluid liquid He. The work will build on prior results with
similar devices and will combine new conceptual and technical advances in order
to realize new capabilities. These advances fall into three categories. First,
the team will adapt single-photon and single-phonon detection techniques for use
with superfluid-based devices. Second, the team will engineer devices in which
the surface waves of a superfluid body couple to the optical modes of a high-
finesse cavity. Third, the team will use multimode optomechanical coupling to
study the quantum behaviors of systems with strong non-reciprocity and non-
trivial topological features. The proposed activity will advance scientific
knowledge on multiple fronts. Accessing and controlling non-Gaussian states in
optomechanical systems will enable the group to perform a broad class of quantum
sensing and information processing tasks that to date have been out of their
reach. Providing access to a wide range of distinctly quantum effects in massive
objects will also provide a route towards testing specific questions related to
quantum gravity, discrete space-time, and modifications of quantum mechanics
(such as spontaneous collapse models). Measuring Gaussian and non-Gaussian
quantum effects in multimode devices that can be tuned to access non-reciprocal
and topologically non-trivial dynamics will also represent an important advance.
This is because in the classical regime, the conventional normal mode
description of coupled oscillators breaks down in such systems, as do some key
aspects of adiabaticity, and it is unclear at present how this breakdown will
alter the system's quantum behavior. This highlights the opportunities for
discovery that will come from exploring this system.