* 1707046
* GOALI:  Population Balance Modeling:  Fundamental Closures and Experimental Validation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Christine Hrenya, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 398,474.00

In nature, the flow of solid particles in avalanches and landslides can lead to
quite devastating effects. In industrial processing, the flow of solid particles
is inherent to the production of pharmaceuticals, oil and gas, chemicals, and
agricultural products. To avoid comparable adverse effects, such as industrial
accidents and lost productivity, it is important to predict and control the flow
of these granular systems. However, the flow of solid particles is poorly
understood and not easily modeled. Whereas models of liquid flow are a basic
tenant of engineering and derived from basic physical principles, current models
of solid particle flow rely on adjustable parameters, are empirical, and
incorporate a number of gross simplifications. This research project uses
computer simulations and state-of-the-art experiments to develop and validate
theoretical models of flows of solid particles that are based on measurable
quantities. In addition, this work supports the involvement of underrepresented
groups, the training of junior researchers and students, and the involvement of
students in an industrial-academic research partnership. Results from the
project will be communicated to the general public via blog posts and a Twitter
account.

This project is focusing on the reliable prediction of the mass flow rate of
solids when they are fluidized by the upward motion of a flowing gas. Existing
empirical correlations for particle entrainment rate constants may vary by many
orders of magnitude when applied to the same system. Current models are
primarily limited by empiricism and development to a very particular situation.
To develop a predictive understanding of fluidized granular systems, this
research is deriving a closure for the continuum theory that is based on
population and kinetic theory balances. The resulting model for cohesive-
particle flows will require only measurable, physical quantities as inputs. The
new continuum framework is being applied to the case of humidity-induced
agglomeration. Numerical modeling with discrete element method simulations is
being combined with non-intrusive shadowgraphy experiments to validate the new
theory. A unique aspect of the work is the development of a novel microscopic
(particle-particle) cohesion model that drives the closure of the macroscopic
(continuum) theory.