* 1707743
* RUI: Structure and Dynamics of Negative Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Nevin Gibson, Denison University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 344,000.00

Negative ions are important in a variety of physical processes including Earth's
atmosphere, stellar atmospheres and electrical discharges and plasmas. The
broader impacts of this research program include contributions to the database
of atomic properties, connections to other scientific fields, and the education
and training of undergraduate students. Lasers will be used to measure the
properties of negative ions, which are atoms and molecules that have an extra
electron. Since ions are electrically charged particles, they can be manipulated
to allow precise experiments. The high-precision measurements of electron
binding energies in this project will be useful for modeling of chemical
reactions and plasma interactions for such practical applications as
semiconductor processing, lighting and plasma displays. The detailed studies of
negative ions will yield insights into dynamical many-body interactions, which
is a general topic of interest for a broad range of fields in physics,
chemistry, materials science, and nanotechnology. The project will enhance the
research and teaching infrastructure of Denison University, an undergraduate
college. Students will participate in the experiments on-campus, providing
important research experiences for young scientists including technical training
in electronics, computers, vacuum systems, lasers, and optics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the interactions of photons with
negative ions in a series of pulsed-laser photodetachment experiments. The extra
electron in a negative ion is bound predominantly by electron correlation
effects and therefore negative ions provide a fertile testing ground for state-
of-the-art atomic physics calculations regarding these multi-body interactions.
Complex atomic negative ions are investigated on-campus at Denison University
using tunable infrared laser light to detach outer-shell electrons from negative
ions produced in a sputter source. The ground and upper state photodetachment
thresholds of several lanthanide and Group III negative ions (Lanthanum and
Thallium) will be measured in order to determine the electron affinities and
energy levels. These experiments will help explain the current strong
disagreement between theoretical predictions and experimental photoelectron
spectroscopy results for these interesting systems. The faculty and student
researchers will investigate resonances and bound excited states in lanthanide
ions including bound-bound electric-dipole transitions that exist in the
negative ion of La. Additional studies will investigate inner-shell
photodetachment from carbon chain negative ions and two-electron photodetachment
processes. The dynamic multi-electron interactions in the photoexcitation and
decay of the highly correlated cores of negative ions continue to challenge the
fundamental understanding of atomic structure. The series of experiments in this
project will test the latest theories describing photodetachment and negative
ion structure.