* 1707867
* Polar (DCL- 16-119): Development and Evaluation of an Interdisciplinary Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience in Arctic Sciences
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Becky Ball, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 271,820.00

A team of scientists and educators at Arizona State University will develop and
implement a highly interdisciplinary Course-based Undergraduate Research
Experience (CURE) to engage students in polar research. The interdisciplinary
experience will pair undergraduate students from both science and non-science
majors to conduct group research projects in the Arctic and to design innovative
ways to communicate results to the public. During the course, students will
compare the Arctic ecosystems, specifically ecosystems at the Kilpisjärvi
Biological Research Station in northern Finland, with those from the desert
environment in which they currently reside. Research opportunities for students
range from Arctic ecosystem studies to use of the Kilpisjärvi Atmospheric
Imaging Receiver Array, a dual array of omnidirectional VHF radio antennas
focused on auroras. Through this innovative learning opportunity, students will
design, implement and present both an independent science-based research project
and a communications project to explain their findings. Student participants
will be selected from the diverse student body at Arizona State University's
West Campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
project rests on the effectiveness of this pilot CURE, which will be evaluated
using a mixed method approach to determine how the experience impacted student
learning and how it impacts student interest in scientific research and in
postgraduate studies. The broader impacts of the project include involving
students from diverse backgrounds, including minorities, first-generation
college students and veterans, in polar research and training students in the
effective communication of science. This project offers an opportunity to
determine the impact of a short international research experience on diverse
students. In addition, the two years of support for this course will lay the
foundation for the future iterations of the course, which are planned to be
self-sustaining.