* 1707482
* Toward an Ab-initio Understanding of Ultracold Boson Experiments in One Dimension
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Marcos Rigol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The quantum world is a source of uncommon phenomena, such as lasing and
superconductivity, that have had tremendous impacts on society. Intrinsically
fragile, quantum phenomena are difficult to observe and study, let alone
explain. Since the observation of Bose-Einstein condensation in the mid-1990s,
ultracold gases (gases at nearly zero absolute temperature) that are trapped and
manipulated with electromagnetic fields in vacuum chambers have provided a
unique window for the exploration of the quantum world. Experiments with
ultracold gases are examining quantum effects when atoms are allowed to move
only in one spatial direction. This reduced dimensionality can exaggerate
"quantum-ness" and produce novel states of matter. This project will develop
theoretical models to describe such states and study their observable
properties. The models to be developed are expected to aid in the understanding
of materials in which electrons interact strongly and in which their motion
along some spacial direction is constrained; for example, in nano-scale wires.
The properties of these systems, at odds with those of traditionally studied
unconstrained (three-dimensional) quantum systems, might be essential to the
understanding of a wide range of nano-devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
theoretical research will explore phenomena in quantum gases in equilibrium and
far from equilibrium. In equilibrium, one of the questions to be answered is
whether the adiabatic loading of three-dimensional Bose-Einstein condensates in
two-dimensional optical lattices results in one-dimensional gases that are in
thermal equilibrium, or whether generalized Gibbs ensembles are needed to
describe them. The researchers will also study phenomena which result when an
additional weaker lattice is added along the one-dimensional gas, and the
associated quantum phases that are realized experimentally. Far from
equilibrium, this project will explore the expansion dynamics of one-dimensional
gases in the presence of interactions, with or without an optical lattice along
the expansion direction, as well as experiments in which parameters such as the
strength of the confining potential or the lattice depth are periodically
modulated in time. Another problem to be explored is the result of band-mapping
procedures in experiments in which the atoms are far-from-equilibrium and
interact strongly. The research proposed will be mostly carried out by two
graduate students who will be trained in computational and many-body quantum
physics. The PI will design an advanced graduate course on quantum statistical
mechanics, and will contribute to the Hazleton Integration Project
(http://www.hazletonintegrationproject.com) by giving talks at the Hazleton One
Community Center about science in general and physics in particular.