* 1707842
* Astroparticle Physics with the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Tyce DeYoung, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2019
* USD 316,000.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope.
It is a 1 billion-ton detector using the Antarctic ice as a detection medium for
high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of the neutrinos
observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for atmospheric
neutrinos originating from decays of particles produced in extensive air showers
by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of the Milky Way Galaxy. These may be
used to measure the fundamental properties of neutrinos. At higher energies,
astrophysical neutrinos are key probes of the high-energy universe. Because of
their unique properties, neutrinos escape even dense regions, are not deflected
by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the photon-filled
universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information about the
dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the origins of
high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active galactic
nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena.

Development of a diverse STEM workforce is an important goal, and women and
members of under-represented minority groups have made up more than half of the
graduate and undergraduate students in the research group. Hands-on research
opportunities are provided to several undergraduates working on key IceCube
research topics. The group engages the public with this research at a variety of
levels and through a variety of media. This award also supports an IceCube
MasterClass workshop for local high school students, giving them experience with
analysis of real IceCube data, using the highly successful program developed for
IceCube at the University of Wisconsin and delivered at collaborating
institutions around the world.

The IceCube Observatory was designed primarily to observe very high energy
neutrinos from galactic and extragalactic sources. An inner array known as
DeepCore, located in the center of IceCube, also permits observation of
neutrinos with energies at which flavor oscillations are visible. This award
supports oscillation measurements with precision comparable to the current
world-leading results from the MINOS, T2K, and NOvA experiments, but at much
higher energies - providing a complementary view of neutrino oscillations with
broad sensitivity to new physics. In addition, the relatively high energy range
of DeepCore allows the world's highest precision measurement of tau neutrino
appearance: a direct, model-independent test of the standard theories of
neutrino oscillations and neutrino interactions with matter. IceCube data is
also used to search for dark matter in the Sun and our Galaxy, with world-
leading sensitivity to some models of dark matter.