* 1707595
* New Nanomanufacturing Techniques for the Fabrication of Plasmonic Surfaces for Photovoltaic, Catalytic and Sensing Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Svetlana Neretina, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 251,257.00

The intense interactions between light and metal particles with nanoscale
dimensions provide the foundation for transformative sensing, catalytic and
photovoltaic technologies. Even though many such devices have been successfully
prototyped from these so-called plasmonic nanomaterials, the fabrication
techniques currently utilized, while well-suited to a research intensive
environment, are incompatible with a manufacturing setting. This award supports
a research effort aimed at defining a platform that replaces current best-
practice techniques with those responsive to the scalability, throughput, yield
and cost-effectiveness requirements of nanomanufacturing. If the
nanomanufacturing platform is validated it could act as the synthetic foundation
underpinning for: (i) sensor technologies able to detect various cancers, E.
coli, explosives, drugs and heavy metal contaminents, (ii) catalytic surfaces
geared towards environmental remediation or "green" chemical syntheses powered
by sunlight and (iii) a new class of photovoltaics reliant on plasmonic
materials. Research activities are being integrated with education initiatives
through projects which train both undergraduate and graduate students in the
design of instrumentation able to synthesize technologically relevant
nanomaterials and provide real-time monitoring of manufacturing processes.
Outreach initiatives are being directed toward the matriculation of women into
the Engineering profession.

The research being carried out will define the nanomanufacturing platform needed
to fabricate photoactive surfaces comprised of periodic arrays of complex three-
dimensional nanostructures which express the intense plasmonic resonances needed
to enable photovoltaic, catalytic and sensing applications. It will utilize an
existing synthetic framework whereby: (i) lithography defines nanostructured
precursors at site-specific locations, (ii) directed assembly transforms them
into nanostructured templates with high crystallinity and pristine surfaces and
(iii) solution-based syntheses sculpt these templates into complex
nanostructures. The studies aim to: (i) validate this synthetic framework as an
inexpensive nanomanufacturing platform able to fabricate functional photoactive
surfaces consisting of periodic arrays of sub-50 nm nanostructures with pristine
surfaces and unprecedented complexity, (ii) overcome existing knowledge barriers
related to the maximum realizable array density and potential throughput
bottlenecks which, if left unreconciled, challenge the viability of the
nanomanufacturing platform, (iii) demonstrate a new set of instrumentation which
is responsive to the scalability and throughput needs of a nanomanufacturing
setting and (iv) establish an in situ optical diagnostic which can in real-time
provide the feedback required to direct nanostructure assembly processes to
programmed endpoints.