* 1707484
* Competing Orders in Quantum Gases with Long-range Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Erhai Zhao, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

Recent experiments with trapped ensembles of magnetic atoms and/or polar
molecules (molecules that have an electric dipole moment) have achieved the
extremely cold temperatures at which quantum mechanical effects abound. Polar
atoms and molecules attract and/or repel one another anisotropically (like a
pair of magnets), and trapped collections of such particles are expected to
display a variety of collective phenomena that are the focus of much current
research. Modern experiments with dipolar gases are attempting to provide a
controlled environment in which to synthesize, tune, and discover novel phases
of polar quantum matter, complementary to the solid, liquid, gas and plasma
phases familiar at higher temperatures. While polar systems are expected to
display a wide variety of new phenomena, they are not yet well understood and
their properties are challenging to predict theoretically. The difficulty arises
from their sensitivity: Even small changes in density or temperature can change
the phase of the ensemble, and so change observed properties dramatically. This
project is developing new theoretical tools for the analysis of the plurality of
phases of ultracold dipolar matter in order to improve our understanding of
recent experimental observations. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained through this project in scientific computing, data analysis and
visualization in addition to physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop two innovative many-body techniques for quantum gases with long-range
interactions. The first is functional renormalization group for continuum Fermi
gases at finite temperatures. It will be used to analyze the many-body
instabilities and phase diagrams of dipolar Fermi gases in two-dimensions. The
second is tensor network variational ansatz for dipolar atoms or molecules
localized in deep optical lattices. It will be benchmarked and adapted to solve
effective spin models with competing and long-range exchange interactions. The
renormalization group technique will also be applied to study the many-body
phases of other quantum gas systems including Rydberg dressed Fermi gases and
spin-orbit coupled Fermi gases.