* 1707813
* Multidimensional Methods for Measuring Kinetics in Complex Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mark Berg, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 07/31/2021
* USD 488,670.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Berg at the University of South Carolina at Columbia is
developing new multidimensional spectroscopic methods to study reaction rates
(kinetics) and apply the new techniques to materials with complex molecular
dynamics. In simple materials, chemical reactions or processes can be
experimentally parsed into fundamental steps, each with a well-defined rate.
When a material is composed of complex molecules or molecular assemblies, these
fundamental steps often appear to have a spread of rates. The multidimensional
methods being developed at the Professor Berg's lab help to determine the nature
and lifetime of states which cause the spread of rates. The methods being
developed here extend to a wide range of processes and materials in biology,
chemistry, materials science and engineering. Professor Berg works with graduate
and undergraduate students closely on the development of these complex methods
of characterizing matter. He is also involved in a number of creative approaches
to engage students from underrepresented minority groups in the research
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three subprojects each address a different
material, kinetic problem and technical challenge. The rotation rates of probe
molecules inserted into microstructured materials are currently used to measure
local viscosity at specific points within the structure. These experiments often
yield a range of rotational rates. Six-pulse, polarized optical experiments are
being developed to determine whether this range is caused by variability in the
microstructure or by local anisotropy in the structure. The green-fluorescent
protein (GFP) is a prototype for understanding reaction dynamics within a
protein. A multicolor, multidimensional, optical experiment is being developed
to determine if the multiple rates observed in GFP kinetics are due to multiple
protein substates or due to unresolved intermediate steps in the photocycle.
Multidimensional methods of analyzing computer simulations are being developed
to understand the formation of long-lived structures within liquids as the
liquid is cooled. Although experiments can see these effects at low
temperatures, simulations are currently the best approach to probing their
initial formation at higher temperatures. Professor Berg intends not only to
advance fundamental understanding about molecular reaction kinetics but also to
provide students an interdisciplinary training experience, in particular those
students from underrepresented minority groups.