* 1707538
* NSF CCSC Computer Science Education Showcase
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Michael Erlinger, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/2022
* USD 103,726.00

The NSF Consortium for Computing Sciences in Colleges (CCSC) Computer Science
Education Showcase will expand the NSF SIGCSE Showcase to a set of regional
conferences, with the goal of increasing the diversity of institutions and
communities represented in the DUE portfolio. Over the years, NSF has funded
numerous Computer Science Education (CS Ed) projects through various programs.
Each has the potential for significant national impact on CS Ed. In recent years
NSF has sponsored a showcase featuring these projects at SIGCSE, the premier CS
Ed conference. This showcase has provided a vehicle for project principal
investigators (PIs), NSF DUE program officers, and attendees to interact. It is
widely believed that the showcase is a successful dissemination vehicle for NSF-
sponsored projects. Due to lack of travel funds, many in the CS Ed community
find it difficult to attend SIGCSE, and instead participate in one of ten annual
regional conferences sponsored by CCSC. CCSC was created for the betterment of
computer-oriented curricula in two-year and four-year colleges and universities
across the nation and to improve the use of computing as an educational resource
for all disciplines. While CCSC and SIGCSE communities overlap, the CCSC
showcases have the potential to reach a population of computer science educators
that are often otherwise overlooked. The showcases address the national concern
about diversifying participation in STEM by potentially increasing the awareness
of NSF CS Ed-related programs among institutions and communities with fewer
resources, and subsequently the volume and breadth of PIs submitting proposals
each year to DUE programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over two years, the NSF CCSC
Showcase project will stage showcase exhibits at CCSC regional conferences to
perform outreach and to feature select NSF Computer Science Education projects
by providing travel support for project PIs who will disseminate their work.
This will enable the PIs to reach an audience that complements SIGCSE. The
project will track the numbers of CS Ed projects presented, computer science
educators exposed to the projects, attendees at each showcase, attendees who
plan on implementing the ideas disseminated at each Showcase, attendees who plan
to submit NSF proposals in the future, and attendees who request to be
considered as a NSF reviewers. The goal is to establish the viability of the
CCSC Showcase as a dissemination vehicle and as a vehicle for developing a
stronger Computer Science curriculum.