* 1707836
* Block Copolymer Based Porous Nanostructures from Non-Equilibrium Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ulrich Wiesner, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2023
* USD 940,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is on advanced porous
nanostructures made from specialized plastic materials ("block copolymers")
using novel non-equilibrium processes. It will promote scientific understanding
of the fundamental principles of how to controllably push polymer-based
materials systems away from equilibrium towards the successful generation of
porous asymmetric membranes or highly ordered ("single-crystal") nanostructures.
The project may offer profound impact in a range of technologically important
areas. For example, if successful, the project will provide advanced membrane
materials for applications in high-resolution biopharmaceutical separations and
will allow use of porous polymer molds to structure higher-melting materials
like metals or semiconductors into periodically ordered porous single-crystal
nanostructures of interest in the microelectronic industry. Besides expected
benefits for society in a number of areas of technology development, the project
will also support education and diversity by promoting interest of a diverse
range of students in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the synthesis and
preparation, characterization, and formation mechanisms of porous block
copolymer directed nanostructures obtained using non-equilibrium formation
processes. Two distinct approaches will be pursued employing ABC triblock
terpolymer self-assembly: One submits the terpolymers to non-solvent induced
phase separation enabling asymmetric membrane formation, the other to transient
laser heating to access temperature processing regimes hitherto unexplored for
polymers. The aim of the proposed program is to understand the underlying
fundamental chemical, physical and kinetic formation principles enabling
generalization of results to other classes of materials. The proposed research
includes synthesis of all components, preparation of porous nanostructured
materials using the two non-equilibrium formation principles, and
characterization of the final assembly structures using various scattering and
electron microscopy techniques. Interdisciplinarity will be a central feature of
the effort. The program will further involve training and development of human
resources, including the participation of underrepresented groups, and
industrial outreach.