* 1707945
* Multi-Messenger Astrophysics with the Cherenkov Telescope Array
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Justin Vandenbroucke, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2021
* USD 405,001.00

Gamma rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma rays probe physical conditions and processes
in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can be used to
test fundamental physics. Gamma-ray detectors may also be capable of observing
cosmic rays, which are highly energetic sub-atomic particles that travel near
the speed of light. The origins and acceleration mechanisms of cosmic rays are
unknown but they likely originate in extreme astrophysical phenomena both within
and beyond our galaxy. This award supports scientists at the University of
Wisconsin in the development of hardware and analysis techniques for the next-
generation gamma-ray telescope, the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), an
international gamma-ray observatory currently in the prototyping stage of
development. A new design, the Schwarzschild Couder Telescope, is currently
under construction in Arizona at the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory. This
award will support the group's work on the camera for the telescope, including
the data processing and analysis procedures for this prototype telescope. They
will then test new methods for studying cosmic rays using the unique
capabilities of this new instrument. The PI leads the Distributed Electronic
Cosmic-ray Observatory (DECO), an education and outreach project that uses cell
phones as particle detectors. This award will support the group to work with
local teachers to develop lesson plans and projects to use DECO in
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The prototype Schwarzschild Couder Telescope
uses silicon photo-detectors with new capabilities, including the ability to
operate in moonlight conditions. The University of Wisconsin group will develop
the data taking, processing, and analysis procedures for these new detectors.
They will then characterize the instrument performance under moonlight
conditions and study the cosmic-ray Moon shadow during partial Moon
illumination. These studies will lay the groundwork for a measurement using CTA
of the positron fraction using the opposite direction of the electron and
positron shadows as deflected in the Earth's magnetic field.