* 1707123
* Liquid impingement dynamics on superheated superhydrophobic surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* R Daniel Maynes, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 373,596.00

Characterizing heat transfer from a solid plate to a liquid is important in
multiple applications where cooling, condensation, or cleaning properties are
necessary. Superhydrophobic surfaces can be self-cleaning and thus present an
immediate advantage for their use when in contact with liquids. Water will sit
atop the micro/nano structures, leaving an air gap in between the structures and
allowing for water to bead up almost completely into a ball on the surface. The
water will then roll from the surface and thus it becomes self-cleaning.
Although the liquid dynamics of impingement on a superhydrophobic surface are
fairly well known, the understanding of heat transfer from these surfaces with
micro-scale air gaps to an impinging liquid is not well characterized. Impinging
liquids are able to remove heat by the constant replenishing of new, cooler
liquid. This study will explore the capability of impinging water droplets or
impinging water jets to remove heat from a superhydrophobic surface while still
effectively being self cleaning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superhydrophobic surfaces
are generated by combining microscale structuring and a hydrophobic coating such
that liquids are often only in contact with a fraction of the solid surface.
Impinging processes are rich in fundamental fluid flow and thermal transport
physics and represent an excellent test bed to consider with superhydrophobic
surfaces since superhydrophobicity exerts enormous influence on the liquid-solid
surface tension, which is dominant in impinging processes. It is expected that
thermal transport physics of liquid impingement on superhydrophobic surfaces
will experience greater departure from classical behavior than has been observed
hydrodynamically. The objectives of this work are to characterize the transport
for: 1) impinging droplets (normal and oblique impingement angles), and 2)
liquid jet impingement (normal and oblique impingement). The proposed research
plan includes coupled experimental and analytical approaches. The processes that
will be explored have significance in next generation high efficiency
condensers, desalinization processes, self-cleaning surfaces, and easily
maintained spray cooling systems.