* 1707666
* Experimental Particle Physics Research at High Energies
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Emanuela Barberis, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,430,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all the elementary particles known at the time into a hierarchy
of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this model to date
was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many
questions about the universe, including such fundamental questions as to why the
Higgs mass has the value it has. One of the primary functions of the Compact
Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the LHC, which remains the premier Energy
Frontier particle accelerator, operating at the CERN laboratory near Geneva
Switzerland, is to discover new physics beyond the Standard Model. This project
will analyze data from the CMS experiment looking for signals of beyond the
Standard Model. The work that will be accomplished with this award will impact
three broad areas: 1) Upgrading the highly technical components of the CMS
detector 2) workforce development and outreach to the broader community and 3)
furthering the analysis techniques that might well discover new physics at the
LHC. With the strong cooperative education program at Northeastern University,
the group will continue to routinely involve undergraduates in meaningful six-
month projects at CERN. The PIs will also continue their involvement with the
Boston Area QuarkNet group (now in its 14th year) where they are able to reach
out to local high school teachers and their students. The group members also
share the excitement and knowledge of the discoveries and results with the
broader public through lectures and presentations to audiences outside of
particle physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work funded through this award will
search for a number of new particle physics sectors where there are theoretical
models of beyond the SM physics. A discovery of leptoquarks would provide a link
between the quark sector and the lepton sectors and help to explain why both
sectors contain three generations of matter. Detection of substantial invisible
decays of the Higgs boson would answer important questions about the nature of
electroweak symmetry breaking. Invisible decays of the Higgs are a signature of
various beyond the standard model physics theories. In these, the Higgs can
interact with new heavy particles which decay into particles that are usually
not detected by the experiment (like neutrinos). Limits on the invisible decay
rate of the Higgs boson also provide constraints on models of Dark Matter. This
project's studies also include measurements of the differential cross section
measurements of Standard Model processes, such as ZZ production, and W+jets
production, that have sensitivity to new physics. These studies are tightly
coupled with the new physics searches because the processes they measure are
important backgrounds to the specific searches targeted. The presence of a
signal in any of these channels would have profound impact on our understanding
of particle physics, while establishing its absence would provide important
constraints on models of physics beyond the Standard Model of particle physics.