* 1707635
* Extragalactic Astrophysics and Cosmic-Ray Physics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Michael DUVERNOIS, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 316,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed with unique capabilities to observe very high energy
gamma-rays. HAWC is also capable of observing cosmic-rays, which are highly
energetic sub-atomic particles that travel near the speed of light. The origin
and acceleration mechanisms of cosmic rays are unknown. The highest energy
cosmic rays likely originate in extreme astrophysical phenomena outside our
galaxy. This award supports scientists at the University of Wisconsin in the
analysis of gamma-ray and cosmic-ray data collected with HAWC. They will study
flares from extragalactic gamma-ray sources and measure the anisotropy in the
arrival directions of cosmic rays. The group will partner with the "El Universo
es Tuyo" program in outreach and education programs for local Spanish-speaking
students.

With its large instantaneous field of view and continuous operations HAWC
surveys two-thirds of the sky every day. The University of Wisconsin group will
study flaring activity in extragalactic gamma-ray sources and measure the
cosmic-ray anisotropy in the TeV to PeV energy range. The group has developed
and implemented a flare monitor program that analyzes HAWC data in real-time to
search for flaring activity. Rapid alerts are sent out to trigger searches by
other telescopes at other wavelengths or facilities that observe cosmic rays or
neutrinos. The group will continue to operate and further develop the flare
monitor, and they will analyze the data taken during flaring events. Using new
methods and combining HAWC skymaps with maps from the IceCube neutrino
observatory at the South Pole, the group will study cosmic-ray anisotropy across
the northern and southern hemispheres to address the long-standing discrepancy
in the observed and expected dipole strength.