* 1707427
* On the Behavior of Solutions of Einstein's Equations and Solutions of Geometric Heat Flow Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2023
* James Isenberg, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2023
* USD 120,000.00

Einstein's gravitational field theory provides a beautiful and remarkably
accurate means for modeling gravitational physics on both the astrophysical and
cosmological scales. It can be used to predict the observational consequences
(both in terms of electromagnetic and gravitational radiation) of black holes
and neutron stars and ordinary stars colliding, and it can also be used to
discern from observations what the Big Bang was like. One particularly useful
way to work with Einstein's theory is by formulating it as an initial value
problem: According to this formulation, to construct spacetimes of use in
modeling gravitational physics, one first chooses an initial state for the
spacetime (at some arbitrary time of interest), and one then constructs the
spacetime by evolving both into the past and the future of this initial state.
Einstein's equations (at the heart of Einstein's theory) both control possible
choices of the initial state, and determine how the evolution proceeds. The
research supported in this proposal involves how to make choices of the initial
state which satisfy the Einstein constraint equations; it also involves
determining the generic behavior of solutions as one approaches "singular
regions" of the spacetime (near the Big Bang, for example). Besides studies of
the behavior of solutions of Einstein's equations, this grant also supports
studies of solutions of geometric heat flow equations such as the Ricci flow and
mean curvature flow. Here, the interest is in the mathematical relationship
between topological spaces and the types of curvature that they can support.
Remarkably, some of the techniques used in the study of geometric heat flow
solutions are also useful in studying solutions of Einstein's
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the specific projects supported by this
grant are the following:&lt;br/&gt;1) Solutions of the Einstein constraint
equations: Two approaches have been developed for constructing and studying
solutions of the constraints: The first of these, the conformal method, works
beautifully for constant mean curvature ("CMC") and near-CMC solutions of the
vacuum or electrovac Einstein constraints (with nonpositive cosmological
constant), but appears to have major problems otherwise. This grant supports
work which studies these problems---non-existence and non-uniqueness of
solutions---in a number of cases, including asymptotically Euclidean ("AE") and
asymptotically hyperbolic ("AH") solutions, as well as solutions on closed
manifolds. The second approach, gluing, allows known solutions of the
constraints to be joined to produce new ones--e.g., N-body initial data sets. AH
initial data must be "shear-free" if it is to be used to produce asymptotically
flat spacetimes; hence this grant supports work to develop gluing techniques
which allow the joining at infinity of a pair of shear-free AH solutions,
thereby producing a new shear-free AH solution (with a single asymptotic
region).&lt;br/&gt;2) Strong Cosmic Censorship: For almost 50 years, one of the
major questions in mathematical relativity has been if the ubiquitous geodesic
incompleteness in maximal spacetime developments predicted by the Hawking-
Penrose "singularity theorems" is generically accompanied by spacetime curvature
blowup. Geodesically incomplete solutions of Einstein's equations with bounded
curvature (allowing extensions across a Cauchy horizon) are known; but the
"Strong Cosmic Censorship ("SCC") conjecture suggests that this does not happen
generically. Model versions of SCC have been proven for families of solutions,
such as the Gowdy spacetimes. In these proofs, verifying "AVTD" behavior
(dominance of time derivatives over space derivatives near the singular region)
has been a crucial tool. The PI and collaborators has developed the singular
initial value problem as a way of identifying AVTD behavior, and proposes to use
it to find non-analytic AVTD solutions among vacuum solutions with one Killing
field, and among Einstein-scalar solutions with no Killing fields. Other
supported works seeks to show that the AVTD behavior of Kasner solutions is
stable among solutions with two Killing fields. &lt;br/&gt;3) Expanding
Cosmologies: The PI and his collaborators propose to use a combination of
numerical and analytical studies to explore the expanding direction of model
cosmological spacetimes. There is good evidence for strongly attracting
"entropic" behavior. This grant supports work to verify and explore this
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;4) Ricci Flow Near Kahler Geometries: For certain even-
dimensional manifolds M, the set of Kahler geometries on M forms a subspace of
the space of all Riemannian geometries on M. A Ricci flow solution which begins
at a Kahler geometry remains Kahler. Are there Ricci flow solutions which begin
outside the set of Kahler geometries but asymptotically approach it? The PI and
his collaborators are working to show that this is the case, for a certain class
of geometries.&lt;br/&gt;5) Stability of Neckpinch Behavior in Geometric Heat
Flows: Neckpinch behavior in Ricci flow and mean curvature flow is well-
understood for rotationally symmetric geometries and embeddings. There is
evidence, both numerical and analytical, that such behavior is stable. The PI
and his collaborators propose further work to verify this stability.