* 1707818
* Integrated Nanochannel and Nanopore Architecture for Studying Translocation Dynamics of DNA
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2019
* MinJun Kim, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2019
* USD 146,928.00

The sequence of bases on deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) strand determines an
individual's hereditary traits and his or her susceptibility to diseases. This
sequence can be used to tailor conventional therapeutic approaches and deliver
more personalized medicine based on an individual's genetic makeup. Solid-state
nanopores and nanochannels present a new paradigm for DNA sequencing and can
make sequence determination faster and cheaper than the currently used methods.
However, these nanoscale tools have not been able to achieve the necessary
control and reproducibility required for large-scale commercial applications.
This award supports fundamental research for the development of an integrated
nanoscale architecture that can harness the merits of both the solid-state
nanopores and the nanochannels for controlled DNA analysis. The new platform
will accelerate DNA sequencing research and has the potential to make
personalized medicine a clinical reality. This research will also provide a rich
foundation for teaching, training, and learning and open a new window to
manufacturing and metrology at nanoscale. The program will also have extensive
outreach component, including active recruitment and training of women and
underrepresented minorities in engineering,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanopore
sensors are poised to revolutionize DNA sequencing technology by obviating the
need for chemical conversion and synthesis and by use of long read lengths.
However, fast DNA translocation speed and low signal-to-noise ratio present
scientific barriers that need to be overcome to realize the full application
potential of these sensors. The objective of this research is to demonstrate
enabling technologies necessary to design, fabricate, and assemble integrated
nanoscale architecture for studying DNA translocation through nanopores, as well
as to understand fundamental scientific principles that govern the translocation
of long DNA molecules (&gt;100 kb) using simultaneous electrical and optical
signal readout. Results of this research will bring about a novel bioanalytical
platform that can be used to capture comprehensive genetic data with high
temporal resolution. In this research, an integrated nanochannel-nanopore device
will be designed and fabricated, wherein nanochannels will be used to unravel
the long coiled DNA and feed the stretched molecules into the nanopore, which in
turn will be used to discern the structural features of the DNA. The
understanding of underlying physics of nanopore translocation of long DNA
strands and the ability to control this translocation dynamics will help to
realize nanopore based DNA sequencers.