* 1707247
* Collaborative Research: Turbulence, Structures, and Diffusive Shock Acceleration
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Peter Hunana, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This project will further our understanding of the origin and properties of
highly energetic particles accelerated at shock waves in outer space. Shock
waves in the interplanetary and interstellar medium are known to accelerate
charged particles to very high (relativistic) energies. Exactly how this is done
remains an important open problem. Energized particles irradiate the Earth,
satellites and astronauts orbiting the Earth, and spacecraft exploring the
heliosphere and other planets. Highly energetic particles represent a hazard to
biological systems and technological systems, including communication,
positioning, and observational and research satellites. Thus, determining the
origin and subsequent properties of very energetic charged particles can have
important technological and biological consequences that impact our daily lives
and even the national security of the US. This award will support a
collaborative effort between the University of Alabama - Huntsville and the New
Mexico Consortium, with support from the Department of Energy, to investigate
the effects of complex plasma structures that are typically generated at shock
waves on the production of highly energetic particles in interplanetary
space.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will, for the first time, develop
quantitative and testable models of particle energization in shock generated
turbulence, which is in turn dissipated via reconnection current layers,
associated magnetic plasmoids, and particle energization. The coupling of
diffusive shock acceleration (DSA) and particle acceleration in the turbulent
wake of fast shocks cleaves naturally into two: A) the generation, transmission,
and amplification of turbulence and structures at collisionless shock waves, and
B) the coupled acceleration of electrons and ions at and in the turbulent wake
of collisionless shocks. This project will 1) develop models, validated by
simulations that describe the transmission and generation of turbulence through
and at collisionless quasi-perpendicular and quasi-parallel shock waves; 2)
determine whether collisionless shocks can generate magnetic structures
downstream of the shock and will describe the downstream evolution of shock-
generated structures through reconnection-related processes; 3) explain the
interaction of magnetic structures and current sheets, including the
heliospheric current sheet, with incident shock waves; and 4) use numerical
models and observations of turbulence, magnetic structures, and current sheets
interacting with shocks to develop a theory of particle acceleration in the
vicinity of shock waves.