* 1707419
* Stellar Atmospheres in the Laboratory: A Testbed for Fundamental Atomic Processes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Donald Winget, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Most stars---including our Sun---will end their lives as white dwarf stars,
which no longer undergo nuclear fusion. Understanding white dwarf stars is an
important tool for astronomy because these stars can serve as cosmic clocks that
probe the age and history of the universe. This research project will create in
the laboratory conditions that are similar to those found on the surfaces of
white dwarf stars. A detailed analysis of the light absorbed and emitted by
atoms under such conditions will allow astronomers to better understand white
dwarf stars. This project will train graduate students in sophisticated
laboratory techniques, and it will support science outreach to local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct new laboratory
measurements that will provide key benchmarks for atomic line broadening
observed in white dwarf stars. They will make these measurements using an
experiment that they have built for the Z-machine at Sandia National
Laboratories. The experiment is capable of producing hydrogen, helium, and
carbon plasmas that are similar to those in white dwarf photospheres. Accurate
atomic spectral line parameters measured in these laboratory plasmas would allow
astronomers to accurately diagnose plasma conditions at the surfaces of white
dwarf stars and test theories of line broadening there. White dwarf stars could
then be used to constrain the age and history of the Galactic disk, Galactic
halo, and individual stellar clusters, and as astrophysical laboratories in
which to study the fundamental physics of crystallization, phase separation,
diffusion, and plasmon neutrino emission. This project will train graduate
students in the methods and applications of laboratory astrophysics, and it will
provide opportunities to undergraduate students from the Freshman Research
Initiative program at UT Austin.