* 1707075
* Improving Statistical Convergence in Direct Numerical Simulations by Exploring Large-Scale Structures Organization and Symmetry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yulia Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 331,155.00

Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is used to describe, explain, and predict
turbulent fluid flow externally around airplanes, rockets, and ground vehicles
and internally in engines and building ventilation systems. Such computations
can be expensive because of the unsteady structures in the turbulence. This
project will focus on developing simulation techniques to make such computations
more practical. Outreach activities through ASU community-connect infrastructure
will focus on educating high-school students about turbulence and its connection
to real-life applications through short tutorials and demonstrations involving
advanced visualization of turbulent flows and large-scale organized motions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop the strategies that
mitigate the problem associated with the persistence of slow moving coherent
structures in certain portions of the flow domain, or locking, during the finite
time of numerical simulations. In these situations, the collected flow
statistics can be significantly biased by the localized and temporary effect of
these structures and cannot reliably represent a long-term system dynamics. The
current proposal is devoted to designing simple but efficient strategies that
will yield significantly improved convergence of statistics in numerical
simulations over a much reduced computational time. These strategies include
efficient sampling over multiple realizations and multiple states of the flow
during the finite time of the simulations. This will be achieved by designing
specific mathematical transformations of the computed flow field at a runtime
that can be thought of as disturbances that trigger the state transitions in
nature. The symmetries of the system will be explored to design the
transformations that (i) amenable to promoting quick transitions into desired
unsampled flow states, (ii) mathematically consistent and preserve the governing
fluid dynamics equations. In addition to improving statistical convergence, the
project seeks to answer the following scientific questions: (i) whether the
observation of very long-lived asymmetric flow states in certain symmetric
systems, such as jets in crossflow and bluff-body wakes, is an artifact of a
similar phenomenon of coherent structure locking and whether the current
techniques will yield symmetric average fields, (ii) whether addition of the
samples from the newly reconstructed states improve a long-term prediction of
the system dynamics by low-order models, such as Proper Orthogonal
Decomposition. The research is coupled to the educational plan that includes
outreach activities at local Phoenix district high schools, involvement of
undergraduates in research, and improving graduate curriculum.