* 1707859
* Overcoming Adsorption Limitations for Surface Enhanced Spectroscopy Measurements
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Mark Arnold, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

New biological, chemical, and radiological agents threaten the environment and
human safety every day. While significant advances in small molecule detection
have been made, challenges still exist in providing flexible detection
methodologies for accurate chemical identification and sensitive and selective
detection of some molecules. With support from the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Haes at the University
of Iowa focuses on developing surface sensitive techniques such as surface
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) as a tool molecular detection. SERS is a light-
based technique that is used to identify and quantify molecules that adsorb onto
metal surfaces. Most molecules do not stick to metal surfaces, limiting the
utility of SERS and similar methods. Professor Haes and her group use both
experimental and modeling methods to develop the SERS technique so that it can
be used to provide accurate chemical identification with high selectivity and
sensitivity. Through this research, Professor Haes provides opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students to work on practical problems. The Haes
research group performs outreach activities with K-12 students that are focused
on the "Size of Things". This project helps students learn about the
implications of size on the properties of nanoscale and macroscale objects
through hands-on activities. Underrepresented minority students are recruited
through the University of Iowa's Center of Exemplary Mentoring. In addition, all
personnel participate in educational development and outreach activities geared
towards introducing science to Iowa's students in grades K-12. Specifically, Dr.
Haes develops a "Size of Things" exhibit for display with a learning game for
the size of nanoscale and macroscale objects. They build off of educational
activities developed by Public Television (DragonTV on Nano)and provide
interactive activities related to (1) What is a nanometer? How big is one
billion meters? How small is one-billionth of a meter?; (2) Why is "nanogold"
red and "nanosilver" yellow?; and (3) My nanosilver socks do not smell but
should I be worried that the nanosilver will get into my body?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks answers regarding how and why some
molecules are difficult to detect using SERS. Despite many successful examples
of direct small molecule detection using SERS, at least three issues remain
including: (1) unpredictable properties of nanomaterials that arise from
aggregation, (2) inefficient binding of some classes of molecules to surfaces,
and (3) low signals associated with targeted molecules. The two research
questions are answered by varying nanoparticle morphology and solution
conditions. Research tasks focus on quantifying molecular binding metrics and
SERS enhancements and evaluating how solution conditions impact binding metrics,
nanoparticle stability, and SERS activity. Key experimental design features are
identified so adsorbate-surface interactions are rationally and reproducibly
promoted thus facilitating direct detection of molecules using surface-enhanced
spectroscopies. Students are trained in the areas of nanoscience, spectroscopy,
and measurement science. Through the supported research, the Haes research group
is developing design rules that overcome current measurement challenges thus
expanding the utility of SERS in a variety of applications.