* 1707019
* 2017 FEW Nexus Summit:  Integrated Science, Engineering, and Policy: a Multi Stakeholder Dialogue
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Rabi Mohtar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James Jones
* 01/31/2018
* USD 49,999.00

FEW Nexus Workshop on Integrated Science, Engineering, and Policy: A Multi
Stakeholder Dialogue&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1: Non-Technical
Description.&lt;br/&gt;The growing demands for energy and food make clear the
necessity of better management of our limited food, energy, and water (FEW)
resources. Competition for water continues to grow among agriculture, energy
production, domestic and industrial uses, leading to water shortages and
tradeoffs that have to be addressed. While water deficits can be partially met
through wastewater reuse and desalination plants, these methods and their
technologies carry unclear threats to the quality and health of our soils,
wherein 30 percent of global freshwater is stored. Integrated resources
management is an essential tool for these tightly interconnected, essential
resources: their interlinkages (the FEW Nexus) must be defined and quantified to
enable a holistic understanding of the tradeoffs resulting from different
choices about their management and use. This workshop will improve the level of
integration of future research, foster national research teams, and build on the
investments made toward the creation of a Food-Energy-Water community of
science. It will bring together leading stakeholders in the FEW resources Nexus
with faculty in science, engineering, and policy disciplines to help identify
systems-level conflicts among alternative uses and provide input on the research
agenda of the FEW Nexus community. This will help foster new cooperation among
science and engineering disciplines for more sustainable management of FEW
resources at local, national and international levels to address societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Description.&lt;br/&gt;The
overall workshop goal is the consolidation of a FEW Nexus Community of Science
and creation of a national platform for FEW nexus biophysical, social and policy
research to address key challenges in the context of the FEW Nexus. Among the
primary workshop outcomes will be the identification of new research and data
collection approaches to enhance longitudinal research to model and monitor the
processes associated with resilience, vulnerability, and risk reduction. Working
groups in the nexus dimensions will establish synergistic research teams to
develop joint FEW research proposals for submission to national and
international funding agencies. These groups will develop a common Nexus roadmap
of science, policy, technology, and education issues critical to the sustainable
management of FEW resources. Such a road map is essential for the proper
planning and understanding of the tradeoffs among FEW resources. This road map
will be developed through an accessible e-portal that is designed to facilitate
future engagement with stakeholders and translate knowledge into action. It will
also become the foundation of further investigations by providing insight toward
new knowledge generated as a result of its implementation. The FEW Nexus
community of science will provide a platform from which the Nexus community will
share and exchange ideas, draw on international, national, and local FEW nexus
efforts, and facilitate the exchange of ideas and development of partnerships
for sharing data and information. This will lay the foundation for future FEW
Nexus research and allow public, private and scientific sector stakeholders to
participate in research to inform decision and policy making.