* 1707359
* NeuroNex Innovation Award: Voltage to Light Transducers (VoLT) Collaborative
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andreas Tolias, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2022
* USD 959,999.00

The ability to image brain activity is critical to understand how we learn,
think, sense, plan movements, and behave. It can also help understand how
neurological disorders impact brain function, paving the way for cures or
treatments. A major challenge is that brain activity is rapid (millisecond-
timescale) and operates at spatial scales down to less than 1/1000th of a
millimeter. There are existing tools to image brain activity, but they have
important limitations, such as being too slow to follow fast brain activity,
having poor spatial resolution, being unable to record from many brain cells or
only allowing imaging at the very surface of the brain. The investigators of
this project are developing new sensors for imaging brain activity in animal
models, thereby providing the research community with more powerful tools to
study the brain in health and disease. The investigators engineer "voltage
indicators," which are proteins who emit flashes of light when neurons are
active. Previous studies demonstrated the potential for this technology, but
developing better versions is laborious and time-intensive. Here, a new
methodology for rapidly improving voltage indicators is being developed and
disseminated to the broader community of neuroscientists and other biologists.
The technology enables users to obtain improved versions on an accelerated
timescale. The project also affords multi-disciplinary training opportunities
for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring voltage dynamics in
defined neurons deep in the brain is critical for unraveling the function of
neuronal circuits, but is challenging due to the limited performance of existing
tools. The investigators address this technical need by developing Genetically
Encoded Voltage Indicators (GEVIs), membrane-based fluorescent proteins whose
brightness is modulated by transmembrane voltage. This emerging technology
promises to fulfill the dream of recording electrical activity from many cells
or subcellular locations in vivo and with cell type specificity. While GEVIs
have enabled a restricted number of experiments in vivo, further improvement of
their performance will be needed for broader use of these probes in vivo. In
particular, GEVIs would benefit from increased sensitivity, brightness and
photostability. To address the limitations of current indicators, the
investigators are developing a microscopy platform that can rapidly screen
indicator variants by automatically monitoring the variants' fluorescence
responses to voltage changes. The investigators also are constructing several
libraries of indicator variants, focusing on residues that are important for
sensing the electrical field, or controlling fluorescence excitation or
emission. The resulting indicators are characterized comprehensively across all
key performance metrics to facilitate deployment in downstream applications.
This NeuroNex Innovation Award is part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's
Understanding the Brain activities.