* 1707822
* RUI: Measuring Nanoscale Thermal Transport with Trapped Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Charlie Doret, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 191,506.00

The transport of heat via thermal conduction is important for a host of everyday
situations ranging from cooking one's dinner or heating and cooling one's home
to removing waste heat produced in consumer electronics. Although thermal
conductivity is well understood on macroscopic, everyday scales, heat transport
on the tiny size scales relevant for today's modern microelectronics - at the
crossover between regimes governed by classical versus quantum mechanics - has
resisted scientific study. This project, which will simulate nanoscale thermal
conductivity using a system of atoms that will be ionized, trapped with electric
fields, and probed using lasers, is a step towards understanding heat flow at
the crossover between quantum and classical mechanics. Taking place at an
undergraduate institution, students will be involved in all aspects of the
experiments - designing and building lasers, electronics, and data acquisition
systems, writing software, and carrying out data collection, providing superb
training for future careers in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
idea underpinning this work will be to co-trap multiple isotopes of calcium to
create a sympathetically cooled, linear chain of ions. The end ions of the chain
will be 44Ca+ ions, laser cooled to different average vibron numbers, analogous
to thermal baths of different temperatures. 40Ca+ will form the central `bulk'
of the chain. Resolved sideband spectroscopy, individually addressed to specific
ions in the chain, will be used to read out the average number of vibrons at
each ion, equivalent to a temperature distribution. Under typical circumstances
vibron transport along the chain is expected to be ballistic, leading to a near-
uniform distribution in the bulk. However, inducing vibron dephasing by
introducing localized noise to the trapping potentials or strengthening radial-
axial mode coupling across the linear-to-zig-zag structural phase transition
will break the chain into thermally disconnected subsystems. This will allow
observation of the onset of diffusive thermal transport, manifested as a non-
uniform gradient of the average vibron numbers. This work will extend quite
naturally to include study of techniques for improving sympathetic cooling of
linear ion chains, a central tool for a wide array of experiments pursuing
quantum information processing with trapped ions. This research program is thus
expected to aid in our understanding of nanoscale thermal conductivity and also
to inform the next generation of experiments in trapped ion quantum computation
and quantum simulation. Additionally, isotope shift measurements made as part of
this work will contribute to the understanding of atomic and nuclear theory.