* 1707640
* Polyelectrolyte Phase Behavior and Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2021
* USD 520,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrically charged polymers,
called polyelectrolytes, are common in biology and include DNA, RNA, proteins,
and mucous layers. They are increasingly used for applications ranging from drug
delivery to membranes for sensing or batteries. Membranes of polyelectrolytes
for these applications can be built up, layer by layer, by sequentially dipping
a surface into a negatively charged polyelectrolyte followed by dipping into a
positively charged one. Additionally, gels swollen with water, known as
"coacervates", can be made by mixing two oppositely charged polyelectrolytes.
Despite the importance of these materials in biology and advanced applications,
their behavior is poorly known, and neither the properties of coacervates nor
the rate of growth of layer-by-layer membranes is understood at present. While
promising theories for such polyelectrolyte materials have recently been
developed, there is little systematic experimental data to test and confirm
these theories so as to help design advanced materials. To provide such tests,
this project will use both simple and advanced experimental methods to measure
the composition of coacervates, and the growth rate and thickness of layer-by-
layer films. These measurements will be carried out systematically with varying
salt concentration and pH to establish quantitative trends needed to test and
confirm newly developed theory and provide a firm base for design of advanced
materials made from polyelectrolytes. Such knowledge is also relevant in
biological systems, including the interactions of positively charged proteins
with negatively charged DNA, which controls the structure and function of
chromosomes. Beyond the research, broader impacts of this project will include
the education of graduate and undergraduate students, outreach, and development
of specialized computational codes relevant to this
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand and test theories for the
equilibrium and dynamics of assemblies of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes,
several phases of study will be performed. First, the phase behavior including
compositions of individual polyions in both coacervate and supernatant phases
for four common polyelectrolyte mixtures will be measured by high pressure
liquid chromatography, proton NMR, and other methods. The results will be
compared to the predictions of new theories, and used to test and improve these
theories. Titrations with acid and base will be used to determine ion pairing
equilibrium constants, ionization equilibrium, and thermodynamic "chi"
parameters. In addition, Layer-by-Layer (LbL) growth rates for these
polyelectrolytes will be measured and the thermodynamic information determined
by theory and phase behavior will be used to predict these growth rates. The
diffusivities of polyions through the polyelectrolyte multilayer needed for
predictions of LbL growth will be inferred from strengths of ion pairing
obtained from atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of a polyanion and
polycation in water and salt.