* 1707961
* NSF/PHY-BSF: Statistical Physics of Control and Evolution in Cellular Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Elijah Roberts, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 363,585.00

Numerous cellular processes do not follow deterministic rules; i.e., genetically
identical cells can display different phenotypes even in identical environments.
Such processes involve cellular decision making, in which individual cells
probabilistically make choices determining their fate. One view is that the
probabilistic nature of cellular decision-making originates from stochastic
noise present in the biomolecular interaction networks. Most previous work has
been focused on the intrinsic noise of these networks. Yet extrinsic or
environmental noise may be much more significant, likely governing the overall
dynamics. The goal of this research project is to develop a concise theoretical
framework describing the combined effect of intrinsic and extrinsic noise on the
stochastic dynamics of genetic switches responsible for cellular decision-
making. The PI hypothesizes that extrinsic noise not only significantly lowers
the escape time from a metastable decision state, but can fundamentally change
the actual escape mechanism. To elucidate the role of environmental noise on
genetic circuits, the project will investigate, numerically and analytically,
the interplay between intrinsic and extrinsic noise in a series of increasingly
complex models of cellular decision processes. Noise-driven switching between
states plays a key role in various phenomena including chemical reactions,
nanomagnets, Josephson junctions, genetic switches, and protein folding. The
methods investigated here can be used to study a range of physical problems. All
code developed during the research activities of the project will be made
available as open source software. Software protocols will be developed to
ensure that all software can be easily used by other research groups. Also, all
simulation and experimental datasets produced by the project will be made
available for download as an "Open Science" policy, to encourage reproduction
and extension of results. All of the educational curriculum will also be
publicly released for other educators to use and adapt for their own courses.

A sophisticated model for the contribution of extrinsic noise to cellular
decision-making will be critical toward developing computational approaches to
advanced synthetic biology. To develop artificial genetic programs that are as
sophisticated as natural developmental ones will require a concerted effort to
understand the basic physical principles by which decision-making networks
operate. This project will build underlying knowledge in three specific areas.
1) The fundamental building blocks of decision making networks. 2) The response
of networks to external fluctuations. 3) The impact of fluctuations on the
evolution of microbial organisms. The educational component of this proposal
will improve quantitative training for future genetic designers. The PI teaches
a biophysically oriented systems biology undergraduate course, attempting to
integrate physics-based modeling with data-driven modeling. The PI also teaches
a graduate quantitative biology course for biology students. New regulatory
design projects will be incorporated into both courses by creating a
computational version of the BioBricks library that students can use to model
regulatory designs, using the research software. The PI will also institute an
outreach program for underrepresented and economically disadvantaged high-school
students to learn about physics, biology, and computers using a programming
"game" based on the research in the proposal.

This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.