* 1707347
* Synthetic Receptor-Based Arrays for Sensing Post-Translationally Modified Proteins and Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Wenwan Zhong, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2023
* USD 870,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Dr. Wenwan Zhong and her group at the University of California -
Riverside are working to improve our fundamental understanding of how proteins
work. Proteins are the workhorses of all living systems. Their functions are
regulated by diverse modifications of protein structures. Identifying and
understanding these modifications can benefit many areas of research, including
such diverse work as probing the chemical mechanisms of life, energy production,
and environmental remediation. The Zhong group seeks to enhance this knowledge
by developing selective recognition tools that can accurately assess changes in
protein modification in response to external stimulation of living cells.
Specifically, they are developing a series of sensors for specific types of
protein modification. The recognition element is a judiciously designed molecule
that acts like a lock's "keyhole," fitting only a correctly sized "key" - the
right type of modification on a protein. Inserting the "key" into the "lock"
generates a large optical signal, allowing simple and rapid detection of protein
modifications. The work targets improved understanding of protein modification,
thereby advancing strategies for controlling processes in living systems. In
addition to these technical impacts, the work is enhancing the diversity of the
scientific workforce via engagement of both graduate and undergraduate students,
especially those from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Zhong
group is developing synthetic receptor-based arrays for detection of post-
translational modifications (PTMs) in proteins. Selective host-guest
interactions between modified side chains and synthetic receptors (cavitands)
allows highly selective recognition of modified proteins, and can discriminate
for example among proteins with different methylation levels, sites, and
numbers. The technique will be valuable in rapid profiling of methylation
alterations in cells under external stimulation and in situ monitoring of PTM
enzyme activities. Initial targets include hosts that bind selectively to
trimethylated lysine, with an aim of enabling array-based PTM profiling.
Cavitand hosts are being synthesized and used in fluorescence displacement
assays (FDA) for selective detection and discrimination of PTM peptides.
Characterization of cavitand-guest interactions will enhance understanding of
how cavitand structures affect binding strength and kinetics, supporting new
designs with improved FDA performance. In a specific model application,
cavitand-based arrays are being applied to study histone methylation in
stimulated cells. It is expected that the highly selective and versatile PTM
sensing arrays enabled by cavitands can greatly improve the detection of
peptides carrying modifications, and enhance the efficacy of PTM study.
Discovery of hosts with high affinity and selectivity for diverse PTM types will
boost understanding of PTM functions.