* 1707401
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Live Imaging of the C.elegans Connectome
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Oliver Hobert, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,097,912.00

The human brain is composed of billions of interconnected neurons that form
highly complex neuronal circuits that process information and encode behavior.
Many questions about these interconnected networks are unanswered: How variable
are they from individual to individual, how do they change throughout life, how
does the environment impact on them, and what are the genetic blueprints that
generate these networks. Disruptions of the genetic blueprints that build
neuronal networks are the likely cause of many human neurological diseases. In
order to study neuronal networks in the brain, it is of paramount interest to
easily visualize the patterns of connectivity of neurons, ideally in the context
of live organisms. The cellular complexity of brains prevents such types of
studies in complex organisms, and this project therefore uses a simple
invertebrate model system, the nematode C.elegans, to visualize all the major
neuronal connections of its simple nervous system. Previous studies have amply
demonstrated that mechanisms of brain patterning discovered in C.elegans are
conserved in other animals as well. The investigators develop and use cutting-
edge fluorescent reporter technology, combined with microscopical and computer
vision technology to achieve this goal. The project's construction of animals in
which most neuronal connections are fluorescently labeled provides a major
resource. This resource is made available to the large field of C.elegans
researchers who with that resource can study the many questions that relate to
circuits in the brain, including the decoding of the nervous system's genetic
blueprint. In addition, the project includes cutting-edge, interdisciplinary
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds, as well as postdoctoral fellows.

The project entails the development and dissemination of tools that empower the
C.elegans neuroscience community to study the connectome of the nematode
C.elegans. In the first phase, the technology hub develops two sets of tools:
One group uses fluorescent-based reporter technology (GRASP and iBlinc as
potential alternative) to generate a large number of transgenic C.elegans
strains in which the main "edges" of the entire wiring diagram (i.e., pairwise
combinations of neurons) are visualized. As part of this project, this resource
is distributed throughout the C.elegans community to enable labs with long-
standing interest in various aspects of neuronal development and function and
with a focus on specific neuronal circuits and behaviors to use these synaptic
labels to examine variability, development, and plasticity of these connections.
In parallel, the other group develops microfluidic-based and automated image
analysis technologies to precisely quantify the structure of the connectome and
to enable high-throughput screening of worm population for defects in synaptic
wiring. Computer vision and machine learning is used to score automatically
disruptions of synaptic wiring to detect subtle changes in wiring. This
NeuroTechnology Hub award is part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's
Understanding the Brain activities.