* 1707489
* RUI:  Calculation of Higher Order Corrections to Positronium Energy Levels
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Gregory Adkins, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Positronium is a bound state of an electron and its antiparticle, a positron. As
such, it forms an "exotic atom," similar in many ways to the traditional simple
atoms such as hydrogen and helium, but different because of its unique
composition and because of its tendency to annihilate, transforming into pure
electromagnetic energy in the form of high-energy photons. Many properties of
positronium, such as energy levels and lifetimes, are accessible to high-
precision experiments. Positronium properties can also be calculated
theoretically to high precision using the methods of bound-state Quantum
Electrodynamics (QED) because strong and weak interaction effects are negligible
in this system. Consequently, positronium is an ideal system for testing the
limits of electromagnetic bound state physics. The activities involved in
calculating the positronium energy levels will be of great educational value to
the undergraduate students involved as collaborators in this work. The students
will learn theoretical methods and techniques of calculation more advanced than
those usually encountered at the undergraduate level. They will gain valuable
experience by doing the research, by presenting their results at professional
meetings, and by publishing their work as co-authors in research
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Positronium energy levels of low-lying states
(n=1 and n=2) have been measured with uncertainties of roughly one MHz, and
experiments are presently being developed to significantly reduce some of these
uncertainties. The 2S-1S transition is of particular interest because it has the
smallest natural linewidth and thus the greatest potential for improvement. The
ground state hyperfine splitting is of interest because the most precise
experimental results are not in accord with current theory. These transition
energies and more will be calculated to a new level of precision. The
calculations will be based on the low-energy effective quantum field theory
NRQED (Non-Relativistic QED), which provides a natural and efficient framework
for the study of non-relativistic atoms.