* 1707008
* Photolytic Nanoconjugate Fuel Generators
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kaan Kalkan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,746.00

The project is focused on designing a photoelectrochemical device that can
potentially be scaled up to the size of 'photolysis farms' capable of the
commercial-scale production of hydrogen obtained from the photocatalytic
splitting of water. The produced hydrogen (H2) could be used directly for energy
generation (i.e. solar fuel) or as a feedstock for the generation of sustainable
liquid fuels or chemicals. The immediate focus of the project would be on both
understanding the working mechanism and optimizing the efficiency of so-called
nanoconjugate devices based on semiconductor nanowires decorated with metal
nanoparticles. The project will involve collaboration with a commercial partner
for student training and investigation of early stage manufacturing feasibility,
and will also incorporate several outreach activities on nanoparticles and
microscopy for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is built on the
hypothesis that a combination of electronic, electrostatic, and plasmonic
mechanisms can be achieved by utilizing the nanoconjugate device structure with
appropriate materials. Preliminary results from the investigator's laboratory
have already demonstrated 5.6% light-to-hydrogen efficiency with a H2 to O2
ratio of 2.0 under 445 nm radiation using sol-gel prepared vanadium oxyhydrate
nanowires coated with nanogold. The unique architecture of the nanowire-
nanoparticle device enables a novel combination of effects and mechanisms that
can potentially increase photolytic efficiency. Mechanisms to be investigated
are: 1) self-alignment of electron energy levels due to ultralow nanoparticle
capacitance, 2) surface-charge-enabled alignment of energy levels with redox
levels, and 3) direct plasmon-driven reduction by chemical interface damping.
The elucidation of these enabling mechanisms should potentially impact other
novel photocatalyst development efforts and allow for a larger set of
photocatalytic materials and structures capable of photolysis. The project will
utilize and investigate V2O5-H2O as the photoanode, which is essentially a
little-known semiconductor. The system to be investigated has been chosen with
scale-up in mind, as the photolytic nanoconjugates can be manufactured at low
cost in the form of an aqueous suspension, which subsequently can be filled in
transparent enclosure panels and scaled up to a fuel farm. To this end, the
project will collaborate with InnoVital Systems, Inc. of Maryland to develop
student internships. Under the direction of the InnoVital engineers,
undergraduate engineering students will be engaged in designing a glass/plastic
enclosure for the nanodevice suspension that will serve as an advanced prototype
of the photolytic panel. Outreach activities will center on one-day summer camps
carried out in collaboration with Oklahoma WONDERtorium, where the children will
make nanoparticles with kits developed by the project team and examine their
nanoparticles using optical and electron microscopy. Additionally, the project
will engage underrepresented students in research through the Oklahoma Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Scholars Program (OK-LSAMP).