* 1707575
* Precision Contrast Interferometry with Ytterbium Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 563,996.00

This grant will support a project to sensitively measure the interaction between
light and matter. By monitoring the change in velocity for atoms due to
absorbing or emitting light, this team will measure a fundamental constant of
nature known as the fine structure constant. The experiments will be performed
with an atomic gas that is cooled to very low temperatures in the laboratory, at
which point it transforms into an exotic state called a Bose-Einstein condensate
(BEC). Like a laser beam, the BEC can be split into multiple parts and then
recombined, to make an interferometer for atoms. By observing BEC interference
fringes, this team will precisely measure the velocity change for atoms due to
absorbing or emitting light quanta (photons). The results will provide
information regarding possible refinements to the underlying theory of quantum
mechanics that describes this fundamental process. The students working on this
project will gain experience with lasers, electronics, and atomic physics
research. The students will also gain experience analyzing data, modeling
complex systems, and connecting experimental results with theory. This will form
good preparation for them to join the work force in academia and industry as
part of the next generation of scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The kinetic energy of an atom recoiling due to absorption of a single
photon will be precisely measured as a frequency. This will be done using the
contrast interferometry technique with a ytterbium BEC interferometer. This
recoil frequency, combined with other measurements, will be used to accurately
determine the fine structure constant, and to test the theory of quantum
electrodynamics (QED). The fine structure constant is ubiquitous in nature, and
QED theory extends across many sub-fields throughout physics. Improving the
accuracy with which the fine structure constant is known and the precision with
which QED is tested are both of fundamental importance. The contrast
interferometer utilizes pulsed optical standing waves to split, manipulate, and
recombine BECs. The interferometer signal is obtained by monitoring the contrast
of the resultant interference pattern via reflection of an optical traveling
wave. In addition to testing QED, this project will also advance BEC
preparation, manipulation, and probing methods.