* 1707563
* I-Corps: Mesh-Free Monte Carlo Methods for Integrated Simulation of Multi-Scale Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Hector Gutierrez, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project has its origins
in the use of Mesh-free Monte Carlo methods as a novel technology for simulation
of multi-physics, multi-scale systems. This project's mesh-free simulation
approach is applied to superconducting system design. The lack of engineering
tools for integrated analysis and design of superconducting coils, in particular
for complex phenomena such as superconducting quench, is a bottleneck that
hinders the development of reliable superconducting systems. This project
addresses the design and simulation of superconducting devices, enabling
reliable, computationally efficient modeling, simulation and analysis of complex
phenomena such as quench in full scale systems. Mesh-free modeling tools for
multi-physics analysis of multi-scale systems benefit applications where large
dimensions or multi-scale geometries makes meshing computationally
prohibitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves software tools
and simulation techniques for multi-physics simulation of multi-scale systems
based on mesh-free Monte Carlo methods. The approach enables the computationally
efficient simulation of coupled systems with multi-scale geometries where proper
meshing for conventional finite element methods becomes prohibitive. The project
enables a complete study of the potential commercialization of the software
tools and simulation techniques being developed, as well as an assessment of
technical areas and commercial applications which could benefit from the
proposed approach for simulation of multi-scale systems. The project could
enable simulation of multi-scale, multi-physics problems in a wide variety of
potential applications based on a novel approach: mesh-free floating random walk
Monte Carlo methods and may enable simulation of systems that are currently
intractable using conventional finite element tools.