* 1707691
* Quantum Dynamics with Cold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Forbes, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 240,000.00

This project will develop and provide publicly available computer codes and
documentation intended to assist in solving problems in quantum dynamics using
high-level programming languages and high-performance computers (HPC). These
resources will enable researchers to more effectively utilize the nation's
investment in HPC, advancing the pace of scientific discovery and innovation. Of
particular interest are applications of quantum dynamics to both ultracold atoms
and to nuclear astrophysics. For example, a theory of quantum hydrodynamics is
needed to properly describe recent experiments with confined ultracold gases and
could also lay the foundation for a resolution of the 40-year old mystery of
pulsar glitches, sudden increases in the spinning of neutron stars even though
they continually lose angular momentum. Both undergraduate and graduate students
will be trained with the analytical and high-performance computational skills to
succeed in their future pursuits in academia, at national laboratories, or in
industry. A superfluid explorer will be developed, enabling people to experience
the fascinating properties of our quantum universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
theoretical work will be applied to three types of cold-atom experiments at
Washington State University (WSU) and the University of Washington (UW). The
first are Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) with various interactions such as
induced spin-orbit coupling. Here, a variety of exotic phenomena will be
studied, including negative-mass hydrodynamics, and soliton dynamics. The
theoretical approach will be refined as required to incorporate the effects of
finite temperature and dissipation. The second class of applications is to
experiments with coupled superfluids which explore the physics of entrainment
and other superfluid interactions. Finally, the project will explore whether and
how experiments with fermionic superfluids can model the proton and neutron
superfluids in neutron stars. Understanding these quantum phenomena will
directly advance the field of cold atoms, unlocking potential applications in
quantum technology, such as improved sensing and quantum computing. The
underlying theory will also advance other fields, including condensed matter,
non-linear optics, nuclear theory, and nuclear astrophysics.