* 1707364
* Many-Body Dipole-Dipole Interactions in Atomic Ensembles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Hebin Li, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Many-body interactions play important roles in a variety of systems ranging from
simple atoms to complex biological molecules. Dipole-dipole interactions are
essential in protein formation and folding. The interactions can lead to
collective and emergent phenomena that cannot be understood by a simple
extrapolation of the microscopic laws of a few particles. The research supported
by this NSF award aims to gain an experimentally confirmed understanding of
many-body dipole-dipole interactions in atomic ensembles. This will be
accomplished by using an advanced laser spectroscopic technique that is uniquely
sensitive to many-body interactions in complex systems. The experimental results
will be compared to simulated results to help develop a theoretical model. This
research will contribute to the general understanding of many-body physics in an
ensemble of interacting particles, which has profound implications in fields
ranging from optical atomic clocks to photosynthesis. The experimental and
theoretical approaches developed in the project can be used to study other many-
body systems as well. This project also includes efforts to enhance the capacity
to train students at Florida International University, a minority serving
institution, in science and technology, to strengthen the education of
underrepresented groups in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to quantitatively understand many-body dipole-dipole
interactions in atomic ensembles, at densities varying across nine orders of
magnitude, and both with or without the presence of thermal motion. The effects
of dipole-dipole interactions will be probed by double-quantum two-dimensional
coherent spectroscopy, which provides a sensitive and background-free detection
of many-body dipole-dipole interactions. The temporal resolution of femtosecond
laser pulses allows one to probe the dynamics during the transient processes of
interactions. The experiments will be performed on a hot atomic rubidium vapor
and also with cold rubidium atoms. The hot atomic vapor provides a broad range
of mean interatomic separations and many-body dynamics associated with thermal
motion. In comparison, the cold atoms provide an environment in the virtual
absence of thermal motion. Comparing the results from cold and hot atoms enables
this group to study the effects of thermal motion on the dipole-dipole
interactions. The resulting structural and dynamic information will contribute
to the development of a theoretical model based on the exciton formalism that
accounts for the dipole-dipole interactions in an atomic ensemble. The study
will determine fundamental parameters such as dipole-dipole interaction
strength, effective interaction range, the number of interacting atoms,
excitation-induced many-body states, effects of a buffer gas, and effects of
thermal motion of the dipole-dipole interaction in atomic ensembles.