* 1707971
* Experimental Physics Research Program at Columbia University/Nevis Laboratories
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Michael Shaevitz, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2021
* USD 3,750,000.00

A principal goal of experiments in modern particle physics is to uncover and
elucidate new physics beyond the Standard Model. Possible approaches include the
study of physics processes at the highest available collision energies at
accelerators or through studies of the very rare interactions of neutrinos. The
Columbia Particle Physics group is engaged in both approaches, which are
relevant to the understanding of the Universe at its most fundamental level in
the fleeting fraction of a second just after the Big Bang, and to why we see the
Universe as we do now. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the highest available collision
energies, the objectives of the experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (the
LHC) at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland is to understand the nature of the recently
discovered Higgs Boson, and to uncover new physics beyond the Standard Model.  
The next three years will witness the growth of the LHC physics program through
ever higher interaction rates and ever increasing data sets at collision
energies of 13-14 TeV. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Columbia team is one of the
leading groups participating in the ATLAS experiment at CERN. Their
contributions include extensive involvement in the scientific and technical
management of the experiment, substantial contributions to the maintenance and
operations and upgrades of the key detectors for energy measurement, in
particular the Liquid Argon Calorimetry. In the search for new physics, the
group is focusing on searches for evidence of supersymmetry and for exotic
particles of very high masses in a broad range of production and decay
processes, involving vector bosons and the Higgs boson, and relying on the
recognition of charged leptons, jets and missing
energy.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another major question is what happened to all
the antimatter in the universe. Fundamental symmetry arguments suggest that
matter and antimatter should have been produced in equal abundance in the early
universe, but now all we see is matter. A key to unraveling this mystery may lie
with elusive particles called neutrinos, which are abundant in the universe, but
which barely interact with matter. There are three of these particles known. Why
three? And what are the masses of these particles? Are there more? Experiments
are underway to understand these phenomena and to see if more than three
neutrinos exist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Columbia group is involved with the
experiment MicroBooNE, which is now online at Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory in Batavia, Illinois, and a new detector in preparation, called SBND.
This program will address several of the key questions in neutrino physics,
including the search of additional neutrinos as well as advancement of an
important new technology for the field, the Liquid Argon Time Projection
Chamber. The Columbia group has major responsibilities for the readout
electronics of the Time Projection Chamber and triggering system, detector
simulation, data acquisition software, and physics analysis for MicroBooNE, and
is advancing these efforts to the future Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment
(DUNE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A principal focus of the Columbia
group over many years and strengthened with this award is the training of
undergraduate students through their highly successful Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) summer program. This program has demonstrated a commitment
to the inclusion of under-represented groups, including many students from
undergraduate-only institutions. And follow-up tracking has shown an impressive
rate of success for graduates of their programs to pursue advanced degrees in
STEM fields.