* 1707970
* Collaborative Research: Optically created metastable mesoscopic nuclear spin states: Glassy transitions and properties beyond electron decoherence in quantum dots
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Lu Sham, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Quantum dots, formed from semiconductors such as
Indium Arsenide, act as artificial atoms and have seen widespread use in many
current optoelectronic devices. However, their use for applications in quantum
computing, communication and sensing has been limited by the relatively short
lifetime of the excited state of the electrons in these dots. Recently, our team
have discovered that polarizing the nuclear spins in these dots leads to a
surprising and dramatic increase of the lifetime by many orders of magnitude
opening the potential for using quantum dots in the next generation of quantum
electronics. This project will explore the fundamental physics behind this
dramatic increase in lifetime both experimentally and theoretically. The
research will support the development of highly trained people, (including
students from the NSF-Imes-Moore Bridge-program in Applied Physics) critical to
the infrastructure of nano and quantum technology, at all levels of higher
education including postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students. The results
of this research will not only open up potential applications in quantum
electronics but could provide advances in areas such as magnetic resonance
imaging and the development of a path for transitioning from the Moore's law to
the new paradigm of a post CMOS era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In previous NSF supported work, we discovered dynamic nuclear
spin quieting (DNSQ) in single and coupled InGaAs quantum dots (QDs) produced by
optical coupling to the e-h spin that is accompanied by clear dynamical nuclear
spin polarization (DNSP). The results show both local and nonlocal creation of
mesoscopic metastable nuclear spin configurations characterized by DNSQ. The
effect is long lived (&gt;1sec) and reflects creation and locking of a
metastable mesoscopic nuclear state involving &gt;10,000 nuclei. The underlying
physics is not clear but is obviously mediated by a nonlinear coupling between
the optically driven e-h spins and the nuclei of the quantum dot through
hyperfine coupling. The large exciton Bohr radius results in interaction of the
electron-hole spins with nearly all the nuclei in the dot, unlike a simple atom
with one nucleus. The results are highly significant for application of QDs or
other structures to spin based quantum electro-photonic devices, such as quantum
repeaters (e -spin serves as memory and the spontaneously emitted photons serves
as the flying qubit) and for the potential use of the nuclear ensemble states
for quantum metrology, classical memory and perhaps even improving MRIs. The
importance of this research is rooted in that locked DNSQ increases e- -spin
coherence time by more than three orders of magnitude , without dynamic
intervention. The theoretical studies have, thus far, not provided a unified
picture consistent with all the data, and the nature of the quiescent nuclear
spin ensemble states remains a mystery. The proposed theory focuses on the
properties of the quiescent nuclear states vis-a-vis the thermal nuclear states
under optical control of the e-spin. Spin glass concepts and methodology will be
adapted to the mesoscopic nature and the spin dynamics of the ensemble, to
formulate a detailed theory for a comprehensive understanding of the physics.
The results could lead to advances in electronic-photonic information processing
on a long time scale, such as a quantum repeater or measurement processes. The
nuclear quiescent state, analogous to spin glass, may also provide a laboratory
for classical computer science and beyond. The proposal has two scientific
objectives: 1. Measure and theoretically understand the dynamics of the
interaction between the two distinct quantum systems (the nuclear ensemble spin
and the e- -spin) leading the various mesoscopic metastable DNSQ states. This
includes determining both longitudinal and transverse relaxation rates of the
nuclear spin in these states including determining the level of quantum
coherence in the nuclear spin states following switching; and 2. Measure and
theoretically predict the e- -spin decoherence in single and coupled QDs as a
function of the various mesoscopic nuclear states. This work will result in
improving the understanding of the interaction between a non-equilibrium
microscopic quantum system (a few e-- spins) and a mesoscopic quantum system
(number of nuclear spins &lt; thermodynamic limit). The complexity of the
mechanism of optical control of the e --spin states stems from the back action
of the resulting modified mesoscopic nuclear state on the optically controlled
e- -spins . For quantum metrology, this is a paradigm system for measuring the
properties of the mesoscopic system (nuclear) via the electron states or as a
quantum measurement of the correlated electron systems under the influence of
the nuclear ensembles as controllable environment. For potential applications,
the broad bandwidth (THz) of the quantum physics enables high-speed optical
control without connectivity problems and operates at 4-10 K.