* 1707576
* Interacting atoms in optical lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 510,000.00

This project will study the quantum mechanical behavior of atoms in one
dimensional (1D) gases. This is important because 1D gases are one of the few
many-body systems for which exact quantitative predictions can be made about
their quantum states. In comparison, most other quantum many-body systems are
not "integrable," and therefore are much more challenging to describe. For this
project, ultracold atoms will be prepared and then confined in 1D traps using
laser light. The atomic momentum distributions in these 1D gases will be
precisely measured under a variety of conditions, and this will serve as a
benchmark test for advanced theoretical approaches that are being developed to
understand many-body quantum systems. This project is also designed to observe
quantum many-body phenomena such as "dynamical fermionization" and
"prethermalization." These experiments will motivate new theoretical approaches
that will also be relevant for nuclear and condensed matter physics, and will
lead to a deeper understanding of quantum many-body phenomena such as
superconductivity, magnetism, and quantum information processing. Students
working on this project will learn advanced atomic physics research techniques
that will prepare them for careers in academia or high tech
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will work on three sets of measurements
related to the momentum distributions of 1D Bose gases, using a technique that
is dramatically more precise than previous approaches. The first set of
measurements will be of equilibrium momentum distributions with intermediately
and strongly coupled gases, for a range of temperatures. These will be compared
to new theoretical calculations. Any disagreement would indicate that the 1D
gases do not have a thermal distribution, despite their extremely gentle
preparation starting from equilibrated 3D gases. The second set of measurements
will entail the first observation of dynamical fermionization, where the
initially bosonic momentum distribution of a Tonks-Girardeau gas transforms into
that of a non-interacting Fermi gas, thus directly revealing the underlying
conserved quantities in this system. The third set of measurements will measure
the early stages of prethermalization after a quantum quench. The quench will be
a Bragg scattering pulse, and the part of the ensuing evolution that is related
to the point contact interactions is much faster than typical evolution in a
trap. Comparisons with recently developed theory will be made. For the latter
two sets of the measurements it is beyond existing theoretical methods to
perform these dynamical calculations in the intermediate coupling regime. But
the investigators propose to perform the experiments there as well, thus setting
benchmarks for theorists to work toward.