* 1707272
* Self-Similar Theory of Electron Thermal Conduction in a Weakly Collisional Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Stanislav Boldyrev, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The solar wind is a flow of hot particles, mostly electrons and ions, streaming
from the Sun with the speed of millions of miles per hour. As the solar wind
expands, it is expected to cool. However, at large distances from the Sun, the
solar wind turns out to be not as cold as one would expect from the simple laws
of thermodynamics. It is currently not well understood what heats the solar
wind, since heating generally requires frequent collisions between the particles
and the solar wind is nearly collisionless. A similar problem arises in other
astrophysical and laboratory systems. This project will develop an efficient
method for describing heating and heat conduction in collisionless plasmas. It
will utilize a special symmetry, self-similarity, often observed in expanding
natural and laboratory plasmas. The outcomes of this research project will also
be instrumental to improving the state of the art in space weather modeling,
where accurate representations of the solar wind are important for correctly
propagating the impacts of the solar activity on the Earth's
magnetosphere.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The problem of electron heat conduction is
central for understanding energy transport in natural and laboratory plasmas.
Its general analytical solution is unknown, except for the Spitzer-Harm case
when the electron mean free path is significantly shorter than the scale of a
temperature gradient. Many natural plasmas, e.g., solar corona and solar wind,
intracluster medium, are weakly collisional, where the above condition is not
satisfied. A novel approach will be developed, which takes into account the fact
that the physical parameters such as temperature, density, and magnetic field in
such systems often decline as powers of the distance from the heat source. This
allows one to find self-similar solutions of the full kinetic equation, and to
construct the electron distribution function in a non-perturbative fashion.