* 1707432
* Astrophysics with Very-High-Energy Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* David Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2021
* USD 570,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. This award supports scientists at the
University of California Santa Cruz in carrying out gamma-ray astrophysics
research using an operating observatory and participating in the planning and
development of the next generation gamma-ray observatory. The Very Energetic
Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona,
is designed to perform high-sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic
and extragalactic sources. The University of California Santa Cruz group will
work on collection, analysis and interpretation of scientific data from highly-
energetic extragalactic sources. The group will also play a leadership role in
the development of the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), an international gamma-
ray observatory currently in planning stages. The group plans to develop a
citizen science program to engage the public in exploring and analyzing the data
from VERITAS. They will also continue to engage in a broad range of efforts in
education and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of California
Santa Cruz group will use VERITAS to explore the extreme behavior of two
powerful classes of gamma-ray sources, active galactic nuclei (AGN) and gamma-
ray bursts (GRB). Measurements of the very high energy gamma-ray emission from
AGN probe properties of the AGN jets and provide important information about the
acceleration processes. These data will also be used to study gamma-ray
absorption by collisions with the extragalactic background light to test the
cosmological model predictions for star formation and galaxy evolution. Using
VERITAS data, the group will study GRB mechanisms and the role they play in high
energy astrophysical phenomena. The group will continue efforts to develop the
next-generation Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA) and will serve in leadership
roles within the collaboration.