* 1707792
* Theoretical Investigation of Low-Energy Positron and Positronium Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 90,992.00

Vortices (or whirlpools) are familiar properties of fluids and gases and so are
important in a number of fields of science and engineering, including fluid
dynamics, astrophysics, condensed-matter physics and non-linear dynamics. They
are examples of collective phenomena in stirred systems, and have even been
observed in the ultracold atomic gases known as Bose-Einstein condensates.
Surprisingly, vortices have recently been discovered in the quantum mechanical
wave function describing elementary electron-atom collision processes, where
their appearance was correlated to deep minima in observed scattering cross
sections. The situation is still somewhat murky, since elementary collision
processes seem to have little in common with the much more complex phenomena
associated with the collective properties of liquids and gases. This project
hopes to shed light on this mystery by searching for vortex formation in
collision processes involving positrons rather than electrons. Positrons are
antiparticles of electrons, carry positive charge, and so interact very
differently with matter. Sensitivity to the charge of an incident projectile
will therefore be tested through direct theoretical calculations, hopefully
clarifying the underlying mechanism of vortex formation in these processes.
Since positrons are now commonly used in a variety of fields and applications,
ranging from condensed matter physics to positron-emission tomography (PET
scans), the relevance of vortex formation to elementary collision processes
involving positrons could have wide-ranging impact. The work will engage
graduate students in challenging research projects involving elementary quantum
mechanical collision processes.

Recently, researchers have demonstrated that vortex formation is responsible for
deep minima observed in the experimental measurements of the triply differential
cross sections for electron-impact ionization of helium atoms. Vortices have
also been studied for other ionization processes in atomic collisions. The first
goal of this project is to analyze vortex formation in positron-hydrogen and
positron-helium collisions, to see whether or not vortices affect the rate of
positronium formation. The PI will guide a graduate student through a detailed
analysis of positronium formation in these processes using Kohn-type variational
methods, multichannel effective range theories and the Born approximation. The
goal is to determine basic components necessary to obtain a zero in the
positronium formation scattering amplitude, the corresponding deep minimum in
the differential cross section and the vortex in the velocity field that
corresponds to the scattering amplitude. A second project is to study
positronium-positronium scattering, which is of interest since it is a
fundamental four-body Coulomb problem, and in support of experimental efforts to
make a positronium Bose-Einstein Condensate. The PI will train a graduate
student to use Kohn-type variational methods and the Born approximation with
exchange for this analysis. A goal is to obtain benchmark results for ground-
state positronium - ground-state positronium scattering using Kohn-type
variational methods.