* 1707117
* Developing Quantitative Modeling Tools for Design and Performance Assessment of Integrated Water Management Systems: a U.S.-China Joint Research Project
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Qilin Li, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop quantitative models and associated
databases to characterize and evaluate water infrastructure systems of different
configurations, and enable data-supported decision making tools for design and
operation of integrated water management (IWM) systems. The research will
address a critical technical barrier in adopting IWM systems by establishing a
set of quantitative models for design and assessment of water infrastructure
systems of various configurations over their lifetimes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will 1) develop statistical
network topology models at low computational cost to characterize and predict
hydraulic performance of water infrastructure networks with different
configurations; 2) Investigate the interdependency and dynamic interactions
among water supply, storm water and wastewater networks in an IWM paradigm; 3)
Assess potential human and ecosystem health risks based on the types of
alternative water sources, reclamation technologies, and end uses; 4) Evaluate
the suitability and sustainability of existing and emerging water treatment
technologies for IWM systems of different scales using a life cycle and systems
approach. The research plan builds upon complementary expertise of 8
participating researchers at several partner institutions, and leverages
multiple ongoing projects and other resources. The highly collaborative
education and outreach plan includes: 1) development of web-based course modules
that will initially be used in existing courses, and integrated into a complete
web-based course to be taught at all partner institutions; 2) means for sharing
data among research labs and with the scientific community as well as the
general public; 3) training for utility operators, urban water planners, and
high school science teachers; 4) engaging high school students from schools
serving large population of under-represented minorities in research; 5) a
faculty and student exchange program between U.S. and Chinese partner
institutions. Implementation of the plan will train the next generation of water
professionals through a highly multi-disciplinary, cross-culture program, and
equip them with technical tools enabling urban water sustainability for cities
of different size, and economic development status. This award is co-funded by
the CBET Environmental Sustainability program and the Office of International
Science and Engineering.