* 1707521
* GEM: Experimental Identification of Plasma Wave Modes in Vicinity of Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) Vortices and in Plasma 'Mixing' Regions in Low Latitude Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Katariina Nykyri, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 309,761.00

This project focuses on understanding the dynamics of the boundary between the
solar wind and the Earth's magnetic field. The interactions between
electromagnetic waves and charged particles that result in heating of the
particles is a universal process, but the near-Earth space is currently the only
plasma physics laboratory where the physics can be studied with in-situ
measurements in naturally existing scales. Examining this problem in the
magnetosphere will provide insight into the solar coronal heating problem. This
can benefit the larger space- and astrophysics community beyond the immediate
field of magnetospheric physics. The PI is a tenured female physics professor
and the project will fund and involve ERAU undergraduate students in summer
research program and fund a female Ph.D student, for 3 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to enhance understanding of the origin of the
cross-scale non-adiabatic ion and electron heating at the Low Latitude Boundary
Layer (LLBL) from magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) to ion to electron scales, plasma
waves will be identified above ion cyclotron frequency extending to electron
scales. These will be examined during 'mixed' intervals with and without
simultaneous Kelvin Helmholtz (KH) activity, and study the possible free sources
of energy in particle distributions, and in microscopic electron and ion
velocity gradients that can for the first time be resolved with the data from
Magnetosphere Multi-Scale (MMS) mission. The objectives of this proposal are to
address what the observed higher frequency waves in the LLBL are, what their
characteristics and relation to ambient plasma conditions are, and what their
role is in ion and electron heating. While the proposed work addresses the
micro-scale physics, which is currently neglected in global MHD codes, it will
help understand the interdependence between fluid scale KH and kinetic scale
waves as well as how these kinetic scale waves modify the ambient plasma
properties. The ambient plasma properties are crucial in determining the
reconnection efficiency and solar wind-magnetosphere coupling. The study is
therefore highly relevant for understanding the physics that needs to be taken
into account for developing better global space weather and magnetospheric
models.