* 1707876
* Collaborative Research: LSC Center for Coatings Research
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Stefan Ballmer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Coles
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,969.00

The LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) Center for Coatings Research (CCR),
funded by the NSF and with planned co-funding by the Gordon and Betty Moore
Foundation, seeks to extend the reach of the next generation of gravitational
wave detectors by addressing the dominant noise source limiting their
performance, thermal noise in the interferometer mirrors. This noise reduces the
number of observable gravitational wave signals from astronomical sources. It
arises from thermal excitation of the vibrational modes of the mirrors in the
LIGO detector optics. The effect of these excitations is reduced as the
mechanical quality factor (Q) of the mirrors is increased. Since the Q of the
mirrors is limited by the reflective coatings deposited on their surfaces, lower
noise requires development of better coatings. The CCR combines groups from 10
institutions in the US working on computational modeling of amorphous materials,
deposition of coatings, and characterization of their atomic structure and
macroscopic properties. These components are often performed by three diverse
communities that work in relative isolation from each other. The strength of the
CCR and its promise of accelerating discoveries arises from close integration of
these three communities focused on a unified research goal. Coating thermal
noise is also a limiting factor in the fields of precision timing, quantum
information, low noise interferometry, and precision measurements like the
search for deviations in the gravitational inverse-square law. Coatings
improving on the state of the art in mechanical and optical properties developed
under this program would be applicable to these communities as well. On broader
impacts in education, the mixture of undergraduate institutions with elite
graduate programs provides research opportunities at all education levels and
establishes clear avenues of advancement for students who wish to pursue a
career within the physical sciences. In addition, the CCR has a strong
commitment to the advancement of women and underrepresented minorities; and will
also continue its participants' activities in issues of education and public
outreach through all major channels of public and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The A+ LIGO detector, planned for 2021, will reduce
quantum noise with squeezed light injection, leaving thermal noise dominant in
the mid-band of the detector. Reducing this noise source requires reducing the
mechanical dissipation in the mirror coatings on the test masses. The goal of
this project is to develop mirror coatings consistent with A+ LIGO's mechanical
and optical requirements. Meeting this goal requires solution of a longstanding
problem in the physics of amorphous materials: the nature and control of the
low-energy excitations in amorphous oxides. On a longer time scale, developing
mirror coatings for the cryogenic LIGO Voyager detector broadens the
possibilities to include amorphous or crystalline semiconductors. The primary
research focus is to find conditions under which amorphous metal-oxide coatings
can be deposited as "ultrastable glasses", which have a low density of the
structural motifs that form two-level systems, the source of elastic
dissipation. A second research track seeks methods to stabilize coatings against
crystallization during high temperature annealing, another method known to
reduce room temperature elastic losses. For the longer term research towards
LIGO Voyager applications, the group will investigate non-oxide coatings such as
single-crystal semiconductors AlGaAs and AlGaP, which have shown low mechanical
loss for small geometries but whose scale up to the size of LIGO optics is
challenging; and also amorphous silicon and silicon nitride, which have
attractive mechanical properties but whose optical properties must be improved.