* 1707093
* Plant-Engineered Nanomaterial interactions: Induced Physiological Reprogramming of Innate Immunity and Prolific Growth in Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Achintya Bezbaruah, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 389,374.00

The findings from this project will fill knowledge gaps in the understanding of
how engineered nanomaterials (ENMs), which are characterized by small size
(dimensions smaller than 100 nanometers) and highly reactive surface areas,
interact with plants affecting their development and growth, thus could alter
ecosystems. The goal of this project is to develop nanomaterials which can
positively enhance plant growth, disease resistance, and crop yields with no or
minimal impacts on the environment. Use of crops (e.g., barley) for nanoparticle
production that can be used in agriculture to deliver nutrients and pesticides
will provide farmers with better agronomic tools for more efficient production
with less cost inputs. The research findings will address some of the
engineering grand challenges (nitrogen cycling, better medicine, and clean
water) as the ENMs developed here can also be used in environmental clean-up and
drug delivery. ENMs and plant-borne polyphenols are extensively used in medical
science and the proposed research will contribute to better delivery and
curative materials in the long run. Two graduate students and one undergraduate
student will be trained in this interdisciplinary project. The outreach programs
proposed in rural North Dakota schools, with a focus on reaching female
students, will broaden these students' participation in science providing them
with an understanding of the relationship between science and technology as well
as help them relate these to the agri-based societal issues (e,g., pest control
in crops). The outreach programs are expected to inspire them to consider STEM
education and careers. This is of paramount importance for North Dakota as the
state is experiencing decline in STEM students. The educational materials
developed for high school chemistry and biology laboratory classes can be
adopted across the country and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goals
of this research proposal are to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying
ENM induced physiological reprogramming of plant innate immunity that results in
both enhanced and compromised resistance to microbial pathogens. Then use this
knowledge to engineer nanomaterial that retain beneficial attributes (i.e.,
fertilizer and fungicide delivery) while mitigating negative impacts. Within the
project period, this interdisciplinary (Engineering and Plant Pathology)
research will address issues immediately related to food security. The project
will elucidate the molecular mechanisms that determine the interactions of
nanomaterials with plants. This knowledge is pivotal in our ability to engineer
ENMs for agricultural uses that have positive attributes while evading unwanted
negative impacts on yield, quality, and agricultural- and natural-ecosystems.
The research proposed on nanomaterial synthesis will lead to the understanding
of the mechanism of ENM formation using plant extracts, specifically
polyphenols. It will further lead to the development of ENMs, which will have
multiple benefits to plants and other ecosystem components (e.g., rhizosphere
bacteria). Thus, the specific goals of the project are: (1) characterize the
variability of physiological reprogramming in response to different classes of
ENMs; (2) resolve the mechanisms by which ENMs interact with the extracellular
matrix and/or cell surface receptor complexes resulting in the perception of
non-self, eliciting or suppressing immunity responses; and (3) develop
nanomaterials utilizing plant-borne polyphenols and plant-based decorations to
maintain or enhance positive physiological responses while mitigating negative
responses.