* 1707753
* A practical upscaling of subsurface reactive transport
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Timothy Ginn, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ingrid Padilla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 337,220.00

Groundwater is an important drinking water source for many communities. Who
depends on groundwater for drinking water ? Three of four American cities, 95%
of the rural American population, and over half of all Americans. Wide scale
contamination of groundwater threatens many of these sources. The state-of-the-
science for cleaning up contaminated groundwater is mired in 1950s technology
because the pollutants and the flowing groundwaters in which they occur are out
of sight and very difficult to monitor. This makes it particularly difficult to
design so-called 'in situ' clean-up methods, that rely on injecting mixtures
into the subsurface to make chemical reactions underground that convert the
contaminants to non-toxic products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem to be
studied in this project is how groundwater clean-up happens underground. The
project will use a recently discovered method of tracking the moving front
between the contaminated ('plume') and the non-contaminated groundwater as a
basis for predicting the overall rate of chemical transformation in situ. This
new method is a recent invention from the theory of turbulence, a field that has
challenged human minds since the time of DaVinci, and it promises to provide a
much more accurate way of accounting the overall rate of clean-up, even when it
is difficult to know exactly the location of the contaminant plume. This project
includes both controlled experiments in the laboratory and field site testing to
complete the development of this method of designing groundwater clean-up. This
innovative and powerful approach does not require the site manager to know
exactly where the plume is, like other methods, but it only requires the total
surface area of the plume. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of
this research includes: development of new methods to help federal and state
agencies, cities, groundwater contamination responsible parties, and anyone
responsible for groundwater quality, to design and manage in situ groundwater
remediation strategies all over the United States. This project shares the work
with learning people at all levels from Kindergarten to College, in order to
achieve broad training goals. The project involves both undergraduate and
graduate students in interdisciplinary education, includes classes with
approximately 75 K-12 students as well as their teachers per year involved in
different aspects of engineering and environmental processes in soils through
one-day hands-on field trips to the UC Davis campus, and expansion of two UC
Davis graduate courses to include material learned in this project.