* 1707704
* The SuperCDMS Research Program at SMU
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jodi Cooley, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2021
* USD 611,703.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objective of
this award will be to create research opportunities for undergraduate students
at SMU and foster relationships with the North Texas community. Students and
postdoctoral scholars working on this project will receive strong scientific and
educational preparation in the techniques of low temperature physics, high
energy physics and astrophysics, simulation techniques and the analysis of data.
The North Texas community will benefit from access to faculty and students who
will serve as mentors in a variety of programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program at SMU is dedicated to advancing the SuperCDMS SNOLAB
experiment towards its goal of exploring the low mass (&lt; 10 GeV) dark matter
region with detectors made of Ge and Si crystals operated in both an ultra-
sensitive high-voltage mode and standard voltage mode. SuperCDMS must maintain a
controlled low background environment. During the next three years, a number of
critical milestones must be achieved to advance this program. This includes the
finalization of shield designs, background estimations, material selection,
experiment construction and analysis development. This project involves several
activities which will assist the collaboration towards meeting these milestones:
development of background models for use in advanced statistical analyses,
development of algorithms for calibration of detectors in the low energy region
and surface assay of materials and detector components with the SMU XIA alpha
particle counter for the SuperCDMS SNOLAB project.