* 1707502
* Study of magnetic Weyl semimetals in Heusler and half Heusler alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Jin Hu, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 355,000.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The advancement of modern electronics has
relied on the shrinking of transistor size. Recent progress in nanotechnology
has reduced the size of silicon transistors down to the order of 10 nanometers.
For such small transistors, other physical effects set in, limiting the
functionality of the transistors. Novel materials and device concepts are
required. Recently, a group of materials called Heusler alloys has been
theoretically predicted to be promising for applications. These materials are
ferromagnetic and expected to host a new type of massless fundamental particles
discovered recently in solid materials, called Weyl fermions. This effort will
provide experimental evidence for such exotic states in Heusler alloys. If
successful, it would not only advance the knowledge of topological Weyl
semimetals, but also likely lead to applications in spintronics. This project
also provides the principal investigators with an opportunity to strengthen the
education and training in field of discovery and growth of crystalline
materials, the importance of which was highlighted in the National Research
Council's report "Frontiers in Crystalline Matter".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Recent discoveries of
topological Weyl semimetals in non-magnetic materials such as TaAs-class
materials, photonic crystals and (W/Mo)Te2 have generated immense interest and
attracted worldwide attention. However, ferromagnetic Weyl semimetals have not
been experimentally realized yet, though they were predicted to have more
exciting properties, e.g. quantum anomalous Hall effect in monolayer
ferromagnetic Weyl semimetal. There have been considerable theoretical efforts
in predicting ferromagnetic Weyl semimetals and many candidate materials have
been proposed. The major objective of this proposed research is to
experimentally verify one recently-predicted candidate material system, i.e.
Heusler alloy Co2XZ(X=V, Zr, Nb, Ti, Mn, Hf; Z =Si, Ge, Sn, Ga and Al). The
principal investigators of this project grow single crystals of various members
of the Co2XZ family using the floating-zone, metal flux and chemical vapor
transport methods and seek transport and spectroscopic evidences of Weyl
fermions in these materials through magneto-transport, Hall effect, quantum
oscillation and photoemission spectroscopy experiments. In addition, the
principal investigators also study the Weyl states driven by a magnetic field in
several half Heusler alloy systems ReMX (Re= rare earth, MX=PdBi and PtSb). The
goal of this part of research is to find more field-driven Weyl semimetal
states, which could be used as a platform to verify the proposed mechanisms for
the field-driven Weyl state and study the dependence of Weyl state on spin-
orbital coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.