* 1707882
* Geometry and Arithmetic in Theoretical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Matilde Marcolli, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2022
* USD 166,067.00

This interdisciplinary research project combines methods and motivating
questions arising in theoretical physics with mathematical methods of number
theory and arithmetic geometry. Surprising connections between these two very
different areas of research have been observed in recent years: the principal
investigator has been involved in the study of these relationships between high-
energy physics and number theory, and she is currently developing new
mathematical approaches towards a better understanding of this mysterious
connection. The goal of this project is to extend this connection beyond its
original occurrence in quantum field theory to other areas, including
statistical physics, string theory, and quantum information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises several related investigations. The
Feynman diagram calculations used in high-energy physics to describe events in
particle physics experiments have a rich and not yet fully understood
mathematical structure, involving motives and periods of algebraic varieties,
which are objects of study in algebraic geometry, arithmetic geometry, and
number theory. This project aims to develop new techniques to improve
understanding of these arithmetic structures in quantum field theory. Similar
mathematical structures based on periods and motives of algebraic varieties
occur in models of modified gravity developed for applications to cosmology;
this new, unexpected development will be investigated in depth as part of the
research. The project will also study a framework for a discretization of the
"holographic correspondence" of string theory, between gravity on a bulk space
and conformal field theory on the boundary, built in number-theoretic terms
using p-adic numbers. The project aims to develop this p-adic form of the
AdS/CFT correspondence into a larger theoretical framework, with a view to
explaining in arithmetic terms the emergence of spacetime geometry from
information. The work will also continue development of another novel approach
to the relation between geometry and information, a construction of anyon models
of topological quantum computation based on special solutions (gravitational
instantons) of the Einstein equations, with singularities along two-dimensional
surfaces. The investigator is also pursuing new number theoretic approaches to
quantum statistical mechanics, where the properties of the quantum systems
correspond to properties of certain classes of zeta functions studied in
analytic number theory, and the equilibrium states of the systems capture Galois
symmetries. Finally, the investigator is developing a new approach to
distributed computing in theoretical computer science, based on the technique of
dynamical triangulations developed in physics as a model of quantum gravity.