* 1707260
* The Study of Radiative Effects on Turbulent High Energy Density Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2022
* Eric Johnsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 724,282.00

This project seeks to learn whether or not a turbulent state can be created and
understood in a laboratory high energy density plasma. High-energy-density (HED)
plasmas, a hot soup of electrons, ions and photons, exist throughout our
universe in an extreme state with high temperatures of over 10,000 K and very
high densities. HED astrophysical systems include accretion phenomena,
supernovae remnants, and supersonic outflows or jets, to name a few. On the
astrophysical scales, such as in supernovae, HED plasma systems can be thousands
of miles in size. In the laboratory, in a fusion experiment for example, an HED
plasma can be one tenth of a centimeter. This study will investigate the impacts
of the strong radiation carried by photons in a laboratory-sized HED plasma on
the properties of complex fluid-like turbulence typical of plasmas at lower
pressures and densities. Better understanding of this fundamental behavior in
laboratory-sized plasmas can inform understanding of HED plasmas in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this work is to investigate the effect of
radiation on late-time, multi-mode hydrodynamics of an HED plasma using an
integrated approach combining theory, computation and experiments. To do so,
first, a late-time, hydrodynamically unstable system will be created and
observed. This will be accomplished by measuring the dependence of the unstable
growth of density variations and multimode perturbations, using techniques
developed by the team for ongoing experiments at the National Ignition Facility
and the Omega Laser Facility. These measurements will enable validation of
multidimensional radiation hydrodynamics codes to design an experiment that
explores the effect of radiation on the evolution of late-time hydrodynamic
processes.