* 1707785
* Charge Fluctuations and Competing Orders in Strongly Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Dragana Popovic, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Electronic properties of many new materials
with potentially great technological importance are dominated by interactions
among charge carriers. Those correlations give rise to a variety of phenomena of
current interest in condensed matter physics, including the emergence of novel
states of matter. These effects are most pronounced near transitions between
different phases - conductor to insulator, or superconductor to normal - that
can be tuned by an external parameter, like magnetic or electric field. The
underlying quantum nature of those transitions contributes to the complexity of
the observed behaviors. This research addresses fundamental questions about the
nature and the dynamics of several charge-ordered states in the presence of
other, competing phases, especially in the vicinity of quantum phase
transitions. Most of the experiments involve measurements of charge transport,
including various time-dependent protocols, using either electric or extremely
high magnetic fields to tune through the phase transitions in two-dimensional
crystals and high-temperature superconductor materials. A key component of the
project is education and training of a diverse group of young researchers for
future careers in academia, national laboratories, and industry. It also
incorporates various activities to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Many
unusual properties of strongly correlated materials have been attributed to the
proximity of quantum critical points, where different types of orders compete
and coexist, and may even give rise to novel phases. The role of collective
fluctuations near quantum critical points is thus increasingly recognized as one
of the key questions in the physics of strongly correlated systems. Even though
fluctuations of various charge-ordered states have been of particular interest,
e.g. to clarify their relationship with high-temperature superconductivity in
cuprates, there have been few studies of charge, as opposed to spin, dynamics.
The aim of the project is to bridge this gap by using time-resolved charge
transport measurements on very long time scales, proven to be powerful probes of
out-of-equilibrium or glassy charge dynamics, quantum critical points, and
novel, intermediate phases. The research is designed to provide answers to
several fundamental questions in condensed matter physics concerning the
interplay of charge correlations and disorder, their relationship to high-
temperature superconductivity, and the nature of various ground states and
quantum critical points, such as the two-dimensional metal-insulator transition
and the magnetic-field-tuned superconducting transition in cuprates. This
knowledge is essential to the development of condensed matter subfields of
strongly correlated materials and out-of-equilibrium phenomena.