* 1707578
* Mechanisms of Equilibration in Block Copolymer Micelles
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2021
* USD 660,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Nanostructured materials that are
formed by a class of extremely large molecules, advanced plastics called block
copolymers, are of growing importance in a variety of emerging technologies.
Examples include drug-eluting coatings on stents to prevent rejection; viscosity
modifiers in synthetic motor oils to boost fuel economy; vehicles for delivery
of therapeutic agents to specific cells, such as cancers; membranes to enable
lighter weight, non-flammable lithium batteries. In all of these applications,
and many more, the nanostructure is created through the "bottom-up" process of
self-assembly, whereby the molecules are carefully designed to produce the
intended structure. However, a fundamental problem of widespread importance is
to understand the process of self-assembly itself. In particular, it is
essential to know whether the resulting nanostructure is the most favorable,
equilibrium one, or whether in fact the system has become structure-trapped in a
so-called "metastable" state. With this knowledge, it will be possible to tailor
a commercial process to produce the most useful nanostructure, reliably and
reproducibly, in the shortest possible time. Graduate students trained in this
project will acquire a broad suite of skills in chemical synthesis and materials
characterization. They will also have extensive opportunities to present
technical talks and posters to external audiences, as well as to mentor talented
undergraduates. High school students from the greater Twin Cities, particularly
women and underrepresented minorities, will be exposed to polymer science
through Polymer Day: You Make It, You Break It, a hands-on component of a
broader Discover STEM week-long summer camp. A new version, American Indian
Materials Week, will be developed, to serve to a drastically underrepresented
group in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; It is the overarching goal of this proposal to
elucidate the molecular-level mechanisms by which block copolymer nanostructures
achieve equilibrium. By focusing primarily on solution assemblies, i.e.,
micelles, the molecular factors that dictate the barriers to single chain
exchange will be quantified, and then collective motions, such as fusion or
fragmentation, will be addressed. The cornerstone of the approach is time-
resolved small-angle neutron scattering, which provides an unrivaled,
quantitative measure of chain exchange kinetics. Collective motions will require
additional tools, such as fluorescence. Structural characterization by small-
angle X-ray scattering, dynamic light scattering, and cryogenic transmission
electron microscopy will also be important. The use of ionic liquid solvents
brings multiple advantages, including the ability to tune thermodynamic
interactions precisely, the relative ease of designing both UCST and LCST
systems, and the remarkably broad accessible temperature range. The research
will aim to answer eight questions: (i) What is the functional dependence of
chain exchange barriers on quality. (ii) What is the functional dependence on
corona block length? (iii) What is the relationship between chain exchange and
the relaxation time of an analogous triblock gel? (iv) How does exchange depend
on micelle morphology? (v) What factors control the rates of micelle
fragmentation and fusion? (vi) How do micelles equilibrate with respect to
aggregation number? (vii) How do mixtures of different micelles equilibrate?
(viii) How do these barriers evolve with concentration, from dilute systems to
melts?