* 1707377
* Structures and Electric Fields in Laser-Induced Magnetized Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Eric Paradis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 558,293.00

Ionized gases, or plasmas, are ubiquitous in nature, for example in lightning,
the ionosphere, the sun, and many astrophysical environments. Plasmas are also
common in technologies such as gas discharge lamps, microfabrication processes,
fusion plasmas, combustion engines, and Hall thrusters. This project will
develop new methods based on atomic spectroscopy to monitor the electric and
magnetic fields inside of laser-generated laboratory plasmas. This is important
because plasma fields are notoriously difficult to monitor, especially for small
volumes of plasma, without influencing the particle distributions and fields.
The research will pioneer novel quantum technologies that provide non-invasive
plasma diagnostics. Shock fronts and ordered structures in plasmas will be
studied, as well as the effects of magnetic fields on plasma dynamics. Due to
the importance of plasmas in technology, plasma-physics research such as this
drives advances in economic competitiveness and prosperity, national defense,
space exploration, and communications. It also promotes progress in basic plasma
science and astrophysics. Students affiliated with this project will get
training that will help them prepare for careers in science, industry and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is on small-scale, magnetized, and
potentially strongly-coupled, plasmas obtained by laser-induced photo-ionization
of atomic vapors. Both trapped atoms and room-temperature alkali-atom vapor
cells will be used. As the photo-generated plasmas expand, they form shock
fronts, and in the case of sufficiently strong coupling between ions and
electrons the plasmas are expected to develop correlations with crystal-like
order. This project will pioneer novel ways to make position- and time-resolved
measurements of the expansion, the shock fronts, and the ordered structures in
plasmas. A diagnostic method will be developed using laser spectroscopy with
Rydberg atoms and electromagnetically-induced transparency (EIT). Electric
fields in the plasma will be mapped via Rydberg-EIT spectroscopy. Another
diagnostic will use micro-channel plates to count particles that are extracted
from the plasma after a variable delay. The use of field-sensitive Rydberg-state
tracer atoms embedded in the plasma as an all-optical diagnostic of macroscopic
and random (Holtsmark) electric fields in plasmas may impact other fields in
which magnetized plasmas occur, for instance in astrophysics, inertial-
confinement and magnetic-confinement fusion, z-pinch studies, and ion trapping.
Graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will be trained in
atomic and plasma physics research, research presentation, and peer instruction.
Students will also gain experience in the construction and operation of
scientific apparatus.