* 1707675
* A New Cryo-Ion Mobility Spectrometer for Studies of Biomolecule Hydration
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Russell, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 06/30/2021
* USD 455,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor David Russell at Texas A&amp;M University is developing
a novel instrument to study charged species surrounded by a few water molecules.
The instrument being developed is called cryo-ion mobility-mass spectrometer
(c-IM-MS) and it can determine the size and structure of the charge species by
monitoring how they fly in a long tube under an extreme low temperature.
Professor Russell's study are providing information to help understand the role
of water molecules in affecting protein structure and function, especially those
in direct contact with proteins. The gained knowledge will ultimately enable
better understanding of many important biological and chemical questions, such
as how antifreeze proteins protect plants and fish living in cold climates. The
students working on this project have the opportunity to gain experience for
both instrument building and biomolecule studies. The instrument design will be
shared with other scientists in the field so the to-be-developed approach can be
widely used to answer structural questions about how proteins and other
biomolecules behave in water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past decade, the
Russell laboratory has developed several prototype c-IM-MS instruments and
described proof-of-concept studies that illustrate the unparalleled capabilities
of the c-IM-MS instrument. The ability to experimentally observe structural
changes that are a function of the extent of hydration is critical for
establishing structure/function relationships. Such studies compliment the rapid
growth in computational studies of biomolecule structure/function relationships
---the ability to draw correlations between theoretical and experimental
results. In this project, Professor Russell focuses on the design of the next-
generation instrument by incorporating a number of recent technological
innovations to include studies of larger proteins and protein complexes. He
evaluates the overall instrument performance in terms of ion transmission and
effects on ion dehydration and benchmark instrument performance against existing
MS analyzers. The ultimate goals are to develop an instrument that is capable of
better understanding peptide-water interactions and answering questions such as
how does hydration affect peptide conformational preferences, and how does the
peptide alter the structure of water.