* 1707261
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Integrated Circuit Cracking (ICC) with Linked Tools for Diverse Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Karl Deisseroth, Stanford University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 9,200,000.00

This NeuroNex Technology Hub, based at Stanford and the Salk Institute in
California, will profoundly advance the understanding of the brain by developing
technologies to study the brain's structure and function. The investigators will
develop new approaches to understand how the individual components that make up
the nervous system operate during behavior, and indeed cause behavior. The team
will merge principles from genetics, physics, optics, engineering, and biology,
to build and disseminate methodology, instrumentation, and analytics that enable
targeting and control of individual kinds of brain cells, and the technology
developed will be taught via hands-on training available to the scientific
community. The outcome will be a broadly-applicable platform for discovering how
neural circuit activity gives rise to complex cognitions and behaviors in the
brain, which is essential to understand how the nervous stem fails to operate
well in neurological and psychiatric diseases. The structure of the NeuroNex
Training Core is designed to drive the participation of investigators across the
spectrum of background and demography, including junior investigators and
students as well as women and other underrepresented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of brain function at the cellular
network level is limited by the lack of integrative tools that (in the same
individual organism) can be used for molecularly defining neural circuit
components, for tracing local and global wiring of those same circuit
components, and for observing and controlling activity in those same circuit
components during precisely controlled and quantified behaviors. This
integration, or "datastream linking", will fundamentally advance knowledge but
is an enormous practical and intellectual challenge. This NeuroNex Technology
Hub will 1) address this challenge with molecular, genetic and optical tools
while also developing computational methods to discover the underlying natural
and causal structural and dynamical motifs; 2) do so in a vertically-linked
fashion so that all technologies built are mutually compatible in the same
nervous system at the same time; 3) do so in a horizontally-linked fashion, so
that the technologies built are suitable for primate rat, mouse, fly, and
diverse fish species; 4) engage in outreach, training, and dissemination, open
for broadest impact to the entire NSF community throughout the program. This
teaching will leverage our current state-of-the-art methods and educational
infrastructure, and will advance alongside the technology development and
integration.