* 1707993
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Mode Apparatus to Resolve the Discrepancy Concerning Big G
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Stefan Ballmer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2020
* USD 120,000.00

Of all the fundamental constants of nature, G, the universal gravitational
constant, is known with the least precision. The current situation surrounding
the uncertainty in the knowledge of G is puzzling the fundamental physics and
precision measurement communities. The world's best experiments yield values
which are incompatible with one another and differ by about 40 times the
uncertainty of the most precise experiment. Furthermore, knowing the true value
of G is important in various fields, as it is necessary in efforts to unify
general relativity with quantum mechanics in a quantum theory of gravity. The
project enabled by this collaboration will be to carry out carefully controlled
metrological experiments where the precision of the measurements will be in the
part-per-million. Since part of the past discrepancies between determinations of
G can be traced back to the methodology used, the group will combine different
approaches to determine G within the same apparatus, hoping to obtain highly
precise values of G from each approach, but with the expectation that the values
obtained using different methodologies will mimic the current situation in the
community, namely, that different methodologies, no matter how precise, yield
different results. With the experiments carried out in the same apparatus our
effort would then help understand the current discrepancies among existing
experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish a torsion
pendulum facility dedicated to measuring the Newtonian gravitational constant G
with unprecedented sensitivity using three different experimental techniques
within the same apparatus. An agreed upon value for G remains elusive as recent
measurements by different experimental groups have scattered widely, or have had
low precision. The spread in measured values and the relatively low precision of
the measurements is recognized by the precision measurement community as
something that needs to be addressed. This project will build a system based
upon the ideas introduced in previous torsion pendulum experiments, but will
expand the scope and breadth of the measurements by the multi-mode nature of the
apparatus. In the primary mode G will be determined by measuring the angular
acceleration needed to keep a torsion pendulum's fiber from twisting while it
rotates on a turntable in the presence of carefully designed attractor masses
(that also rotate on a separate turntable). This angular acceleration feedback
mode has yielded the most precise measurement of G to date, yet it has only been
performed once. Compared to previous efforts, the proposed system will achieve
smaller metrology errors by using advanced measurement and characterization
techniques. Using the same apparatus, G will be determined by measuring the
change in the resonant frequency of the torsion pendulum with the attractor
masses present and removed by measuring the thermally induced oscillation of the
pendulum. In the third approach, G will be determined by large amplitude
determination of the change in the resonant frequency of the pendulum when the
attractor masses are at two different positions. Each technique is expected to
provide a measurement with a relative error of approximately 2 ppm. The
measurements performed within this project will be of broad interest to
scientists in diverse fields of physics and metrology, and the approach may shed
light on why previous experiments have resulted in discrepant measurements of G.
In addition to broad scientific interest, undergraduate and graduate students
will be integral to the success of the project. They will be trained in
experimental physics and precision measurement techniques. The project will
provide training and education for first-generation college students and
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds by recruiting from a rural, federally-
recognized Hispanic Serving Institution that has limited research opportunities
on campus. Students from three different universities will be in contact,
enhancing their exposure to different academic cultures and providing networking
opportunities. As part of the proposed activities, demonstrations associated
with the principles of forces will be developed and used at community gathering
events, recruiting events and in classroom environments.