* 1707544
* Astroparticle Physics with the VERITAS and CTA Gamma-Ray Observatories
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jamie Holder, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 06/30/2021
* USD 547,880.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, and can
be used to test fundamental physics. This award supports scientists at the
University of Delaware to carry out gamma-ray astrophysics research using a
currently operating observatory and participate in the planning and development
of a next-generation gamma-ray observatory. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is designed to
perform high sensitivity pointed observations of both Galactic and extragalactic
sources. The University of Delaware group will work on hardware and calibration
tasks for VERITAS as well as analysis and interpretation of the scientific data
from Galactic gamma-ray sources. The group is also involved in the technology
development and scientific planning for the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), an
international gamma-ray observatory currently in the prototyping stage. The
group will continue to organize and host the "Fermi Summer School," a two-week
high energy astrophysics course for graduate students and post-docs. They will
also continue to engage in a broad range of efforts in education and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Delaware group will conduct
both scientific analysis and hardware-related activities. They will use gamma-
ray observations with VERITAS to study supernova remnants, gamma-ray binary
systems, and new gamma-ray sources identified by the complementary High Altitude
Water Cherenkov Observatory. They will also conduct prompt VERITAS follow-up
observations to search for gamma-ray emission from sources of astrophysical
neutrinos identified by IceCube, and mine the VERITAS archive for gamma-ray
counterparts to the enigmatic Fast Radio Bursts. The group will work on the
maintenance and calibration of VERITAS. They are involved with the hardware
maintenance of the upgraded camera, and the development of a new calibration
device. Finally, the group will participate in commissioning of the CTA
prototype telescope at the VERITAS site. They will also lead the scientific
planning for Galactic gamma-ray studies with CTA.