* 1707620
* Search for Novel Electronic State in Strongly Correlated Kondo Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lu Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 473,602.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;In solids, many electrons interact among
themselves leading to interesting phenomena. For example, in some metals they
interact turning the metal into a good insulator. The coupling between electrons
may have a topological property, making the material's surface conductive while
keeping the inner bulk insulating. This amazing property is revealed by a number
of experiments on Kondo insulators, a family of solid materials based on rare
earth elements. The research leads to rich new physics and brings hope for
developing materials for future electronics. The research furthers fundamental
knowledge of rare earth hexaborides and opens new doors for future electronic
and magnetic materials. The highly conductive surface states are topologically
protected against impurities. As a result, 2D devices based on topological
phases are expected to be able to serve as superior electronic nanomaterials for
making next-generation nanoscale field-effect transistors, which have the
potential to exceed the performance of conventional silicon-based field-effect
transistors, with faster operation speed, lower power consumption, and higher
integration density. The educational objective of this proposal is to teach the
general public about advancements in electron interactions in solids and to
develop excitement, awareness, and interest in the field. This objective is
achieved through several avenues: 1) involving undergraduates in research; 2)
creating opportunities to promote the integration of women and minorities in
careers in science and engineering; and 3) communicating research to the broader
public. The broader public, particularly underrepresented groups are reached by
public lectures at University of Michigan's Saturday Morning Physics, and by
public demonstrations and workshops to middle school students in low-income
areas through the University of Michigan's Science for Tomorrow
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the research is to investigate the physical origin of the quantum oscillations
and Landau Level quantizations in strongly correlated Kondo insulators. Using
measurement techniques of torque magnetometry, electrical and thermoelectric
effects, and thermal transport properties, the principal investigator aims to
answer these 3 specific questions for Kondo insulators, especially for samarium
hexaboride SmB6: (1) What is the dimensionality of the quantum oscillation
signals: 2-dimensional or 3-dimensional? (2) How does the quantum oscillation
amplitude change at elevated temperatures - does it follow the Lifshitz Kosevich
formula from Fermi liquid theory or not? (3) Does quantum oscillation exist in
electrical transport properties? Is the oscillation electronic, or completely
charge-neutral? Answers to these questions provide the big picture of quantum
oscillations in Kondo insulators. If exotic bulk charge-neutral Fermi surface
indeed exists, the research resolves the thermal transport signatures of this
bulk state. The knowledge obtained from the research sheds light on the
electronic state of Kondo insulators. The research resolves the debate on
whether Kondo insulators can be topological insulators with no leaky bulk
conductance or an electronic insulator with charge-neutral Fermi surfaces.
Either scenario is a significant breakthrough in condensed matter physics.