* 1707080
* Collaborative Research: Hydrodynamic Thermal Transport in Graphitic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Li Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 02/28/2021
* USD 362,416.00

Graphitic materials exhibit some of the highest thermal conductivity values
found in solids. This feature has resulted in existing and emerging applications
of these materials for transferring heat and keeping operating devices cool.
However, the actual mechanisms behind their high thermal conductivity are not
well understood. Recent theoretical studies have suggested that frequent
scattering among a peculiar group of high-population phonons in graphitic
materials does not either cause resistance directly or limit their thermal
conductivity contribution. This unusual phonon transport behavior has been
referred as hydrodynamic phonon transport. Observation of hydrodynamic phonon
transport has never been experimentally observed in any materials at a
sufficiently high temperature that is relevant to technological applications.
Hydrodynamic phonon transport can have practical implications in the design and
thermal modeling of graphitic materials. Thus, a set of theoretically guided
advanced experiments are conducted in this research to verify the existence of
the unusual thermal transport behavior in graphitic materials. Also, the
research findings and methods are integrated into three undergraduate and
graduate courses and two demonstration modules for general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to elucidate the
influence of hydrodynamic phonon transport on the thermal transport properties
of graphitic materials. This will be accomplished through theoretical and
experimental efforts, including first principles based theoretical studies of
phonon transport, nanoscale thermal transport measurements of the intrinsic
thermal conductance, and ultrafast opto-thermal measurements of second sound in
isotopically purified nanotube, graphene, and thin graphite samples. These
theoretical and experimental efforts can further lead to a better understanding
of the quantum theory of energy transport by lattice vibrations. If successful,
the research can lead to a new approach to simulate phonon transport. In
addition, it can advance the frontier of nanoscale thermal transport
measurements by overcoming a critical challenge in probing the intrinsic thermal
transport properties of nanostructures. Moreover, it can result in a cutting
edge ultrafast thermal transport method for probing phonon transport.