* 1707384
* Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy and Ultramicroelectrode Studies: Electrochemistry of Single Molecules and Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Allen Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 01/31/2022
* USD 414,301.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry. Professor Bard and his team at the University of Texas at
Austin further develop scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) and
ultramicroelectrodes to include new applications at lower concentrations (fM),
and improved sensitivity. The work shifts the approach of chemical analysis for
measurements of signals that arise from a very large number of molecules
(ensembles) to measurements of single molecules, one at a time. Properties of
single entities and effects of composition and structure can be investigated on
an individual basis. The goal is to push the limits of single-entity
electrochemistry to a regime of unprecedented sensitivity. The activities also
contribute to the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce.
Programs address training and technology transfer with the goal of training
students and professional researchers to apply the new methods and approach to
their own research problems. Young chemists participate in hands-on,
multidisciplinary scientific research in areas of national importance. These
researchers gain valuable experience, working closely with the PI and visiting
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these fundamental studies, digital
electrochemistry allows for single analyte species and single entities to be
counted and specifically detected one at a time. The central thrust is the
improved understanding of nanoparticle collision responses that is being
extended to the area of detection of single atoms and potentially to single
electron-transfer events. The approach is unique in focusing on: 1)
understanding the detailed electrochemical responses during collision events at
electrodes, 2) detecting and selectively identifying single small ions,
molecules, and atoms, and 3) developing methods of detecting very small amounts
of charge using nanoelectrodes (less than 10 electrons, perhaps single electron-
transfer events). Young chemists are trained in advanced techniques, interact
through group meetings, seminars, teaching, publishing, and conference
presentations.