* 1707918
* Quantum Processing via Four-Wave Mixing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alexander Gaeta, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 560,000.00

Understanding how light interacts with atoms and materials at the microscopic,
or quantum, level is essential for developing current and future technologies.
This will lead to advances in telecommunications, smaller and more sensitive
detectors, precision measurements, and applications of quantum information. This
project will develop methods for quantum information processing using linear and
nonlinear optics. Manufacturing and controlling bright, deterministic, and
efficient photon sources that can perform quantum logic operations and store
quantum information with high fidelity are some of the major goals for this
field. Realizing these goals and a network of such devices will require
fundamental developments and new ways to control interactions between light and
matter at the quantum level. In particular, nonlinear optics is at the heart of
many of the quantum information devices and systems. For example, correlated
light beams can be generated either through second- or third-order nonlinear
optical processes in which one or two pump photons, respectively, are
annihilated to create a correlated "signal" and "idler" photons. By utilizing
these parametric processes in different configurations, it is also possible to
create quantum frequency converters that are able to change the frequency of a
signal field without changing its quantum state. The goal of this program is to
utilize this quantum frequency conversion process performed in optical fibers
and atomic vapors to achieve various critical functionalities including
generating a specified number of photons on demand and exploring a form of
quantum computation known as Boson sampling. This project will contribute to the
development of quantum technologies and train students for careers in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, parametric four-wave mixing will
be exploited to explore new phenomena and regimes in quantum optics.
Specifically, this work will explore quantum processing in the frequency domain,
which offers a number of critical advantages over spatial- and time-domain
implementations. The very high nonlinearities in photonic band-gap fibers will
be used to greatly improve the efficiency of coherent photon conversion and to
perform quantum frequency translation from the telecom regime to the visible. In
addition, the near-unity efficiency, low-noise quantum frequency converter
previously demonstrated in the principal investigator's group will be exploited
to investigate temporal quantum correlations in the femtosecond regime, to
perform frequency-domain Boson sampling, and to develop a quasi-deterministic
single-photon source via frequency multiplexing.