* 1707352
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Bioluminescence for Optimal Brain Control and Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Christopher Moore, Brown University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2023
* USD 9,050,000.00

Animals ranging from fireflies to jellyfish produce light, a process known as
bioluminescence. In nature, bioluminescence is used for prey capture, mate
attraction and self-defense. This unique form of light production occurs when a
small molecule combines with an enzyme to release photons. Researchers have
harnessed this distinctive form of living light production for a wide variety of
uses, from measuring activity in cells by tracking light flashes, to controlling
activity in cells by transforming bioluminescent signals into electrical current
flow. These tools are powerful for answering scientific questions, and may also
prove useful as novel treatments, for example in stimulating specific areas of
the brain or regulating heart pacemakers. This NeuroNex Technology Hub advances
science by innovating new bioluminescent technologies, and teaching others about
it. New innovations include the development of brighter chemical reactions, able
to transmit signals farther across the brain, and the creation of new
microscopes to harvest bioluminescent activity. The Technology Hub also helps
other scientists learn both the principles and the pragmatic details of how to
use these methods in their own research, through workshops, emissaries sent to
laboratories, and a comprehensive website. An additional key focus of this
project is on developing curricula for general education, from the grade school
to the high school level, and on outreach projects within the broader community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NeuroNex Technology Hub enables bioluminescence use
for cellular imaging and control. Historical impediments to effective
bioluminescence use included the prolonged time scale of light production and
long recharging time (severe limitations in early calcium imaging attempts), and
insufficient light production. The Technology Hub and other recent advances
directly address these concerns, for example through discovery of new molecules,
development of novel strategies for conferring calcium sensitivity to bright and
fast luciferases, and brightness amplification e.g., by resonant energy
transfer. All these innovations not only serve imaging, but also enable
bioluminescence as a driver for optogenetic molecules, a new cellular control
strategy termed BioLuminescent OptoGenetics ('BL-OG'). While BL-OG has already
proven effective as a solution that allows chemigenetic and optogenetic control
in a single molecule, the advances implemented here significantly elaborate and
improve this functionality. The Hub role in providing technology transfer to
other practicing scientists is tailored to the individuals seeking training.
This specificity in dissemination of pragmatic knowledge is achieved by
designing workshops at Brown University around the needs of attendees, and
through sending bioluminescence-trained technicians and students directly to
laboratories to demonstrate and trouble-shoot experiments. The comprehensive
website lists existing bioluminescent options, where they can be acquired, and
aggregate bibliographic references. In all activities, the Hub team seeks active
input from the user community to ensure that the knowledge being disseminated is
of use to advancing the exact goals of practicing scientists. This
NeuroTechnology Hub award is part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's
Understanding the Brain activities.