* 1707474
* Collaborative Research: Structure and Tone in Luyia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/27/2016,05/31/2020
* Christopher Green, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2020
* USD 28,537.00

How and why do languages vary? Studying closely related languages can tell us
important details of the nature of human language, by holding most grammatical
properties constant while varying others, across a set of languages.
Understanding the limits on such variation?and how such differences arise
historically?requires an accurate description of a group of related languages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heterogeneous varieties of Luyia, a group of Bantu
languages of Kenya and Uganda, provide a laboratory for investigating such
micro-variation in grammar. This project will produce the first comprehensive
descriptions and formal analyses of four underdocumented Kenyan varieties of
Luyia: Bukusu, Logoori, Tiriki, and Wanga. A series of monographs will be
developed for each language which include a grammatical outline, a detailed
description of the tonal system, in-depth studies in syntax, a collection of
texts, and a dictionary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse tone systems of Luyia
are a major focus of this work. Luyia tone has many notable features, including
a rare process by which High tones spread leftward across and within words.
Complex tonal patterns mark inflectional differences among verb tenses, and
syntactically conditioned rules are also found in the phrasal tonology. A solid
understanding of these processes bears crucially on theories of the phonology-
syntax interface, which are concerned with what kind of syntactic information
can be used by a phonological system. These theoretically and typologically
interesting features of Luyia tone will be systematically investigated through
targeted paradigmatic elicitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project models
team-based, data-rich and theoretically informed linguistic description and
analysis. The Luyia team draws on the expertise of linguists in multiple
subfields and brings together US-based and Africa-based scholars, enriching the
practice of linguistics by each group. The monographs, text collections, and
dictionaries produced by the project will be made freely available online, and
relevant materials will be disseminated within the appropriate local
communities.