* 1707954
* Gravitational Wave Physics and Astronomy with Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 360,000.00

We have entered a new age of human exploration of the universe: the age of
gravitational-wave astronomy. Gravitational waves are ripples in the fabric of
spacetime that carry information about distant astrophysical objects. The
observation of binary black hole mergers by the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) has confirmed a one-hundred-year-old
prediction of Einstein. We can now use gravitational waves to study the
universe. Gravitational waves carry information that can tell us what happens
when black holes collide, how massive stars die, how heavy elements form, how
gravity works, and how the universe evolved. This group will continue the
development of data analysis techniques used to extract signal from instrumental
noise. In particular, the group's studies concentrate on signals generated by
binary systems composed of black holes and/or neutron stars. The new methods
accelerate the detection by making efficient use of computer resources available
to LIGO and provide estimations of the parameters of the binary such as masses
and rates of rotation. Gravitational-wave astrophysics offers exciting
opportunities to inspire and educate students of all ages, strengthening both
the diversity and competitiveness of U.S. secondary and college students, and
improving the scientific literacy of the general public. The computational
methods developed through this award are transferable to many areas of science
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award directly supports Advanced
LIGO's mission to detect gravitational waves from merging neutron stars and
black holes. Black holes and neutron stars are nature's most compact objects and
their collisions are a transformative laboratory for fundamental physics and
astrophysics. The highly relativistic speeds and strongly-curved spacetimes of
compact object mergers generate gravitational waves that encode the properties
of the objects as they collide: how massive they are, how far away they are, and
how fast they spin. These properties can then be used to understand how massive
stars live and die. This award will support research to improve the sensitivity
of Advanced LIGO's compact binary searches and develop next-generation
parameter-measurement techniques to extract the physics from observed signals.
The proposed project will continue to drive the development of scientific
workflow tools and high-throughput computing that will have broad impact across
the scientific community.