* 1707194
* Automated target concentration, signal enhancement, and detection in a single point-of-care paper-based diagnostic
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Daniel Kamei, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop an easy to use sensor device (similar to
the over-the counter pregnancy test) for the detection of malarial infection at
a sensitivity suitable for diagnosis. The sensor device is expected to be
robust, rapid, low-cost, easy-to-interpret and have a low detection limit while
requiring no equipment or trained personnel. The primary goal is to
significantly improve the detection limit while maintaining all the desirable
operating characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available diagnostic methods
for malaria have excellent sensitivities and specificities, but are not suitable
for resource-poor settings. Current lateral-flow immunoassay (LFA) devices
detect Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH), Plasmodium-specific histidine-
rich protein (HRP-2), and/or Plasmodium aldolase, all of which are found in an
infected individual, but their sensitives are below the recommended World Health
Organization threshold of 95% sensitivity. The goal of the proposed work is to
improve the sensitivity of the conventional LFA, by integrating two methods of
enhancement into a single, automated paper-based device. The first method
utilizes aqueous two-phase system (ATPS) separation on paper, in which a well-
mixed ATPS solution rapidly separates into its macroscopic phases and
concentrates the target biomarker as it flows through a paper membrane. The
second method incorporates a signal enhancement reaction that utilizes
engineered nanoparticles with enzymatic activity. The proposed work will
investigate a new approach for controlling fluid flow through the extension of
ATPS separation on paper in order to sequentially deliver signal enhancement
reagents to the LFA detection zone. Additionally, to maximize shelf-life and
ease-of-use, all required assay components will be dehydrated on the LFA test
strip. It is anticipated that the seamless coupling of the LFA with pre-
concentration and signal enhancement capabilities will result in significant
sensitivity when compared to the traditional LFA, while maintaining the same
user-friendliness.