* 1707056
* RUI: Two-dimensional flow-boiling characteristics under surface wettability gradient
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Jong-Hoon Kim, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 263,970.00

As technology becomes increasingly miniaturized, extremely concentrated power
consumption from advanced electronic devices leads to the challenge of how to
keep devices from overheating. Conventional thermal solutions are inadequate for
advanced high power density semiconductor devices for wireless and military
applications. Flow-boiling, highly efficient phase-changing thermal energy
conversion/transport phenomena, can be incorporated into microgap heat-sink
technique as a promising thermal solution for high power density electronics.
However, local excessive evaporations (dry-outs) by highly concentrated heat
sources and consequent unevenness in flow distribution has been a challenging
issue. In this project, microgap surface wetting property will be modified to
address this issue; i.e., highly wetting surfaces imposed on hot-spots will
enhance liquid-phase entrainment and thus prevent dry-out. The successful
accomplishment of this project will advance fundamental knowledge in complex
multiphase flow and heat transfer, enable cooling of futuristic electronic
devices, and transfer state-of-the-art knowledge and experience to undergraduate
and K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
attain fundamental knowledge about two-dimensional flow-boiling morphology and
heat transfer characteristics under a surface wettability gradient. Despite the
critical importance, the understanding of 2-D flow-boiling morphological
behavior is very limited. Mere extension of 1-D theories cannot accommodate the
2-D complications and consequences. The proposed research tasks will investigate
the 2-D flow-boiling morphology and vapor ebullition cycle, which will explain
2-D energy transport mechanisms related to the flow-boiling. The effect of
multiphase forces on the vapor dispersion behaviors will be explored as well.
Microgap surfaces with various wetting properties will be fabricated and tested
to study how the induced capillary force modify the multiphase force balance and
eventually affect 2-D flow-boiling phenomena.