* 1707137
* Formation of Molten Nanocraters on Electrodes during Charge Transfer with Conductive Droplets or Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* William Ristenpart, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2021
* USD 342,371.00

CBET - 1707137&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ristenpart, William D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a
conductive droplet or particle contacts an electrode, charge is transferred from
the electrode to the droplet or particle. Although the exact mechanism of charge
transfer is not well understood, it is usually assumed that the charge transfer
does not affect the electrode or the droplet or particle that contacts the
electrode. However, recent observations show that charge transfer to water
droplets or other particles creates craters in the electrode's surface up to a
micron wide that can be detected by electron microscopy and atomic force
microscopy. The goal of this project is to understand the mechanism of crater
formation and how it affects charge transfer. A series of experiments will test
the hypothesis that Joule heating during charge transfer melts the electrode
locally. The molten metal is pushed out under pressure due to a plasma jet of
the surrounding fluid. The metal then cools and solidifies leaving behind a
crater. Understanding these and other details of charge transfer could lead to
improved efficiencies in a variety of industrial electrochemical processes,
including electrical de-emulsification, which is used to separate water from
oil, and electrostatic precipitation, which is used to control particulate
emissions. The results of this project will be used in a general education
course at UC Davis that introduces beginning students to science and engineering
and is taken each year by more than 1500 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
behavior of charged objects at an electrode will be characterized by a series of
in situ experiments, including high speed video, high resolution
chronocoulometry, and high sensitivity photon counting. Results will be combined
with post in situ characterizations of the resulting craters obtained by
optical, electron, and atomic force microscopy. Specific experiments will be
aimed at directly testing the proposed mechanism of crater formation, including
systematically varying the melting point temperature of the electrode, the
dielectric breakdown strength of the surrounding fluid, and the radius of
curvature of solid conductive particles. If corroborated, the mechanism proposed
here could explain the long-standing difficulty in obtaining quantitative
agreement with predicted charge transfer values, since the crater formation
physically alters the electrode.