* 1707491
* Student and Postdoc Travel Support for International Workshop on Future trends in DNA-based nanotechnology
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 11/30/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports students and postdoctoral scholars from US Institutions to
attend the International Workshop on Future Trends in DNA-based Nanotechnology
(DNATEC17), which will take place in May 2017 at Max Planck Institute for the
Physics of Complex Systems, Dresden, Germany. DNA has developed to be a
"designer molecule" that can be used to construct complex artificial
nanostructures with a precision and complexity not easily achievable by
conventional lithographic techniques. DNA nanotechnology has - in an engineering
context - become a pioneering field of employing basic biological principles
such as molecular recognition and self-assembly for advanced materials
synthesis. DNATEC17 aims at summarizing the enormous progress in the rapidly
growing cross-disciplinary field of nucleic acid-based nanotechnology, and
enhancing the exchange of ideas and understanding by bringing under the same
roof experts from different fields of physics, biophysics, chemistry, biology,
computer science and materials science. Supported by this award, students and
postdocs attending this workshop will gain an understanding of the process of
creating and developing sound scientific ideas. There is a unique blend of
theory and practice in DNA-based nanotechnology, from a range of academic
disciplines. Interdisciplinarity is absolutely engrained within the goals of
this workshop. At DNATEC17, young scholars will see that the leaders in their
field are devoted to the idea of producing the highest quality interdisciplinary
research. A full day of tutorials at the beginning of the conference will
facilitate students' understanding of work from a variety of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will help to foster the development of
the next generation of molecular designers and molecular programmers, by
encouraging students to attend, present their work, and interact with other
important players in the field. The workshop will: 1. cover aspects including
structural DNA nanotechnology, DNA-based machinery, advanced imaging techniques,
structure modeling for nucleic acid-based nanostructures as well as DNA
nanotechnology for programmable molecular circuitry, intracellular
biocomputation and synthetic biology. 2. address basic scientific questions that
have to be solved in near future and that are related to both the creation of
novel designer rules for advanced assembly of complex 3D structures and the
successful transfer of the latter into more applicative fields. Approximately 20
outstanding students and postdoctoral scholars from US institutions will be
funded by this award to support their travel to the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By attending DNATEC17, students and postdoctoral
scholars from US Institution working in the field of DNA nanotechnology will
have the opportunity to present their work to an audience of international
scientists. This will facilitate their interaction with the international
research community and greatly foster collaborations between the young
scientists in US institution with scientists from other nations, leading to
potential international collaborations.