* 1707986
* Searches for Exotic Spin-Dependent Forces using High-Frequency Mechanical Oscillators
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Joshua Long, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports an experimental search for fundamental forces of nature
beyond gravity and electromagnetism at sub-millimeter length scales. Forces
could depend on several properties of the test objects involved, such as mass
(like gravity), or charge (like electromagnetism). The proposed experiments
concentrate on forces that depend on spin, which can be thought of as the
rotation of an object around its axis. Most subatomic particles (including the
protons, neutrons, and electrons of ordinary matter) have non-zero spin, which
determines their magnetic properties: magnetic forces depend on spin. The
discovery of an additional macroscopic force that depends on spin would have
enormous implications for physics from subatomic to cosmological scales. A
variety of extensions to the Standard Model (the most successful theory of
particle physics to date, but widely believed to be incomplete) predict short-
range spin-dependent forces. These forces are mediated by particles that could
contribute to "dark matter," the otherwise unknown quantity hypothesized to make
up about one quarter of the mass of the universe and to explain the apparent
mass distributions of galaxies. During its execution, this fundamental project
will also provide all participants (including undergraduates who have
contributed to this proposal) with experience in mechanical design, vacuum
technology, low-noise electronics, semiconductor and magnetic materials
processing, and other practical techniques useful in a wide range of science and
engineering fields. The experiment will also be a key focus of the Indiana
University Center for Spacetime Symmetries (IUCSS), which was founded by the PI
and his colleagues to strengthen and publicize IU's growing expertise in the
investigation of the structure of spacetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiment
uses 1-kilohertz planar oscillators as test masses with a thin shield between
them to suppress backgrounds, a technique that has demonstrated the capability
to probe micron-scale distances using relatively large (square-centimeter)
masses, and to operate at the limit of instrumental thermal noise at room
temperature. The principal challenge will be to overcome the anticipated
magnetic backgrounds associated with the use of polarized test masses. To this
end we have developed spin-polarized test masses with very low intrinsic
magnetism. We will use them in our experiments to conduct initial searches for
several velocity-independent spin-coupled forces with unprecedented sensitivity
below one millimeter, and to search for several more velocity-dependent
interactions that are presently unconstrained by experiment. We will also
investigate polarized materials that have the potential to improve our
experimental sensitivity by several additional orders of magnitude. At the
completion of the award period, it is our expectation that, in the absence of a
discovery, we will have set limits on as many as eleven previously unconstrained
spin-coupled interactions of electrons in the sub-millimeter range, and up to
four more limits with sensitivity at least order of magnitude greater than
present constraints.