* 1707049
* Collaborative Research: A self-contained microfluidic optical cavity biosensing platform for multiplex label-free molecular diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/24/2016,02/29/2020
* Seunghyun Kim, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 02/29/2020
* USD 132,418.00

1- Proposal Title: Proposal #1509746 Collaborative Research: A self-contained
microfluidic optical cavity biosensing platform for multiplex label-free
molecular diagnostics 2- Brief description of project Goals: We aim to
demonstrate a self-contained microfluidic optical cavity sensor which enables
simple, cost-effective, label-free and highly sensitive biomarker screenings.

3- Abstract:

3a. Nontechnical: Millions of people suffer from major chronic diseases such as
cancers, diabetes, cardiovascular and pulmonary disease, and infectious disease.
To improve survival rates of patients and give the right treatment at the right
time, early diagnosis of these diseases is required. The most common way to
diagnose these diseases is to use a biochemical test that measures the presence
or concentration of a macromolecule in a solution through the use of an
antibody. The current gold standard biochemical test for detecting these
biomarkers is called an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Such tests
have significant limitations with respect to the required sample volume, total
testing time, expensive fluorescence detection and an inability to test for many
biomarkers simultaneously. A simpler and more cost effective approach is still
needed to achieve a more efficient biochemical testing platform. In this
research project, we will demonstrate a novel optical cavity biosensor, a sensor
that detects the concentration of biomarkers with simple two partially
reflecting mirror structure, integrated with a simple microfluidic device. This
integrated device enables automated, low-cost, and highly sensitive sensing
which is required for various molecular diagnostic fields. Such rapid, simple
and cost effective label-free biosensors have the potential to transform the
field of early disease screening and to make significant impact on various
clinical and healthcare applications. In addition, a new bio-sample handling
technique will be implemented to make overall testing procedures simple. The
education and outreach activity of this project is well-aligned with the
research approach and outcomes. By educating undergraduate and graduate students
through summer research experiences, new courses, and seminars, we will be able
to deliver the state-of-art techniques related with micro/nanotechnologies. More
specifically, by adapting the use of microfluidic system and optic sensors into
new courses, we will enhance hands-on learning of microfabrication and
semiconductor/microfluidic processes. For K-12 students, we will use this
advanced biosensing tool for STEM education. Real demonstration of this work
will be broadened through the development and distribution of educational
activities on the optical physics and micro-flow phenomena.

3b. Technical: A standard ELISA process includes a laborious and time-consuming
sample preparation and labeling processes that involve complicated multi-step
chemical reactions, expensive fluorescence and laser equipment to detect a
labeled molecule. A simpler and cost effective approach is still needed to
achieve a more efficient immunoassay platform. By developing optical cavity
biosensor arrays, we will achieve the ultimate goal in biosensors which is a
combination of label-free, low cost, high sensitivity, and high selectivity. In
addition, adapting a differential detection method with multiple diode systems
enables a multiplexing immunoassay, enhances the sensor`s sensitivity and
increases the linear dynamic range. By integrating the optical cavity sensor
with the self-contained microfluidic platform, we will design SMDx (self-
contained multiplexable label-free diagnostics) to achieve a label-free,
multiplexable microfluidic molecular diagnostic system. In this platform,
various bioassay protocols can be implemented using pumpless technology.
Furthermore, the SMDx platform can be readily extended to a portable system by
incorporating a modular biosensing system for reliable medical diagnostics.

This project has multiple aims: (1) Develop an affordable point-of-care
biosensor using optical cavity structure enabling multiplexing bioassay with
high sensitivity. (2) Understand sensitivity enhancement by increasing the
responsivity of the transducer through the differential detection method. (3)
Demonstrate a seamless microfluidic device containing passive flow control with
channel surface properties and wicking force. (4) Implement a self-contained
multiplex label-free diagnostics (SMDx) platform for cardiac panel screenings.