* 1707282
* Plasma Discharge in Liquids: Understanding the Initiation and Formation Mechanisms of Non-Thermal Plasma in Dense Medium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Tanvir Farouk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 367,034.00

The focus of the project is to determine how a plasma - a mix of free
interacting charged and neutral particles - is formed in liquid media such as
water or oil. Plasmas in liquids is one of the most exciting, challenging and
important intellectual frontiers in modern plasma science. This project is aimed
towards filling in the gap in the present understanding and mathematical
modeling of plasma discharges in liquids. A study of the fundamental mechanisms
of complex and inter-related processes by which a plasma discharge initiates,
interacts and sustains in the liquid medium will also have substantial benefits
outside the field of plasma science. Unique and critical technologies envisioned
to have the greatest impact are biomedical - wound healing and sterilization,
electronics - nano-particle synthesis, and energy efficiency - high-efficiency
combustion from liquid fuel reforming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
computationally investigate plasma discharges in liquids using advanced
numerical methods in conjunction with high-performance computing resources. The
primary hypothesis of the research is that formation of a low-density medium
(gas phase) through complex electric field-plasma-liquid interactions is the key
initiation process for plasma discharges in a dense (liquid) medium. A multi-
dimensional, multi-physics model will be developed and employed to determine the
role and importance of low-density region/bubble for plasma discharge in non-
polar and polar liquids, production and spatiotemporal evolution of reactive
species in a multi-phase medium, and phase change due to coupled ponderomotive
forces and ohmic heating effects. The main outcomes of this effort are expected
to be a major leap in the predictive modeling capability for non-thermal plasma
discharges in liquid/dense medium, new course material on multi-physics modeling
to increase the education impact for engineering students, "YouTube"-based
introductory short modules on plasma science, and outreach activities to inspire
under-represented students and the general public towards STEM.