* 1707511
* Advances in Casimir-Polder Interactions Between Atoms and Substrates
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Kimball Milton, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 209,997.00

Subtle quantum mechanical effects can produce unusual forces between objects.
The quantum uncertainty associated with electric and magnetic field
fluctuations, for example, can produce unusual forces between molecules, or
between molecules and surfaces. These effects, generally known as Casimir
interactions, were discovered long ago and thought to generate very tiny forces
between macroscopic objects. They are now understood to be especially important
for nanometer-sized objects, such as nano-machines and macro-molecules, and so
are becoming the focus of much research on sensor technology and precision
measurement physics. Accurate calculation of Casimir forces from first
principles is a difficult challenge, as it involves delicate averaging of
fluctuating fields, with strange consequences; the forces can be either
attractive or repulsive, and can either contribute to or detract from the
system's entropy. This project will enhance our understanding of Casimir forces
through explicit calculations focused on systems of current experimental
interest. Results of this research have applications to chemistry, biology,
nanoscience, and atomic and nuclear physics. This work is being carried out in
collaboration with researchers world-wide, including senior scientists,
postdocs, graduate students, undergraduate students, and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance our understanding
of Casimir (quantum-fluctuation) energies and forces at zero and finite
temperatures, for example, by using Green's function and other analytic
techniques to compute Casimir self-entropies for a spherical model of an atom.
This requires isolating, regulating, and renormalizing the free energy,
processes that also have to be done for the energy associated with quantum
fields external and internal to surfaces, either flat or curved. It has recently
been discovered that the negative entropy of interaction between a perfectly
conducting sphere and a perfectly conducting plate is exactly balanced by the
positive self-entropy of the sphere. Negative entropies are not unrelated to
repulsive forces, which can be realized between atoms and other bodies in
vacuum. The nonadditivity of Casimir forces plays an important role in these
phenomena. Although most work in this field has concentrated on the normal force
between bodies, lateral forces are also being explored, along with Casimir
torque and Casimir friction, with the hope that these latter two phenomena may
be soon seen in laboratory experiments. Applications, such as to the freezing of
ice on surfaces, and properties of new materials such as phosphorene, are being
studied in collaboration with a diverse international group of students and
advanced researchers.