* 1707837
* EAGER: Social Media Participation as Indicator of Actors, Awareness, Attitudes, and Activities Related to STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Aditya Johri, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,292.00

A strong and productive STEM workforce is essential for the socio-economic well-
being of the nation. Consequently, efforts to improve STEM education are
undertaken each year across a range of federal and state agencies and they
support thousands of STEM education events, activities, and initiatives. These
efforts have been successful to some degree but participation by populations
historically underrepresented in STEM continues to lag at a time when STEM
workforce requirements are increasing. In order to improve future efforts, it is
critical to build a nuanced and empirical understanding of the overall STEM
space: What is the nature of issues related to STEM that garner interest? Who
shows an interest and participates? What are the outcomes and impact of
different STEM related initiatives? This proposed project will use social media
data to study these issues and answer such questions. Social media data is an
underutilized resource as almost 87% of the American population now participates
in some form of social media activity. This project has the potential to improve
and increase the impact of STEM education related efforts by illuminating ideas
and activities of interest to people, current efforts in place, and what
participants share and where. This information can be used for efforts such as
broadening participation by better targeting campaigns intended to increase
interest in STEM and by connecting individuals and organizations to create more
momentum for an idea, event or topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use
Twitter data and will focus on studying: (1) Actors - who participates in STEM
education issues? (2) Awareness - what do participants know? (3) Attitudes -
what attitude and beliefs do participants hold? (4) Activities - what do the
participants do? what activities do they participate in? More specifically, the
investigative team will use novel methodology to (a) analyze interaction
patterns of the categorized users and create interaction networks by considering
nodes as users and edges as the interaction strength; (b) use topic modeling
techniques to gain insight about users' awareness of STEM; (c) employ target-
specific sentiment mining techniques to gain insight about users' attitudes; (d)
use geographic and spatio-temporal analysis, such as Density Based Spatial
Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN), to gain insight about STEM
activities. This project has the potential to contribute to our understanding of
STEM education from the lens of social media. There is novelty in the approach
and the methods of this project that serves to potentially transform how social
media in STEM education is utilized.