* 1707408
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Miniaturized open source devices for calcium imaging, electrophysiology, and real-time control of neural activity
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Jason Cong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2023
* USD 9,582,530.00

To understand how the brain processes information, creates and retrieves
memories, and makes decisions it is necessary to record the activity of
thousands of brain cells simultaneously. New small and light-weight microscopes
have been developed that can be carried on the heads of laboratory mice and
rats. These microscopes take advantage of new probes that sense calcium levels
and flash bright when a brain cell becomes active. The Neuronex Neurotechnology
Hub has built new miniature microscopes that not only sense light but can also
directly record the electrical activity of the large numbers of cells deep in
the brain. This combination of electrical and optical recordings gives
scientists the new ability to read out how large groups of brain cells and brain
regions work together as the brain senses, learns, plans and executes actions.
The Neuronex Neurotechnology Hub will also create new computer systems that can
analyze these activity patterns extremely quickly (within small fractions of a
second). This rapid feedback system will allow investigators to rapidly probe
how the activity of specific groups of brain cells is linked to each behavior.
Finally, the Hub will build and test a new miniature microscope called a "light
field miniature microscope". This version of the microscope will allow
investigators to make 3-D movies of brain activity, greatly improving their view
of the large network of brain cells. All these technologies will be openly
shared with neuroscience community through a website (miniscope.org), such that
each laboratory can build each of these devices themselves at very low cost. The
Hub will hold workshops to teach scientists how to build and use the various
devices. Finally the hub will reach out to the broader community by holding
classes for K-12 and college students, and demonstrating how these devices can
give us a view of brain function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Neurotechnology Hub
will develop and share next-generation miniaturized in vivo sensing devices that
integrate optical and electrophysiological recording from hundreds or thousands
of neurons in behaving animals. These devices will be coupled with energy-
efficient computing hardware for real-time signal processing and closed-loop
feedback capabilities. The Hub will also create light field miniaturized
microscopes that will allow three dimensional optical recordings of network
activity in freely behaving animals. Last, the Hub will manufacture and
distribute custom made, 3 dimensional silicon microprobes for large scale
electrophysiological recordings. Making these devices widely available for
neuroscience research and teaching will have significant broader impacts, by
accelerating discovery and broadening outreach. The devices and techniques will
be distributed widely to a large community of researchers, as previously done
with the open-source miniaturized microscope developed by the PIs (the website
at miniscope.org already has &gt;2500 registered users and &gt;250 labs using
our microscope), as well as with silicon microprobes (&gt;100 devices have been
shared with users). Hence, the Hub will have a broad impact upon neuroscience
research, facilitating many future advances in our understanding of the neural
basis for emotion, cognition, and behavior, with a high potential to catalyze
major new discoveries. The PIs will establish an outreach program through
partnership with the Minority Access to Research Careers program at UCLA, as
well as the UCLA Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity (CEED), to
involve highly diversified high school and undergraduate students in this
research. This NeuroTechnology Hub award is funded by the Division of Emerging
Frontiers within the Directorate for Biological Sciences as part of the BRAIN
Initiative and NSF's Understanding the Brain activities.