* 1707068
* Human-Building Integration: Bio-Sensing Adaptive Environmental Control for Human Health and Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Shrikanth Narayanan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

1707068 (Choi). This research will develop an integrated human-centered
framework for intelligent environmental control in a building. The physiological
signals of the occupants, as well as their ambient environmental data, will be
integrated by using sensing agents (such as wearable as well as remote sensors)
and embedded environmental sensors in the building. This will enable bio-
sensing-driven multi-criteria decisions for determining building thermal and
lighting system controls that will potentially lower energy usage awhile
improving occupant comfort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This human-centered approach
will provide a framework that will 1) address sensor data processing and
analysis challenges that are inherent in large and dynamic datasets generated
from sensing agents; 2) develop methods for optimizing decisions and solutions
to multiple-criteria problems pertaining to occupants' preferences; and 3)
establish a human-centered control approach that is integrated with a
conventional control system for building retrofits to enable real-time decision
making and system optimization that will enhance energy efficient operations and
occupants' comfort. Such a three-fold approach can lead to tailored building
environmental control systems with the potential for dramatically improving the
efficiency of a building's performance, increasing sustainability, and
leveraging informatics technology that will improve the occupants' quality of
life.