* 1707565
* Studies of Atomic Hydrogen Contained in Solid Molecular Hydrogen Isotopes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* David Lee, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2021
* USD 620,530.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The quantum mechanical phenomena of Bose
Einstein Condensation leads to many fascinating and important effects. In 4He it
leads to a superfluid where the liquid can flow with viscosity and transport
heat without loss. In some metals it leads to superconductivity where electric
currents are carried without loss - offering the potential for power
distribution without the losses that occur in current power lines. BEC has also
been observed in super-cooled atoms which could lead to more precise atomic
clocks that power the global positioning system. Other, yet to be discovered
systems, may show equally fascinating and important behavior. In this project we
will attempt to produce a Bose Einstein Condensate in hydrogen atoms embedded in
solid molecular hydrogen. The studies will take place at ultra-low temperature
(below 0.1 degrees above absolute zero) and utilize microwave magnetic resonance
techniques. This work will provide training in state-of-the-art low temperature
and microwave techniques which are relevant in many areas of physics such as
quantum computing. An active outreach program is pursued. Meetings with graduate
students, visits by junior college students and participation in science fairs
continues. For example, the principal investigator gives public lectures at the
Texas A &amp; M Physics and Engineering Festival with demonstrations. The
festival is typically attended by more than 5000 students from all over the
state of Texas and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The properties of hydrogen atoms embedded in solid molecular
hydrogen films are studied by electron spin resonance in a high magnetic field
(4.6 Tesla, resonant frequency 130 GHz) corresponding to 2mm waves. The
spectrometer for these measurements is fully operational. A dilution
refrigerator is now in place to cool the samples to temperatures below 100 mK.
The large departure of the polarization of the nuclear spins from the Boltzmann
distribution observed previously are investigated down to lower temperatures and
at higher hydrogen atom concentrations in an attempt to reach full Bose-Einstein
condensation. Although in previous experiments the spin-lattice relaxation was
found to be several hours, it was not possible to fully saturate the transition
between the two lowest hyperfine states. This anomalous behavior is fully
investigated. Hole burning experiments in a magnetic field gradient also are
performed to determine the hydrogen atom mobility as Bose-Einstein condensation
occurs. Finally, the effect of different film substrates on the departure from
Boltzmann statistics of hydrogen atoms are studied.