* 1707776
* RUI: Quantum Turbulence in Atomtronic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Mark Edwards, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 10/31/2022
* USD 165,000.00

An "atom circuit" is a thin sheet of atomic gas that has been confined to two-
dimensions by squeezing it with laser light and cooling it to nearly the
absolute zero of temperature. The low temperature of such confined gases
enhances the display of the wave-like quantum mechanical nature of the
constituent atoms so that they form a state called a Bose-Einstein condensate
(BEC). A horizontal thin sheet of gas in the BEC state can be molded by the
confining laser light into arbitrary closed-loop shapes analogous to closed
electric circuits. The gas can then be stirred by lasers so that it flows around
the closed loop like the electrons in an electric circuit except that the
particles are neutral atoms. "Atomtronics" is accordingly an analogue of
electronics in which entire atoms flow through a circuit. Atomtronic systems are
of interest because they could potentially be used as extremely sensitive
quantum sensors of rotations, of magnetic fields, and of gravitational fields.
This research program will study how the quantum turbulence that often appears
when such gases are stirred can be harnessed to enhance the operation of these
quantum sensor devices. Methods for readout of the important characteristics of
these circuits (such as analogs of ammeters and voltmeters in electric circuits)
will be developed. This work, performed with undergraduate students at an RUI
institution, is conducted in close collaboration with experimental researchers
at JQI/NIST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration will study the behavior of
ultracold samples of atomic gases strongly confined in a horizontal plane and
subjected to arbitrary space-dependent and time-dependent potentials produced by
laser light. The research will take advantage of recent experimental
breakthroughs in the optical manipulation of ultracold gases in designing new
atom circuit potentials. In this work a variety of different atom-circuit
designs will be investigated. Each atom circuit to be studied will be assumed to
be completely filled by the atoms condensed into a BEC. Methods of producing
condensate flow, especially smooth flow, will be studied. The operation of each
atom circuit will be simulated both at zero and non-zero temperature. The flow
present in atom circuits often involves the appearance of numerous topological
excitations such as vortices (i.e., miniature tornadoes in the gas) and solitons
(solitary waves that move without degrading) and thus exhibits "quantum
turbulence". One focus of this research will be to detect the presence of all
such excitations and then follow and analyze their behavior. These studies will
enable the development of simple models of vortex and solitonic behavior in the
atomtronic systems. Such models will be useful in designing optimally performing
atom circuits for applications. This research program will enable at least two
undergraduate physics majors to gain state-of-the-art research experience in the
area of ultracold atom theory. The project will enhance the infrastructure for
research and education by enhancing an established collaboration among an
undergraduate institution (GA Southern), a national laboratory (NIST), and a
major research university (University of Maryland). Results of this research
will be broadly disseminated to enhance scientific and technological
understanding by developing virtual reality (VR) videos that describe the
physics of BECs at a level that is accessible to the lay public. These VR videos
will be suitable for display on VR headsets such as the Oculus Rift and Google
Cardboard. Finally, an understanding of the role of quantum turbulence in atom-
circuits will enable the design of a new generation of practical devices that
will find applications in metrology and navigation. This knowledge will also add
to the understanding of the fundamental properties of quantum matter.