* 1707227
* DFG-NSF:   Gravitational Waves from Neutron Star and Black Hole Mergers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Wolfgang Tichy, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 210,000.00

The first direct detection of gravitational waves emitted from merging black
holes by LIGO was a historic breakthrough in gravitational physics. Since we can
now detect and study gravitational waves, a new window to the universe has been
opened. Observations from a variety of other astrophysical sources are
anticipated. One particularly promising source is when two neutron stars orbit
around each other and merge. As long as the two compact objects are widely
separated, post-Newtonian calculations can give highly accurate and
astrophysically realistic predictions about the orbits and the gravitational
waves emitted. Yet, as the two objects get close, fully non-linear numerical
computer simulations of the Einstein equations are required to make predictions
about the final part of the inspiral and subsequent merger. This project is
aimed at gaining a detailed understanding of such astrophysical scenarios by
performing numerical simulations. The plan is to use and improve the highly
efficient BAM computer code, which has been developed by the numerical
relativity groups at the University of Jena in Germany and the group at Florida
Atlantic University (FAU). Such theoretical predictions of the emitted
gravitational waves are important to extract the maximum amount of information
from observed gravitational wave signals. This award is co-funded by the Office
of International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expecting the
detection of more gravitational wave signals from black hole binaries and
anticipating the detection of binaries containing neutron stars, the goal is to
significantly enhance the theoretical understanding of such systems in terms of
physics, in particular with regard to neutron star spins. This project proposes
to explore astrophysically realistic compact-object binaries. In particular,
addressing several key physics issues such as: (i) How does neutron star spin,
mass ratio and eccentricity in binaries affect the evolution of the inspiral,
the merger, and final object after merger? (ii) Study the gravitational waves
emitted by such binaries: Investigate spectra of the waves and create hybrid
waveforms using analytic approximations such as the effective-one-body approach.
(iii) How can magnetic fields in neutron star initial data be included in a
consistent and realistic way? (iv) How can neutron star evolutions be improved
by removing the artificial numerical atmosphere, that is currently used instead
of true vacuum between the stars? (v) How can we use hyperboloidal foliations to
obtain more accurate gravitational waves? By providing gravitational wave
templates, the proposed activities are critical for maximizing the science
output of gravitational wave detectors such as LIGO. Neutrons star mergers and
the resulting disk dynamics will shed light on the question whether such mergers
are engines for Gamma Ray Bursts, and help determine the currently unknown
equation of state at supranuclear densities. This research will be carried out
in close collaboration with the relativity group at the University of Jena led
by Dr. Bruegmann. Regular visits by faculty, postdocs and students from both
institutions are planned. This exchange will have educational benefits for
postdocs and students from both FAU and the University of Jena.