* 1707557
* Persistent Currents in Fermionic Quantum Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kevin Wright, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 370,000.00

Quantum phenomena are generally most evident at microscopic scales, but there
are some special materials where quantum effects are important at large scales.
These materials often have extraordinary properties such as superconductivity
that make them important for diverse applications such as electrical power
distribution, electromagnets, precision sensors, and quantum computing. The
many-body quantum physics of these "super" materials can be stunningly complex,
and predicting material properties or even the existence of quantum phases of
matter has proven to be surprisingly difficult. This award supports laboratory
quantum simulation experiments with ultra-cold atoms that will improve our
understanding of the mechanisms leading to the formation of superfluid phases,
and the way they break down when disturbed in different ways. These experiments
will expand present capabilities to create, study, and understand exotic quantum
phases of matter that are both of fundamental scientific interest and important
to the advancement of technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this research
program, ultra-cold fermionic atoms (Li-6) will be confined to ring-shaped
optical traps, and optical techniques will be used to create persistent currents
in the superfluids of fermionic pairs which form when the system temperature is
sufficiently low. The initial objective is to create and study persistent
currents in a ring-shaped molecular BEC. The researchers will create rotatable
Josephson junctions to probe the system and analyze the properties of the system
as a function of interaction strength, temperature, and effective
dimensionality. These studies will then be extended to include persistent
currents in the strongly-interacting unitary limit, and as far into the BCS
limit as permitted by the temperatures achievable in the system. The results of
these experiments will be analyzed to extract information about the superfluid
critical velocity, the transition from phonon-mediated dissipation to pair-
breaking excitations, superfluid/condensate fractions, and otherwise validate
key theoretical predictions for this important superfluid reference system.
Measurements conducted above the superfluid transition temperature will help
resolve questions raised by recent experimental observations of persistent
currents in mesoscopic normal-metal rings. This program will also establish an
essential foundation for longer-term efforts to study the low energy limits of
mass and spin transport in unconventional superfluid phases that are less well
understood, and/or whose existence has yet to be confirmed.