* 1707069
* WERF: Determining the fate and major removal mechanisms of microplastics in water and resource recovery facilities
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Edward Peltier, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 304,892.00

Proposal: 1707069&lt;br/&gt;PI: Belinda Sturm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this project is the fate of microplastics (plastics &lt; 5mm) in the liquid and
biosolids discharged from water resource and recovery facilities (WRRFs).
Microplastics are typically entrained within activated sludge and ultimately
released to the environment through biosolids. The detrimental effects of
plastics on marine vertebrates is well-documented and a major environmental
concern. In this project the transport pathways for plastics will be identified.
The results of this study will help reduce harmful marine ecosystem impacts. The
PIs will engage municipalities through a full-scale sampling campaign and will
disseminate the data in a web-based database that is publically accessible. They
will continue to collaborate with high school teachers to refine teaching
modules dealing with topics focused on microplastics and emerging
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplastics are likely to be removed when
they are adsorbed or entrained within the activated sludge floc structure. The
main hypothesis is that the sludge structure and extracellular polymeric
substances (EPS) content are controlling variables to microplastic removal. In
particular, the assumption is that microbial aggregates with high surface areas
and high EPS content can capture more microplastics. To test this hypothesis the
PIs will conduct a survey of select WRRFs with different primary and secondary
treatment processes. To further quantify microplastics capture efficiencies, the
PIs will determine the effect of EPS on microplastic adsorption and retention
efficiency within lab-scale and pilot-scale reactors and compare conventional
and aerobic granular sludge processes for microplastic adsorption. The activated
sludge process, and particularly gravity sedimentation, was not designed to
remove low density microplastic particles. Microplastics are likely to be
removed when they are adsorbed or entrained within the activated sludge floc
structure. As microplastic loads to WRRFs increase, it is important to study the
effect of niche separation of microplastic-associated microorganisms on
activated sludge process performance. One outcome of the research will be a
better understanding the fate of microplastics in WRRFs. Results of this project
will provide a framework for comprehensive management of microplastics
contamination in WRRFs.