* 1707883
* Atmospheric Fates of Neonicotinoid Insecticides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 622,986.00

This award is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program in the
Division of Chemistry. Professor Barbara Finlayson-Pitts and her group at the
University of California-Irvine (UCI) study the environmental fate of
neonicotinoid pesticides. There has been a significant, recent, worldwide
decline in bees, which play a major role in pollination. Neonicotinoid
pesticides have been implicated in this decline, along with other factors such
as parasites and pathogens, loss of habitat and diversity of pollinators.
Neonicotinoid pesticides have low toxicity to mammals. However, in the
atmosphere they may undergo transformations to form new products that are more
toxic than the parent compounds. The goals of this project are to elucidate the
atmospheric reactions of neonicotinoids, the rate at which they are changed into
other molecules in the environment, and the nature of the resultant molecules.
The results of this research will contribute to a molecular level understanding
of the atmospheric lifetimes and fates of neonicotinoid pesticides in the
environment. The data collected enable scientists to establish the risk
assessments for these compounds. Training in current techniques for studying
heterogenous chemistry on surfaces is provided to a diverse group of students
and postdoctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to provide a molecular level understanding of the photochemistry of
surface-bound neonicotinoid insecticides (NNs) and their reactions with trace
atmospheric gaseous oxidants. NNs have found increasing use since their first
introduction about 25 years ago, largely as seed coatings and soil treatments.
Their reactions once in the atmosphere are not well known. This project studies
the photochemistry and atmospheric reactions of seven commonly used
neonicotinoids which are nitroguanidines (imidacloprid, thiamethoxam,
clothianidin and dinotefuran), cyanamidines (thiacloprid and acetamiprid) or
nitromethylenes (nitenpyram). The quantum yields for photolysis of the compounds
that absorb light at wavelengths relevant to the atmosphere are measured. Also,
both the gas phase and solid state products are determined using a variety of
techniques. These techniques include attenuated total reflectance and
transmission Fourier transform infrared spectrometry and several mass
spectrometry techniques. The identity and yields of the products and the
kinetics of oxidation by ozone, the hydroxyl radical and the nitrate radical are
measured. This is used for a quantitative assessment of the atmospheric
lifetimes and fates of neonicotinoids in air.Professor Finlayson-Pitts' is the
Co-Director of AirUCI, a collaborative group of faculty at UCI that sponsors a
number of educational initiatives, including student research retreats, training
in effective communication and discussions of career options. Collaborations and
hosting international visitors provides breadth of experience and networking
opportunities to group members.