* 1707865
* Biophysical Mechanisms of Ultrasound Modulation of Cellular Functions in the MHz Domain
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Jen-Wei Lin, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2023
* USD 766,203.00

The overarching aim of this project is to study the cellular bases of modulation
of neuronal activity using ultrasound. Ultrasound is now becoming recognized as
an important new modality for noninvasively modulating neuronal functions in the
brain because: (a) a focused beam can be applied noninvasively from outside the
head to any region of the brain, even deep in the brain within a very small
region (1-3 mm in Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) for a 1 Megahertz (MHz)
ultrasound beam); and because (b) Ultrasound can be used to safely modulate
neuronal activity within the FDA safety limit. This project will examine two
mechanisms of neuromodulation that are still hardly investigated, the modulation
of membrane capacitance Cm and conductance gm associated with the lipid bilayer
of the cell membranes, in an isolated giant axon of the crayfish. This project
has broad impact in three areas: (1) It will pave a way to study the biophysics
of the ionic channels and lipid membranes in the MHz domain, thereby providing
insights into the kinetics of single ion channels that open and close in a
millisecond scale; (2) It will provide the foundation for using ultrasound as a
new modality for tomographic neuroimaging with a millimeter and a millisecond
resolution that is just beginning to be investigated by this group and perhaps
others; and (3) It will provide a specific new mechanism for opening the blood-
brain barrier with important implications in drug delivery.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasound (US) can modulate Cm by either the cavitation or radiation
force. When a pressure wave of US hits the membrane, its cavitation force is
thought to expand, oscillate or collapse gas bodies in the tissue or solution
around it, deforming the bilayer geometry in synchrony with the period of
ultrasound and thereby modulating Cm. Ultrasound can also alter Cm by
mechanically moving the membrane due to the radiation force caused by spatial
gradients in acoustic intensity. Empirically, the radiation force can produce
strong clearly detectable capacitive current across a synthesized lipid bilayer
at the onset and offset of a train of ultrasound pulses. The PIs will study the
modulation of Cm by the cavitation force. This mechanism has not been studied
experimentally in biological preparations, in comparison to the effect of the
radiation force on Cm, even though simulation studies imply that this type of
modulation should produce very strong intracellular currents.