* 1707275
* Collaborative Research:   Non-Linear Physics of the Interaction Between a Relativistic Electron Beam and Magnetized Plasma:   an Integrated Experimental and Modeling Approach
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Seth Dorfman, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 326,332.00

This project uses a combination of laboratory experiments and computer
simulations to study how electron beams moving with speeds approaching the speed
of light interact with space plasmas. This is both a fundamental and practical
problem that is relevant to many challenging issues in space physics and
astrophysics. For example, it is well known that energetic particles in space
pose a danger to communication satellites; and it has been proposed that such
energetic particles could be removed from near-Earth regions of space by waves
generated via electron beams produced directly on future spacecraft. This work
will investigate in detail the types of waves that can be produced by electron
beams and how such beams propagate through space plasmas. In addition to
providing the scientific basis for future space-borne experiments, this
collaborative project will also provide training in laboratory plasma techniques
for undergraduate and graduate students at the University of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to provide an experimentally
validated theoretical framework for understanding and predicting the coupling
between a relativistic (with energies in the range of 0.1-1 MeV), finite size,
modulated beam and magnetized plasmas. Most earlier investigations have focused
on low energy beams that cannot deliver significant power to the surrounding
plasma when emitted from a spacecraft operating in a low-density magnetospheric
plasma due to spacecraft charging effects. Comparatively little is known about
possibility of exciting plasma waves of interest (e.g. whistler) with MeV beams.
The project will combine theory, two-dimensional, and three-dimensional kinetic
simulations, and laboratory experiments performed on the Large Plasma Device at
the Basic Plasma Science Facility, a user facility located at UCLA and jointly
supported by NSF and DOE. These experiments will utilize a unique variable-
energy electron beam source recently developed at the Los Alamos National
Laboratory that will allow for an unprecedented electron beam parameter scan.