* 1707637
* A Combined Theoretical and Experimental Approach to Study Collective Cell Migration
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Wouter-Jan Rappel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2023
* USD 539,673.00

Cell motility plays a critical role in many biological and medical processes,
including wound healing and morphogenesis. In most cases, cells do not move in
isolation but move in groups. This collective motion is a process that is not
yet well understood. In particular, it is not clear how cells that move within a
group communicate and how cell-cell interaction and intracellular communication
result in asymmetric, polarized cells. To tackle these questions using in vivo
experiments is challenging since these experiments are hard to visualize and
manipulate. In vitro experiments that follow large sheets of cells are slightly
less difficult to visualize and probe but their results are not always easy to
interpret, and are thus not ideal to determine the fundamental mechanisms of
cell-cell interactions. To build a physics-based model for collective migration
is also challenging, not only because the precise cell-cell interactions and
intra-cellular mechanisms are unclear but also because the physical properties
of cells, including membrane tension and rigidity, and cell morphology changes
are difficult to implement. In this project the PI will overcome these
challenges using an approach that combines theoretical and experimental
investigations. He will formulate an efficient physics-based model that can
incorporate the physical properties of deformable cells. The general framework
of this model should be applicable to a wide variety of cell motility problems.
He will also carry out careful and quantitative experiments. The proposed
theoretical and experimental research will lead to deeper and fundamental
insights into the mechanisms and processes involved in collective cell
migration. The results will have direct relevance to many biological processes,
including embryogenesis and wound healing. The PI anticipates that the
theoretical and computational models developed as part of the proposal will be
applicable to a wide range of multi-cellular processes and will have broad
implications for biological modeling. In addition, the experiments should shed
light on how cells interact when they collide, and how small groups of cells
coordinate their motion. The PI will include the training of high school,
undergraduates, and graduate students who will be directly involved in the
proposed research. He will recruit talented underrepresented minorities through
the on-going outreach efforts and programs of the Department of Physics and the
Division of Physical Sciences and will offer two Research Experiences for
Undergraduates internships. These students will be integrated into the lab and
taught how to design, carry out, and interpret experiments and simulations. The
goal is to attract diverse students to a career in the biophysical sciences.
Furthermore, the PI will extend his existing collaboration with the Preuss
Charter School, a top local high school that accepts students only from
disadvantaged families. He will offer three internships to interested students,
who can participate in all aspects of the research. Finally, the results of the
project will be broadly disseminated to the academic community through
publications, conferences and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
experimental approach consists of first studying how a collision between a pair
of cells affects their motion and polarity. He will then extend these
investigations to a small group of cells and will determine how these cells move
in a collective fashion. The experiments and simulations will be carried out on
micro-patterned surfaces which enables the PI to carefully control cell
polarization and will allow him to quantify not only cell motion but also the
spatio-temporal dynamics of intra-cellular communication. By comparing the
experimental and theoretical results on cell collisions the PI will be able to
determine cell-cell interaction mechanisms and parameters. He will then simulate
collective cell migration and generate predictions that can be experimentally
verified, resulting in a two-way dialogue between experiments and modeling.
Specifically, he aims to: 1) Develop a computational framework that is able to
model multiple deformable cells, physical cell membrane properties and different
cell polarization mechanisms, and apply it to cell-cell collisions and
collective motion of groups containing a small number of cells, and 2) Perform
experiments using eukaryotic cells confined to micro-patterned surfaces that
quantify cell-cell collisions and collective cell migration using confocal
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.