* 1707190
* Understanding the Role of Fluidic Microenvironment in Stem Cell Suspension Culture toward Scalable Biomanufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Marko Princevac, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2023
* USD 399,823.00

Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) and cells that differentiate from these are
anticipated to be in great demand for cell-based therapies and engineered
tissues. In order to meet this demand, these cells need to be made available in
sufficient number to supply both laboratories and, in the future, treating
physicians. Therefore, they actually need to be manufactured. Three-dimensional
(3D) stirred suspension culture, due to its scalability and ease of automation,
is a promising platform for meeting such a demand, while potentially reducing
the cost of production significantly. However, culturing undifferentiated hPSCs
using this technique is a relatively new development in the past several years,
and little is known about the role of the fluid environment and stirring process
on the cells? expression of various traits. This research will investigate the
effect of shear forces applied through the fluid environment on the cells,
including their gene expression, differentiation, and survival. The new
discoveries and tools anticipated from this study are expected to be applicable
to studies of other medically relevant cell types, such as neurospheres,
pancreatic islets, and adult stem cells, potentially addressing the existing
bottlenecks that reduce the efficiency of their current production. In
conjunction with the outlined research activities, the project will develop and
integrate several outreach and educational activities, including: developing new
crosscutting course materials for stem cell biology and mechanical engineering
courses; recruiting and mentoring both undergraduate and graduate students,
particularly women and underrepresented minorities, in cutting-edge research;
and engaging local K-12 teachers and students through outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research aims to address a critical
knowledge gap relevant to stem cell biomanufacturing, by undertaking three
tasks: 1) determining the roles of fluidic shear on growing stem cell
aggregates; 2) identifying biomolecular mechanisms of shear-induced
mechanotransduction; and 3) designing and verifying a suspension culture that
will impose uniform shear on the stem cells. Expected outcomes of this research
effort include 1) quantitative correlations between shear stress, aggregate
size, and cell fates, 2) molecular pathway models for shear-controlled
mechanotransduction, and 3) new means to apply and quantify homogeneous shear
stress inputs to the stem cells and their aggregates. Collectively, these
outcomes are expected to enable a novel approach to expand and differentiate
stem cells using the fluidic microenvironment (e.g., fluid shear) as a critical
input parameter.