* 1707977
* Novel Phases and Dynamics of Optical Lattice gases under continuous quantum measurement
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Mukund Vengalattore, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2018
* USD 112,035.00

Efforts to harness quantum science for the realization of novel materials or
quantum computation generally hinge on the ability to create robust quantum
systems that are isolated from sources of dissipation and decoherence. In
reality, however, all quantum systems are 'open', i.e. they interact constantly
with their environment. In most cases, this interaction leads to the destruction
of quantum effects. However, there is growing appreciation of how the interplay
between quantum dynamics and dissipation can sometimes result in novel and
robust nonequilibrium quantum behavior in open quantum systems. This project
will examine such behavior. Interestingly, these open systems can exhibit
properties that defy conventional descriptions based on central paradigms of
symmetry, scale invariance and universality. As a result, the emergent phases
and dynamics of such open systems are currently poorly understood and present a
challenge that lies at the interface of atomic physics, condensed matter physics
and information science. At present, the theoretical activity in this arena
stands in stark contrast to the dearth of rigorous experimental studies on open
systems. This project will conduct a series of experiments on the phase
transitions and emergent phases of a clean, tunable open quantum system
consisting of an ultracold gas of atoms interacting with photons. These studies
will shed light on universal aspects of open quantum systems and aid in the
development of quantum systems that will have applications in quantum metrology
and quantum computation. Students that participate in this project will gain
experience with research methods and quantum technologies that will help them
participate in high tech industry or academic careers.

This experimental program aims to shed light on the nature of open, interacting
quantum systems in the specific context of an ultracold lattice gas. Building
upon this group's recent work controlling the dynamics of optical lattice gases
using two-photon imaging techniques, this project will explore the
nonequilibrium dynamics and phases of the Bose-Hubbard model in the presence of
tunable dissipation and continuous quantum measurements in the form of light
scattering. First, this team will extend their studies on the quantum-to-
classical transition in a lattice gas in the presence of weak dissipation by
studying the influence of many-body interactions, quantum interference and
particle indistinguishability on this transition. Next, they aim to realize and
explore driven, dissipative transitions and emergent dynamical phases in the
lattice gas due to the interplay between quantum coherence, many-body
interactions and dissipation. In particular, they propose to realize a metal-to-
insulator transition and a many-body localized transition driven by tunable
dissipation. These transitions and the resulting emergent phases have close
correspondences to various models of quantum percolation and magnetic
frustration with hitherto unknown critical behavior. The experimental studies
supported by this project promise to shed light on these models and serve as
experimental touchstones for broader, more universal descriptions of the
phenomenology of open quantum systems.