* 1707526
* RUI: Studies in Numerical Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Thomas Baumgarte, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,894.00

Einstein's theory of general relativity describes all gravitational interactions
in the universe, ranging from the force that pulls a falling apple to the Earth,
to the expansion of the Universe itself. The equations of general relativity -
called Einstein's equations - are quite complicated and can be solved exactly,
i.e. with pencil and paper, only under very special and unrealistic
circumstances. Modeling more realistic scenarios - for example in order to
understand a gravitational wave signal, emitted by two merging black holes, and
detected by the LIGO gravitational wave observatory - requires computer
simulations. This group's ongoing research efforts aim at developing methods and
approaches for such computer simulations. In recent years, the PI has developed
new methods that are well suited for a new class of problems, and that may make
current simulations significantly more efficient. In the next few years he plans
to adopt these methods to study so-called "critical phenomena" that occur at the
onset of back-hole formation, to examine properties of rapidly rotating neutron
stars, and to collaborate with colleagues to make the above-mentioned new
methods available in public community codes. Undergraduate students will
participate in these activities, providing them with a "hands-on" research
experience, and generating a research-enriched learning environment at Bowdoin
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this research effort in
numerical relativity include the development and implementation of numerical
algorithms for the solution of Einstein's equations of general relativity, as
well as their application in the numerical modeling of relativistic objects, in
particular neutron stars and black holes. In the next funding period the PI
plans to adopt methods for numerical relativity in spherical polar coordinates,
previously developed with support from NSF grants, to study several problems in
gravitational physics and relativistic astrophysics, in particular, to use this
code to study critical collapse in the absence of spherical symmetry. Extending
earlier results the PI plans to study the effects of angular momentum and
aspherical deformations on critical phenomena in the gravitational collapse of
perfect fluids, scalar fields, and vacuum spacetimes, addressing several open
questions. The PI also plans to perform simulations of astrophysical objects;
specifically, the stability of new types of differentially rotating neutron
stars. Finally, the PI will implement these methods for numerical relativity in
curvilinear coordinates in efficient and scalable community codes, namely the
Einstein Toolkit and Harm3D, so that these techniques can be applied in a number
of astrophysical simulations that cannot be performed with current stand-alone
codes.