* 1707090
* Data and Model Requirements for Statistically Weighted Determination of Fire Origin for Fire Forensics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Robert Moser, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 05/31/2022
* USD 350,179.00

Fire forensic reconstruction, in many respects, is one of the most complex and
error-plagued areas of forensic science. The United States civil and criminal
justice systems rely on expert witness testimony in the evaluation of fault and
blame in legal cases. Increasingly, these expert witnesses rely on scientific
models to either explain or promote a particular hypothesis/theory of how the
fire evolved. The challenge for fire investigators is that by its very nature, a
fire damages the contents of the compartment and obscures signatures produced in
its early evolution. Extracting statistically meaningful signatures in a fire
scene requires characterizing the thermochemical damage to typical materials
present in the fire environment. These damage signatures must then be connected
in a self-consistent manner to large-scale fire evolution. The overarching goal
of this project is to develop a rigorous statistical methodology to connect
these measured data and fire signatures to fire evolution for forensic
reconstruction. This provides a scientific foundation for future development of
fire forensic standards and best practices. Such standards will be the basis for
training of more scientifically sophisticated fire
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate the effects of
model bias and data uncertainty in issuing predictions about the origin of a
fire. Measurements and observations present in typical fire scenes will be
distilled into mathematical terms that can be modeled and subjected to
quantifiable assessments. Several tasks are required to accomplish the project
goals. First, degradation of condensed phase materials will be experimentally
investigated at small and large scales to characterize thermal damage. Next,
stochastic damage models will be developed to describe material degradation.
Concurrently, a Bayesian framework using computational models and measured data
will be developed to statistically evaluate fire origin and evolution
hypotheses. Finally, a validation study will be conducted in a densely-
instrumented and actuator-controlled large-scale fire test room. The project
will advance knowledge in fire science by characterizing property changes for
condensed phase materials during fire thermal exposure, encapsulating property
change features into damage models, and identifying the limits on how these
damage models coupled to gas-phase fire models should be applied to fire
forensic reconstruction.