* 1707236
* Saturation of Shear-Flow Driven Instability and Turbulence
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Paul Terry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This award will enable a study of a type of collective fluctuation common in
hydrodynamics, the Earth's atmosphere, astrophysical systems, and fusion
devices, focusing on novel mechanisms for saturation of a growing instability.
Saturation is the nonlinear process that stops the exponential growth of
fluctuations by creating a turbulent state and changing the circumstances that
led to the initial growth of the instability. This project investigates the role
in saturation of large-scale fluctuations previously assumed to rapidly decay,
and studies how they impact the development of turbulence. Shear-flow
instabilities and turbulence transport particles and momentum, resulting, for
example, in the mixing of cream into coffee, formation of clouds, and dispersal
of chemical species throughout the galaxy. The research supported by this grant
will provide new understanding on how these processes work and better
predictions of the rates and nature of the transport they
produce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear excitation of stable modes in the
saturation process will be investigated by determining analytically and
numerically the linear eigenfrequencies and eigenfunctions for an analytically
tractable piecewise continuous shear flow with a uniform flow-aligned magnetic
field. A previously developed mapping technique will be used to determine the
nonlinear energy transfer properties between the unstable and stable mode, from
which an analytical, stable-mode saturation-level estimate will be derived. The
fluctuating flow profiles, the rates of transport of momentum and chemical
species, and the rates of generation of secondary smaller scales motions in
saturation will all be determined using the calculated saturation level. The
dependence of stable eigenmode level, transport rates, and secondary structure
generation on the magnetic field and its degree of alignment will quantify the
effect of stable modes on the turbulent cascade and on the relaxation of the
driving profile. Numerical solutions of the saturated state will be obtained
using the Dedalus code, and related drift-wave-type shear flow instability in
magnetized plasmas will be investigated gyrokinetically using the Gene code.