* 1707700
* Support for the "Table Top Experiments with Skyscraper Reach" Workshop
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Janet Conrad, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 11/30/2017
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide support for the "Table Top Experiments with Skyscraper
Reach" workshop. It will be held August 9-11, 2017 on the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology campus. The primary intellectual merit of the conference
is in its potential to catalyze collaboration across diverse physics fields.

This conference is aligned with NSF interests in developing a diverse workforce.
On-campus experiments will give under-represented minorities (URMs) and women
who are undergraduates hands-on detector experience. These experiments usually
have small numbers of collaboration members, hence workshops such as this are
particularly important for broadly disseminating the plans for such experiments
and recruiting new collaborators. The funding to attend the conference is
targeted at junior scientists and the organizers will aim for gender equity and
will recruit URMs as participants.

This award provides funds to support travel for attendees to a workshop that
will bring together scientists to discuss about 20 new experiments that can be
performed with under 20 collaborators and modest funding. Such experiments span
a range of techniques from nuclear, particle, and atomic physics, and represent
a variety of programs within the NSF physics division. By bringing together
experts promoting a unique collection of research programs, using a wide variety
of experimental techniques, it is hoped to form a community where ideas can be
exchanged and collaborations can be formed.