* 1707549
* Studies of Strong-Gravity Binaries and Their Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Scott Hughes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 359,955.00

This award will support and extend this group's ongoing research on the dynamics
of binary systems in general relativity, and research on astronomy with
gravitational wave observations. This work will further our understanding of how
black holes in binary systems interact with one another, and will develop tools
for understanding the signals that are now being measured using the LIGO
gravitational-wave detectors, and using sister instruments coming on line on the
Earth's surface and planned space-based detectors. In particular, this group
will continue work on an approximation to General Relativity known as "effective
one body" (EOB) that simplifies the modeling of binary systems and other
perturbative frameworks used to describe the black hole event horizon. These
techniques complement those used when looking for full numerical solutions of
the Einstein equations. They will continue to produce sonifications of
gravitational wave signals, a tool which has proven to powerfully illustrate how
gravitational waves encode source information. Additionally, the PI will make
online tools to explore black hole orbits, with accompanying videos illustrating
the strong-field nature of orbits which produce interesting gravitational-wave
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific projects that will be pursued in this
time frame will be a mix of studies using black hole perturbation theory, and
studies in support of astronomy with the LIGO gravitational wave detectors. The
PI's group will use black hole perturbation theory in collaboration with
colleagues at the Albert Einstein Institute to revise and extend the very
successful EOB approach to compact binary dynamics. Work in this program so far
has done much to clarify how interactions with a black hole's event horizon
affect the evolution of compact binaries. Ongoing work is now probing orbits
with substantial spin-orbit misalignment, laying the groundwork for using the
EOB framework on a larger family of astrophysically relevant orbits. The group
will also use black hole perturbation theory as the foundation for understanding
self forces, computing how a body deforms the spacetime in which it moves and
how that deformation acts back upon the body's motion. In the domain of
gravitational wave astronomy, they have begun a systematic investigation into
how black hole modes are excited in the final merger of two black holes. This
analysis will allow us to understand how the mixture of modes excited by black
holes mergers depends upon the collision geometry and characteristics of the
merging black holes. The analysis will also make it possible to learn more about
the characteristics of the merging black holes from the gravitational waves that
we measure.