* 1707981
* Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Oreglia, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,202,377.00

Particle physics considers a vast range of scientific questions, from subatomic
to cosmic scales. The University of Chicago Group supported through this award
investigates such questions through experimentation at the highest available
collision energies at the Large Hadron Collider (the LHC) at CERN, Geneva,
Switzerland. These studies are relevant to the understanding of the Universe at
its most fundamental level in the fleeting fraction of a second just after the
Big Bang, and to why we see the Universe as we do now. The Chicago group is
making significant technical and analytical contributions to the ATLAS
experiment, one of the major detectors at the LHC. The integration of research,
education, outreach and diversity is also an essential aspect of the Chicago
group's mission. Activities focus on coherent themes that address several
primary audiences: the research community (REU programs and the recent
ICHEP2016), neighborhood (Enrico Fermi Summer Interns Program), the general
public (film documentaries) and diversity and inclusion (Expanding Your Horizons
Program, Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physics). The group's location on
Chicago's South Side brings important opportunities for engaging underserved and
underrepresented minority communities in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific technical contributions being made by the Chicago group include leading
the development of the Fast Track Trigger (the FTK) and upgrades of the hadron
Calorimetry (the TileCAL), to allow ATLAS to operate effectively at the very
high beam collision rates that are necessary to advance the scientific goals of
the experiment. The group's analytical contributions are focused in several
important areas, including studies of final states containing top quarks, b
quarks and light quarks, which will be greatly facilitated by the FTK, the
TileCAL, and jet substructure tools developed by the group. These will provide
access to Higgs physics, with emphasis on Higgs decays to b bar final states and
searches for exotic physics processes such as dark matter and new states of
matter in high mass di-jet final states.