* 1707731
* Exploring Interacting Topological Fluids in a Synthetic Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Bryce Gadway, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 325,000.00

This research will use cold and dilute gases of atoms to investigate new phases
of matter shaped by topology and disorder. The ability to harness the diverse
behaviors of electrons in different materials, such as metals, insulators, and
semiconductors, has led to remarkable technological development and economic
growth over the past century. The discovery and engineering of new quantum
materials promises to shape future technologies for many decades to come. In
particular, materials with nontrivial topology, relating to highly robust
properties, promise to play an important role in diverse areas such as
spintronics and fault-tolerant quantum computing. While important aspects of
these systems are difficult to probe in real materials, the approach of quantum
simulation, where a highly tunable quantum system can be used to mimic a more
unwieldy quantum system, allows for the exploration of new classes of
topological materials. This project will use extremely well-controlled and well-
understood systems of neutral atoms, cooled to less than one-millionth of a
degree above absolute zero temperature and having ultralow densities a million
times less than that of air, to engineer synthetic quantum materials. A key
focus of this research will be on the development of new techniques, based on
the high degree of spectroscopic control available in simple atomic systems, to
engineer designer synthetic materials. These experiments promise to provide
laboratory-based studies of hitherto unexplored phenomena, and to shed new light
on poorly understood emergent behavior in systems with high ground state
degeneracy. The developed techniques will also expand the set of tools used for
inertial sensing based on atom interferometry. Additionally, this program will
provide scientific and professional training to students in areas of high
technological relevance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project will
develop new techniques for lattice and band structure engineering, to address
outstanding problems related to topological and disordered materials. Taking an
unconventional approach, where a synthetic lattice is engineered not in real
space, but rather in the space spanned by a discrete set of quantum states, this
project will enable completely new capabilities related to Hamiltonian
engineering, and will open up new classes of material systems to investigation
through quantum simulation. The studies focus on a laser-based manipulation of
ultracold bosonic quantum gases, where pairs of interfering lasers can drive
transitions between distinct atomic momentum states, creating a momentum-space
lattice. This project will have three primary goals. The first will be to
develop the ability to engineer arbitrary lattice structures in one and two
dimensions, and to engineer predicted new classes of topological lattice
structures, explore phase transitions driven by the interplay of disorder and
topology, and probe the complex quantum critical phenomena occurring as
topological order is destroyed by disorder. Second, novel phenomena will be
explored that occur in lattice structures with engineered flat energy bands,
stemming from geometrical frustration, that can play host to emergent phenomena
driven by small perturbations and interactions. Third, alternative methods will
be explored for constructing synthetic lattices, not based on atomic momentum
states but rather on the atoms' internal spin degree of freedom, which may hold
added prospects for studying strongly correlated topological systems.