* 1707394
* NeuroNex Innovation Award: Behavioral Technologies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Adam Kepecs, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2021
* USD 800,000.00

Producing behavior is the brain's principal function. While a technological
revolution in systems neuroscience yielded a broad array of tools to observe and
manipulate neural circuits, behavioral technologies have lagged behind. The
problem of behavioral measurement and description is as complex as behaviors are
diverse. To study behavior, laboratories employ complex behavioral systems,
often in combination with custom-made hardware and software, and use these to
define the tasks animals are required to learn and perform. As a consequence,
the descriptions of behavioral tasks are tied to the hardware of each system,
and there is no general, abstract description format to bridge across
laboratories employing different systems. Building on insights from computer
science, computational linguistics, and psychology, the goal of this project is
to develop a formal language to describe behavioral tasks. This new behavioral
task description language enhances accurate task design, improves
reproducibility of existing tasks, enables widespread sharing and publication of
task descriptions, and supports cross-system implementation. The project has
broad benefits for improving scientific rigor and reproducibility in behavioral
neuroscience. Moreover, the project reduces a significant barrier to
sophisticated behavioral neuroscience experiments, putting them within reach of
undergraduate class projects, and exposing students to a highly
interdisciplinary approach, drawing on neuroscience, computer science,
psychology, and linguistics. The project entails the development of a formal
computer language that can describe all laboratory behavioral tasks in a
platform-independent manner. Currently, behavioral tasks are described largely
with a combination of flowcharts and textual explanation, beyond the specific
software codes used to control behavioral hardware. These descriptions do not
provide formal accounts that ensure identical re-implementation or the rigorous
comparison of similarly described paradigms. In addition, the hardware-bound
codes tend hide the logic of behavioral tasks. The objective of this project is
to design a new language, an extension to finite state machine descriptions,
that can serve both as abstract illustrations for publications and also ready-
to-run programs to control hardware. The new behavioral task description
language builds on the class virtual finite state machines, a finite state
machine extension framework that was developed to provide software
specifications for real-time control systems. Additionally, the new task
description language introduces ways to encapsulate common design motifs so they
can be treated as primitives and additional features to define trial structures.
The consistent high-level description enhances behavioral task design,
distilling critical features into an easy-to-understand and formally rigorous
structure. To demonstrate the use of this language, a turn-key implementation,
including a graphical editor, is produced. In addition, templates for an array
of commonly used behavioral tasks are produced. The platform-independent
behavior description language exposes the underlying behavioral task logic and
makes it easier to describe, reproduce, and share behavioral tasks across
laboratories. This NeuroNex Innovation Award is part of the BRAIN Initiative and
NSF's Understanding the Brain activities.