* 1707298
* NeuroNex Innovation Award: Towards Automatic Analysis of Multi-Terabyte Cleared Brains
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Miller, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2020
* USD 959,999.00

Three complimentary changes are revolutionizing the way neuroscientists study
the brain. First, experimental advances allow neurobiologists to "clear" brains
so that they become transparent, with the exception of a set of neurons that can
be selected on the basis of their location, response properties, and genetic
make-up. Second, technological advances have resulted in microscopes that can
simultaneously image an entire "sheet" of this brain, thereby enabling rapid
acquisition of whole brain volumes. Third, researchers are taking steps to
educate neuroscientists to acquire these data. Together, this will result in a
massive upswing in adoption of this experimental modality. However, acquiring
the data is one step in the upward spiral of science that will yield
transformative scientific results. The subsequent steps are computational. This
project will develop cyberinfrastructure resources and software that enable
storage and access of large CLARITY brain imaging datasets, alignment and
registration to reference anatomical atlas and visualization of the datasets.
Additional capabilities for automatic identification and localization of cell
bodies and statistical analysis will be provided. The PIs will run annual
hackathons for college students and sponsor a summer internship program for
undergraduates to broaden the educational efforts in software development for
neuroscience. Finally, mobile compliant digital education content will be
created to complement existing online courses to target STEM students, and
educate global citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a
prototype pipeline that operates on raw CLARITY brains and outputs the
statistics of locations of cells in each region in the Allen Reference Atlas, as
well as estimates of connectivity and similarity across regions and conditioned
on different contexts. To do so, the PIs will leverage modern mathematical
statistics (such as Large Deformation Diffeomorphic Metric Mapping for
registration, Deep Learning and Random Forests for segmentation, and Statistical
Graph Theory for analysis of the resulting conenctomes), as well as modern
computational tools, including Docker containers to facilitate full
reproducability, and semi-external memory algorithms and cloud computing to
enable scalable analytics. To reach out to the broader community and educate
them in the use of these tools, this project will provide tutorials deployed in
the cloud. Together, this will facilitate the large community of users to both
collect and analyze their data with ease. Many of the tools developed as part of
this project will be easily extensible to other experimental modalities and
neuroscience communities.