* 1707990
* PhysTEC: Building a Solution to the National Physics Teacher Shortage
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2023
* USD 3,075,000.00

A severe shortage of qualified STEM teachers, necessary to educate and inspire
the future technical workforce, undermines our nation's economic competitiveness
and its scientific and technological leadership. The situation in physics is
particularly alarming: fewer than half of all high school physics classrooms are
led by a teacher with a degree in physics, and physics is the number one
shortage area for new K-12 teachers. The Physics Teacher Education Coalition
(PhysTEC) project vision is that every student will have the opportunity to
learn physics from a highly qualified teacher, thus enabling the U.S. to meet
the high demand for STEM professionals. Since 2001, PhysTEC, led by the American
Physical Society (APS) and the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT),
has been working to engage physics departments in establishing the educational
infrastructure needed to address the national physics teacher shortage. The
project developed over 40 model teacher preparation programs that more than
doubled their production of highly qualified physics teachers, and these new
teachers have high retention rates. These PhysTEC Sites also demonstrated
considerable success in sustaining their programs beyond their funded period. To
disseminate effective practices and knowledge, the project established a
national coalition of more than 300 Member Institutions; these institutions
collectively prepare over half of the nation's highly qualified physics
teachers. Building on this widespread engagement of the physics community and
project knowledge and experience from many successful programs, PhysTEC will
pursue three interrelated goals toward building a solution to the national
physics teacher shortage. The project will: (1) directly engage dozens of
institutions to prepare greater numbers of highly qualified physics teachers,
(2) test the effectiveness of "levers" for engaging physics departments to
enable the development of scalable change initiatives, and (3) validate a model
for thriving programs that prepare large numbers of highly qualified physics
teachers. PhysTEC will develop "next generation PhysTEC Sites that offer
improved models for physics teacher preparation, including Comprehensive Sites
that establish thriving programs to prepare 5 or more physics teachers per year,
and Recruiting Sites to develop an appropriately scaled model for smaller
institutions. The project will also explore innovative modalities for directly
engaging larger numbers of institutions at lower cost and offer readily scalable
solutions. Improving the national infrastructure for preparing greater numbers
of highly qualified physics teachers will help ensure excellence in physics
education for tens of thousands of K-12 students across the nation each year,
and thousands of college students including future teachers will benefit from
transformed courses at PhysTEC Sites. In addition, PhysTEC will disseminate
knowledge on teacher preparation to a broad national audience, including the
60,000 combined members of APS and AAPT, through conferences, workshops,
publications, online communications, and a website. Further, the project will
engage with disciplinary professional societies and other organizations to offer
PhysTEC as a paradigm to address teacher shortages in other STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates knowledge gained from
previous efforts with theories of institutional change to inform a complex,
systems approach to change initiatives. A comprehensive evaluation plan will
investigate the effectiveness of PhysTEC initiatives to engage physics
departments, develop capacity for change, and improve physics teacher
preparation; formative evaluation will guide improvements to PhysTEC
initiatives. Participating institutions will adopt research-based practices,
including instructional practices shown to increase student learning and develop
knowledge and skills for teaching physics. Peer-reviewed publications will add
to the knowledge base for STEM teacher preparation. This award is funded by the
Division of Physics within the NSF Mathematics and Physical Sciences Directorate
and by NSF's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program.