* 1707965
* Gravitational Waves as a Tool of Astronomical Discovery
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Richard O'Shaughnessy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 120,000.00

LIGO has identified gravitational waves (GWs) from coalescing black hole
binaries, initiating a revolution in astrophysics. Reliable measurements about
these previously-unseen events will allow astrophysicists to infer the processes
responsible for forming them, and to test general relativity. The main thrust of
this project is to perform comparisons of the best available solutions of
Einstein's theory (large-scale supercomputer simulations) and current
approximations used to estimate the parameters of the binary systems, such as
masses, spins, orbital eccentricity, etc. Numerical relativity solutions will be
used to remove bias and reduce systematic errors in the estimation of these
parameters from data observed by LIGO. Accurate knowledge of these parameters
will lead to a greater understanding of the processes that formed these binary
systems and the history of their corresponding stellar progenitors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major theme of this project is the interpretation of
gravitational wave observations of binary black holes, as measured using LIGO
data. The PI's group will help produce these distributions and the associated
science. The principal method at present to infer the properties of coalescing
black holes relies on approximate solutions of Einstein's equations, whose
limitations will bias astrophysical inferences about individual events and
populations. Thus, to enable this core activity, this group will directly and
indirectly compare LIGO data to numerical relativity simulations of binary black
hole coalescence and will perform inference using several models in parallel,
including multimodal surrogate models tuned to numerical relativity, to draw the
sharpest possible conclusions and assess the systematic error. Additionally, the
group will extend underlying parameter estimation strategy used in this
approach. For example, by using Gaussian process interpolation of the likelihood
function to make the inferences more robust and to assess their error. They will
also develop a hierarchical strategy for targeting numerical relativity followup
simulations and incorporating them into the parameter and systematic error
estimates. These techniques will be apply to perform tests of general relativity
using multiple modes excited during the merger, particularly as excited
coherently during the coalescence of precessing binary black holes.