* 1707207
* ABI Innovation: Development of Glycan Modeling and Simulation Toolset
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Wonpil Im, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 546,826.00

Carbohydrates are sugars or chains of sugars that are also referred to as
glycans. They can can be covalently attached to proteins (glycoproteins) and
lipids (glycolipids), or exist as small, soluble molecules. Experimental
techniques for studying glycans are not as well developed as for other types of
biomolecules, including a lack of computational tools. This means it can be hard
to decide which glycans contribute to protein function, how they act to modulate
this function, and how to modify them to optimize interesting properties.
Structural records of proteins, including glycosylated proteins, are appearing
in ever larger numbers in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). By selecting these
glycosylated protein structures for deeper investigation with sophisticated
computational tools, a knowledge-based approach to understanding the
relationship between their structure, function and biological roles can be
built. Knowledge based approaches allow both top-down understanding of
biological roles, and bottom-up simulations of structural fluctuations at the
atomic level; the latter provide very deep insight into how different glycans
affect the folding and function of modified proteins. In addition, most proteins
in cell membranes are glycosylated, which is important to cell recognition and
signaling; more realistic modeling of biological membranes, provided by the
CHARMM-GUI Membrane Builder toolset, will further enrich the available
repertoire of membrane structure simulations. This project aims to achieve these
goals by developing a comprehensive toolset for glycan modeling and simulation.
Both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the
interdisciplinary computational structural glycobiology. In particular, this
project will raise the scientific literacy of the research community through the
publication of research results and workshop participation.

The main objective of this project is to develop a computational toolset for
modeling and simulation of glycan-containing biological systems and to acquire
an in-depth and molecular-level understanding of glycan structure, dynamics, and
function in the context of glycoproteins, glycolipids, and protein-glycan
complexes. A comprehensive toolset for the computational analysis, modeling, and
simulation of glycoconjugates and glycan-associated complexes will be developed.
This tool set will include (1) Glycan Modeler, a tool for structure prediction
of protein-linked glycans from their primary sequences; (2) GLYSUM, the GLYcan
monosaccharide SUbstitution Matrix, the glycan equivalent to the BLOSUM matrix;
(3) GLDB, Glycan Ligand Database for easy retrieval of protein-glycan
interaction patterns and motifs in the PDB; (4) GBS-Predictor, a template-based
tool to predict potential glycan binding sites (GBS) in a target protein; and
(5) glycolipid-containing Membrane Builder, an intuitive tool to build a complex
membrane system containing glycolipids. This project also seeks to foster
synergistic scientific research and education on glycan structure, dynamics, and
function by making resulting tools available http://www.glycanstructure.org and
http://www.charmm-gui.org.