* 1707350
* NeuroNex Innovation Award: Chemical and Genetic Methods to Measure and Manipulate Neurons with Light
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2020
* Ehud Isacoff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 800,000.00

Understanding the human brain remains one of the great challenges of modern
science. The scope of disciplines required to understand brain structure and
function - chemistry, molecular biology, structural biology, biophysics,
electrical engineering, computational science, cognitive science and psychology
- to say nothing of the fields of inquiry and exploration that are influenced by
this understanding, such as religion, art, music, philosophy, sociology and
literature, is far-reaching. The sheer scale of the cells contained in the human
brain, in contemplating the vast number of neurons, some 80 billion, and the
hundreds to thousands of connections that each neuron forms with other neurons,
along with the additional 80 billion non-neuronal support cells, makes for a
daunting parts list to catalog. And yet, beyond just a static picture of the
arrangement of these various cells into ensembles and networks, the dynamic
information flow between these cells, the electrical and chemical impulses that
underpin the very essence of human existence - sensation, thought, emotion,
cognition - represent not just an additional layer of complexity, but, at its
core, a deep mystery to be unraveled and explored. To push back at this frontier
requires new thoughts, new tools, new techniques, and new interpretations that
will almost certainly come from teams of scientists working across disciplines
to bring new approaches that are more than the sum of their parts. This project
will develop and apply new methods for non-invasively measuring electrical
signals underlying brain cell communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
establishes a NeuroNex Innovation Project at the University of California,
Berkeley, which will develop chemical-genetic methods to measure neuronal
activity in a non-invasive, high-throughput, high-fidelity manner across
multiple length scales, at high speed, and in multiple species with molecular
precision. The team will optically read-out neuronal activity by directly
imaging changes in membrane voltage with bright, sensitive, chemically-
synthesized voltage-sensitive fluorophores. The voltage-sensitive fluorophore
make use of photoinduced electron transfer (PeT) as a voltage-sensing trigger to
provide fast, sensitive, non-disruptive optical recordings in neurons. In this
project, pairing of PeT-based voltage-sensitive dyes with genetic targeting
methods to enable optical voltage sensing with sub-cellular and sub-millisecond
resolution in intact animal brains will be conducted. This NeuroNex Innovation
Award is part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's Understanding the Brain
activities.