* 1707415
* Controllable spin and charge transport in two-dimensional monochalcogenide semiconductors for spintronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ian Appelbaum, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 330,002.00

In addition to their charge, electrons have an intrinsic angular momentum,
called 'spin', that is coupled to a magnetic moment. Manipulation of electron
spin orientation in polarized ensembles provides a basis for new logic devices
and circuits with potential advantages over present-day charge-based designs. It
is widely believed that whenever spin encodes logic state, semiconductor
materials with the longest spin lifetime are the most suitable choice for
transport channels between injection and detection contacts. However, once a
logic operation is completed, residual spins can and will interfere with future
operations. If a device can be designed with a controllable spin lifetime such
that injected spins do not relax during transport in a logic operation but upon
completion vanish from the channel by an induced fast equilibration mechanism,
it will have a significant advantage over the current spin logic technology. The
innovation of the proposed research lies in making use of semiconductor
materials having anisotropic spin relaxation. The impact of the proposed
activity is in the potential of spin-based semiconductor devices and circuits to
circumvent the fundamental limitations of charge-based electronics. In addition,
graduate students will be trained in interdisciplinary research involving
semiconductor device design, processing, measurement, magnetism, low-temperature
techniques; and outreach activities will extend to broaden understanding of
2-dimensional semiconductors to elementary and high-school students, parents,
and the general public by developing demonstrations of the scientific contents
of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spins are initially aligned parallel or
antiparallel to the quantization axis at injection. After the completion of a
logic operation, spin transpors to other parts of the device and a clocked
voltage pulse on an electrostatic gate generates an electric field that induces
a Bychkov-Rashba effective magnetic field. This magnetic field is non-colinear
to the spin axis and thus coherently rotates the spins onto an orthogonal axis
where strong relaxation eliminates their polarization. The logic environment is
then reset. Through theoretical symmetry analysis it has been determined,
several two-dimensional materials that are based on graphene-like honeycomb
lattice have the requisite anisotropic spin-orbit properties. The most promising
candidate material system is the group-III metal-monochalcogenide monolayers,
called III-VI-ene ('three-six-ene'). In these inversion asymmetric materials
(such as GaSe, InS, etc), the spin-orbit-induced wave-vector- dependent
Dresselhaus effective magnetic field is oriented perpendicular to the plane,
making spin up/down the natural eigenstates, immune to Dyakonov-Perel relaxation
via precessional dephasing upon momentum scattering. To control spin lifetime, a
Bychkov-Rashba field resulting from electrostatic gating that is always oriented
in-plane can be used to rotate spins toward the plane so that precessional
dephasing leads to efficient depolarization. This proposal deals to exploit the
unique properties of three-six-enes (specifically, exfoliated GaSe) that
intimately combines the symmetry-based theoretical understanding of the
fundamental electronic structure in these materials with an experimental plan to
demonstrate the predicted anisotropic relaxation effects in spin- and charge-
transport devices. The focus is on understanding the experimental consequences
of complex electronic structure and develop a scheme for implementation of the
unique properties of three-six-enes in spin-enabled circuits for engineering
applications.