* 1707467
* Radiative Double Electron Capture (RDEC) of Ions with Quasi-free Electrons
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Asghar Kayani, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 172,779.00

A popular image of atoms shows electrons circling the nucleus like planets
orbiting the sun. To improve upon this analogy, one must understand how
electrons in atoms repel each other due to their negative charges, and how
electrons obey the laws of quantum mechanics. This project studies how
interactions between electrons causes their motion to become correlated. This is
important because such correlations have a big impact on the physical and
chemical properties of atoms, molecules, and materials. To investigate electron
correlations, this project will observe situations in which two electrons are
transferred from one atom to an ion and an x-ray photon is simultaneously
emitted. When this happens, the entire process can be thought of as the time
inverse of double ionization (removal of two electrons) by a single photon. This
is related to the photoelectric effect, which was originally explained by Albert
Einstein in 1905. However, the rate for double photoionization is difficult to
predict because of the way electrons interact with one another. Similar physics
is important when two electrons are transferred to a moving projectile.
Scientists are interested in understanding this process as it occurs in
collisions between projectile ions and target atoms and from the time-reversed
process of double photoionization of an atom by a single photon. Both processes
are likely to occur in astrophysical plasmas. Probabilities for the two-electron
process have been calculated with widely differing results, leaving the field
open for experiments to resolve the differences. Attempts to measure the process
have been very difficult due to the long measuring times required to observe the
events. The involvement of Ph.D. students in this research project gives them
valuable training in a state-of-the-art physics experiment and experience in
preparing collaborative manuscripts and abstracts and allows them to attend
conferences to report the results and assists them as they develop into
productive young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transfer of two electrons
to an ion accompanied by the emission of a single photon is called radiative-
double-electron capture, or RDEC for short. The intellectual merit of this
proposal lies in its intrinsic importance in the field of ion collisions with
quasi-free electrons, and its close relationship to photon interactions with
highly-charged ions. This relationship comes about because RDEC is the time
inverse of double photoionization. These processes are essentially identical
when RDEC occurs for incident fully-stripped ions and double photoionization for
two-electron systems, in which case the interaction between the two electrons,
i.e., correlation, plays a fundamental role. RDEC is similar to the commonly
observed one-electron process of radiative-electron capture (REC), the inverse
of the photoelectric effect, which, however, does not require electron
correlation. New studies in this project of RDEC for gas targets of helium,
nitrogen and neon will address complications of previously published data
involving ion-solid interactions for oxygen and fluorine ions incident on a thin
C-foil target. Multiple collision effects are not present for gas targets as
they are for solid targets. RDEC can be compared with several published
theoretical calculations, which, however, differ by several orders of magnitude.
The measurements are being done (Some preliminary data have already been
obtained for nitrogen and neon targets.) for fully-stripped fluorine ions using
the 6-MV tandem Van de Graaff accelerator at Western Michigan University.
Coincidences between x rays emitted and singly- and doubly-charged projectiles
are recorded, with the latter representing a signature for RDEC. The
measurements are very time-consuming due to the relatively small RDEC cross
sections (less than ~1 barn) and require continuous counting times of a month or
more for each target. The studies are carried out by the PI, the co-PI, and two
graduate students and also include collaborators from the University of Notre
Dame and Jagiellonian University in Krakow (Poland).