* 1707585
* SUSCHEM:  Exploring Specific Heating in Microwave-assisted Synthesis of Hierarchical Hybrid Nanomaterials for Future Sustainable Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Jun Li, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 298,367.00

PART 1:   NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Batteries are ubiquitous electrical
energy storage devices in our life to support anything from portable electronics
to electrical grids. A key component that determines the cost and performance of
batteries is the electrode materials. This project, funded by the Solid State
Materials and Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
seeks to develop new methods to prepare novel electrode materials that can be
used for two types of emerging batteries, i.e. sodium ion batteries and
magnesium ion batteries. These new battery-types use earth-abundant sodium and
magnesium ions in electrochemical reactions and hence have the potential to
significantly lower the cost of energy storage compared to current state-of-the-
art Li-ion batteries, making them attractive for large-scale electrical energy
storage. However, currently used single-phase electrode materials in these
batteries exhibit poor stability and a short lifetime due to hosting the much
larger sodium ions and higher-charged magnesium ions. Therefore this project
targets hybrid materials which consist of active electrode materials deposited
on stable three-dimensional nanostructured carbon scaffolds. The research
approach makes use of the relatively strong microwave absorption by the
nanocarbon materials to accelerate the synthesis process and create strong
hybrid materials that otherwise may be unstable in separated phases. In addition
to creating a better understanding of the fundamental properties of hybrid solid
state materials and potentially improving the performance of electrical energy
storage devices, this project provides cross-disciplinary training to students
from diverse backgrounds including underrepresented groups. All three aspects
are critical for maintaining our nation's leading role in the strategically
important fields of energy conversion and
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:   TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project, funded by the Solid State Materials and
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, targets the
development of well-controlled three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical hybrid
electrode materials for two types of emerging batteries, i.e. sodium ion
batteries and magnesium ion batteries, by depositing desired active electrode
materials (metal oxides and chalcogenides) on nanostructured carbon templates
using an innovative microwave-assisted synthesis method. Rapid heating, based on
the specific microwave absorption of the nanocarbon templates, induces rapid
nucleation and growth of metastable phases which combine into stable hybrid
electrode materials that cannot be readily synthesized with conventional
methods. Different types of nanocarbons, including dispersed nanoflakes of
reduced graphene oxides (rGOs), stacked 3D films of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or
electrospun carbon nanofibers (CNFs), and arrays of vertically aligned carbon
nanofibers (VACNFs), are investigated as highly conductive and mechanically
robust templates to control the morphology, composition and phases of the
deposited active electrode materials. This provides techniques for synthesizing
delicate 3D hierarchical core-shell hybrid materials containing metastable
materials such as hydrated metal oxides (V2O5·nH2O bilayers) and metal
chalcogenides (VS4 chains) which have more opened structures to facilitate
reversible storage of large Na+ ions and divalent Mg2+ ions. Such hybrid
hierarchical materials may break the intrinsic limits of single-phase electrode
materials by enhancing the electrical conductivity and reducing the ion
diffusion path length in the solid materials while significantly improving the
electrode's stability. The capability of fast heating by microwave irradiation
shortens the materials synthesis processes and greatly accelerates materials
discovery and optimization. This project also provides cross-disciplinary
training to both graduate and undergraduate students in nanomaterials
synthesis/characterization, electrochemistry and electrical energy storage
technologies. Outreach activities are aimed at interesting K-12 students
(particularly girls) in Kansas in STEM education, and engaging an undergraduate
student from Xavier University (underrepresented minority) in summer research
and further career development each year.