* 1707770
* Identifying the Rules Governing Tripeptide Gelation in Aqueous Solution.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Reinhard Schweitzer-Stenner, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 396,750.00

Non-technical abstract

The discovery and characterization of biodegradable gels are important to many
biomaterial applications. Low molecular weight peptides attracted increasing
interest as gel forming compounds due to their low synthesis costs and the ease
by which their reactive sites can be modified. Peptides are known to self-
assemble into supramolecular structures, such as ribbons, nanotubes, and
monolayers, which are predominantly composed of sheet-like structures. Several
diseases are linked to the self-assembly of peptides/proteins including
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. Overall very
little is understood regarding the self-assembly of peptides/proteins into
fibrils. With respect to biotechnology, the self-assembly process has very
positive aspects. It allows the generation of biocompatible material with
incorporated biological function. Their biomedical and biotechnological
relevance for developing suitable protocols for drug delivery, microfluidics,
and tissue engineering/repair, is well established. This project will focus on
elucidating specific interactions between peptides that lead to self-assembly
and bulk gelation. Phase diagrams will be constructed to identify material
constraints and identify potential applications for series of peptides. The
results are expected to bring significant insight into designing new peptides
with tailored or controlled aggregation kinetics and gelation properties for a
broad range of applications. The project outcomes will have significant impact
in understanding and interpreting the role of peptides and their sequence in
disease manifestation. Lastly, the project will result in the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in the fields of Chemistry, Chemical
Engineering, and Physics.

Technical abstract

This research project is motivated by the discovery of the unexpected gelation
of cationic glycylalanylglycine (GAG) in ethanol/water and glycylhistidylglycine
(GHG) in water at neutral pH. The planned experiments and computations are aimed
at a thorough assessment of the molecular mechanisms and microscopic and
macroscopic properties of gels formed by the above unblocked GxG peptides. We
will focus initially on five tripeptides: GAG, GHG, GVG, GDG and GFG and their
respective blocked derivatives. Experimental investigations will determine the
effect of environment (solvent composition, pH, temperature, peptide
concentration) on peptide conformation and interaction energies. Rheology will
be used to determine the strength, compliance, and recovery of volume spanning
networks. Circular dichroism (CD), IR, vibrational spectroscopy, and rheology
will be used to construct phase diagrams with regard to temperature, peptide
concentration, pH and the mole fraction of co-solvents. The phase diagrams will
also be analyzed in the context of current theories of gelation to determine
interaction energies. Finally, investigations will focus on exploring the
different steps of the tripeptide gelation process: from the onset of tripeptide
aggregation to the formation of large scale fibrils. Some key questions that
will be answered are how the peptides are integrated into a sample spanning
network and what type of structure and conformation do the peptides make inside
fibrils. A strong emphasis will be placed on characterizing the kinetics of
gelation and the dependence of kinetic rates on external stimuli. Furthermore,
we will determine the local conformation of peptides in the crystalline fibrils
by combining vibrational spectroscopy data with molecular dynamics and density
functional calculations. The unique comparison and analysis of simultaneous
rheological, computational and spectroscopic data will unfold the complexities
of peptide aggregation, fibrillization, and ultimately network formation from
the molecular to macroscopic scale. The proposed research is clearly at the
interface between physics, chemistry and biology. The project would provide
funding for graduate students and one undergraduate student. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained on a variety of instruments and learn how
to combine rather different data sets into a common picture describing the
investigated systems. Undergraduate research will be become part of the
student's Co-op experience.