* 1707830
* Chemical Guidelines for Predictive Materials Integration in Hybrid Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Chemists draw diagrams that visually represent the application of important
chemical and physical principles to a new idea or function, and then work to
create the molecules and materials that make these designs a reality. For
example, combining together catalysts and semiconductors at nanometer length
scales can allow certain chemical reactions to occur when a light is turned on.
While chemists can propose an almost limitless combination of materials that
have potentially interesting and useful functions, it is not always easy to
practically put together the materials in a way that enables these functions to
be observed experimentally. Dr. Raymond Schaak, from the Pennsylvania State
University University Park, is developing new capabilities for predictably
combining materials and molecules at nanometer length scales. He is funded to
identify new ways of creating interfaces between functional nanoscale materials
using chemical reactions that couple together and transform nanoparticle
building blocks. He is also studying important characteristics of these
interfaces to better understand how targeted functions can be predictably
achieved. Dr. Schaak is developing methods for depositing materials and
molecules at precise locations on the surfaces of these coupled nanoparticle
systems. The fundamental knowledge gained from this project helps to bridge the
gap between what can be designed and what can be accessed experimentally for
functional nanoscale materials of increasing chemical complexity. Dr. Schaak
works on this research program with a diverse team of graduate and undergraduate
students. He trains a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students to
develop, implement, and assess modular plug-and-play curricular materials
(application-focused notes, case studies, collaborative problems, assessment
tools) for contextualizing general chemistry units using cutting-edge research
themes, impacting &gt;2000 students initially plus many more through
multiple&lt;br/&gt;dissemination pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research program, Dr. Schaak of Pennsylvania State University is supported by
the Macromolecluar, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Pprogram to develop
new chemical strategies for constructing multi-component hybrid nanoparticles
that integrate functional materials through well-defined interfaces at precise
locations. A suite of nanoparticle heterocoupling, chemical transformation, and
phase segregation reactions decouple two competing synthetic bottlenecks,
functional materials incorporation and interface control, to generate new hybrid
nanostructures. Microscopic and spectroscopic studies complement the synthetic
efforts to provide new insights into interfacial composition, structure, and
morphology. Additional efforts to control metal and ligand deposition at precise
locations on the hybrid nanoparticle surfaces add additional interfaces and
capabilities for directional surface interactions. These new chemical
capabilities and insights are important for predictably synthesizing functional
hybrid nanostructures of increasing chemical complexity across a wide range of
applications. Because they incorporate nanoscale interfaces, colloidal hybrid
nanoparticles serve as discrete model systems for larger multi-component
architectures such as fuel cells, solar cells, and lab-on-a-chip devices. Dr.
Schaak works on this research program with a diverse team of graduate and
undergraduate students. He and his students also develop new teaching tools to
provide application-focused context to topics in large introductory chemistry
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.