* 1707232
* I-Corps: 3D Printing of carbon fiber reinforced polymer on contoured surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will derive from
a new 3D printing technology that can address critical needs in small
volume/smart devices by providing products with increased strength-to-weight
ratios, integrated materials that enable designed functionality, and a high
degree of feature customization. 3D printed components with optimal shape and
functional properties have a multitude of potential applications in the
automotive, aerospace, environmental monitoring and medical fields. With the
potential introduction of commercial drone applications, this technology will
meet an increased need for flexible payload carrier fabrication techniques that
can be customized for payload specific weight, strength, and design
requirements. Additionally, the technology described in this project will
provide an alternative fabrication approach for customized assistive devices
that has the potential to decrease production time, lower waste and energy
consumption, decrease costs, improve assistive device customization and user
performance. Lastly, the ability to embed novel capabilities such as monitoring
acceleration or temperature and pressure at the skin interface into these
devices aligns with a growing societal interest in wearable
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will identify the key value
propositions of a novel 3D printing technology for targeted customers and
quantify the market value for devices fabricated with this technology across
several application areas. Key strategic partners and major competitors within
the general areas that align with this technology will be investigated. The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the new knowledge that will be
obtained regarding application driven needs for 3D printing of fiber reinforced
polymers that enable customized fabrication of smart, functional devices. This
advanced 3D printing technology reconfigures and extends the functionality of a
fused deposition modeling (FDM) 3D printing approach to enable 3D printing of
continuous fiber composite materials along curvatures on multiple planes,
including overhanging features. Preliminary results from this technology have
demonstrated the first example of out-of-plane 3D printing at the meso-scale.
The new knowledge resulting from this I-Corps project will inform and direct
further technological advancements towards the development of a printing system
targeted for specific application needs in size, strength, resolution, and
material diversity.