* 1707316
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Multimodal Integrated Neural Technologies (MINT) - Connecting Physiology to Functional Mapping
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Gyorgy Buzsaki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 7,750,000.00

In order to understand how neural signals propagate to conduct specific
functions in behaving animals and how individual neurons are physically
connected in the context of behavior, advanced tools should be available at the
hands of neuroscientists. The Multimodal Integrated Neural Technologies (MINT)
hub aims to develop and provide tools that are able to read from and modulate
neurons at multiple sites independently at high spatial and temporal
resolutions. The hub will disseminate tools and methods to correlate the
recorded cell activity with the structural connection. In this way, the
connectivity of active cells can be visualized, labeled, and traced for detailed
functional mapping. The mission of the MINT hub is to provide a collection of
tools, synergistically developed, integrated, and available to the neuroscience
community, to address one theme: connecting neurophysiology and structural
analysis with a greater scale and resolution. The synergistic integration of
these neurotechnology tools at the MINT Hub would accelerate the rate of
discovery in neuroscience. This in turn can be expected to pave the way to
improved treatments for neurological disorders and to breakthroughs in
artificial intelligence, especially neuromorphic computing. The MINT hub will
provide annual training workshops for new users to be familiar with new
technologies and able to use them effectively. To achieve sustainability, the
hardware tools will be actively marketed to the community and those with
sustainable volume will be transitioned to commercialization partners.
Importantly, this program will cross-train neuroscience and technology personnel
during the course of this program, resulting in preparation of a new generation
of multi-disciplinary engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This hub
uniquely combines high-density electrodes, chemical sensing, optical
stimulation, and cell labeling. Fiberless high-density optoelectrodes can allow
optical stimulation of individual or few neurons with high specificity and
selectivity using monolithically integrated micro-LEDs or optical waveguides on
multi-shank silicon probes. Carbon microthreads will be used to create advanced
arrays that will dramatically increase the ability to record from interconnected
neurons and label those cells with high accuracy. Advanced metal alloys will
also be used to greatly enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of miniaturized
electrodes. The MINT hub will innovate viral vector delivery and tissue clearing
in the nervous system and combine these with multispectral labeling for intact
cell phenotyping. Furthermore, an open-source software will be developed to
improve the accuracy and efficiency of anatomical reconstruction for creating
connectivity maps. The MINT hub will validate the developed tools and methods in
three in-vivo experiments to exemplify what can be accomplished when the
proposed modalities and methods are synergistically integrated. This
NeuroTechnology Hub award is co-funded by the Division of Emerging Frontiers
within the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental &amp; Transport Systems within the Directorate for
Engineering as part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's Understanding the Brain
activities.