* 1707519
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Morphological Variation and Molecular Origination of Chiropteran Wing Membranes
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Daniel Urban, Urban                   Daniel         J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Daniel Urban, is conducting
research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections in
innovative ways, and is being mentored by two sponsoring scientists at two host
institutions: Nancy Simmons (American Museum of Natural History) and Karen Sears
(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign). The project aims to understand the
origination and diversification of novel traits, specifically bat wings. The
wing membranes of bats are novel structures with no known associations to
features in any other mammals. Additionally, the importance of the wing
membranes cannot be overstated as they have allowed bats to diversify in an
extraordinary manner - bats account for over 20% of all mammalian species. While
conducting this research, the fellow is training and mentoring several
undergraduates from groups traditionally underrepresented in science, while
utilizing the wealth of knowledge in museum collections in innovative ways.
Furthermore, the fellow is broadening public engagement by generating hands-on
learning activities at the American Museum of Natural History, which have the
potential to reach over 5 million children and adults annually.

The fellow's research consists of three primary aims. Aim 1 characterizes
varying wing forms among diverse bat species. This aim is being achieved by
conducting wing shape analysis on adult specimens housed at the American Museum
of Natural History (AMNH), which contains over 60,000 bats in its collection. In
Aim 2 the fellow is identifying when during development the wing membranes begin
to form, and from what tissue sources they originate. The fellow is also
determining at what point differences in the wing forms begin to emerge among
species. Aim 2 specimens are being acquired from a combination of AMNH fluid
collections and newly captured bats (which will then be added to the AMNH
collections). Finally, Aim 3 seeks to establish the cellular and molecular
mechanisms responsible for the development of the wing membranes, and how these
mechanisms diverge among various species. This aim uses developing embryos to
visualize cellular processes, gene expression, and protein localization.
Identifying the mechanisms driving the origination and diversification of bat
wing membranes will advance our understanding of bat development and evolution
and, more generally, the developmental drivers of evolutionary innovations and
adaptive radiations. In the process, the fellow is also generating outreach
activities to assist in educating the public about the importance of bats and
their amazing novel wing structures.