* 1707372
* Probing Domain Wall Dynamics in Ferroic Materials by Impedance Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Keji Lai, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 369,934.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Domain walls in ferroelectrics or
ferromagnets are the boundaries separating domains with different polarizations
or magnetizations. The motion of these narrow interfaces is of fundamental
importance for the application of these materials in electrical and optical
devices. Because of various technical challenges, it is not trivial to
experimentally investigate the high-frequency dynamics of individual domain
walls. Using a specialized microscope, the research team aims to study the
electrical properties of these nanometer-sized interfaces, as well as to explore
domain wall devices that function at microwave frequencies. An integrated
research and education program at University of Texas at Austin is established
such that students at different levels are trained to explore fundamental
material physics and master advanced microscopy
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The collective
domain wall motion has been extensively studied to understand the switching
dynamics of ferroic materials. Due to the difficulty to perform nanoscale
impedance spectroscopy over a broad frequency range, however, little is known
about the dynamic response of ferroic domain walls to oscillating electric
fields, which is crucial for their application in functional devices. Using a
novel broadband impedance microscope, the research team plans to address many
profound scientific questions such as the dielectric loss and conduction at
ferroic domain walls, the influence of temperature and magnetic fields on wall
dynamics, and the feasibility of prototyping domain wall waveguides. The
understanding of the dielectric dispersion and local conduction of multiferroic
domain walls in the microwave regime is critical for their application in
communication systems. The new approach of nanoscale dielectric spectroscopy is
at the cutting edge of modern condensed matter physics. The research activities
on advanced materials and technologies are also integrated with outreach to
local high school students and teachers through Saturday workshop and summer
camps.