* 1707398
* NeuroNex Theory Team: Columbia University Theoretical Neuroscience Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Laurence Abbott, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 07/31/2023
* USD 7,600,750.00

Understanding how a healthy brain interprets sensory signals and guides actions,
and why an unhealthy brain fails to perform these functions properly, is a
profound and ambitious goal of 21st century science. Integrating knowledge of
neural circuit function into a coherent picture of perception, cognition and
action requires extraordinary cooperation and coordination between three
research areas: experimentation, data analysis and modeling. The National
Science Foundation Theory Team at Columbia University will unite exceptional
resources in statistical data analysis and theoretical modeling with an
extensive network of experimental collaborators to address the enormous
challenges facing neuroscience. Never has the need been greater for theoretical
insights and sophisticated data analysis. The field of neuroscience is facing a
torrent of complex data from a system that is, itself, extraordinarily complex.
Future progress requires developing the ability to extract knowledge and
understanding from these data through analyses and modeling that capture the
essence of what they mean. The goal of the NeuroNex Theory Team at Columbia is
to establish, through the quality of its research, the excellence of its
trainees, and the impact of its visitor, dissemination, and outreach programs, a
new cooperative paradigm that will move neuroscience to unprecedented levels of
discovery and understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-density electrode
recording, wide-field calcium imaging and complex connectivity mapping are
bringing neuroscience into an era of extensive multi-area and even whole-brain
studies of neural activity and circuitry. The neuroscience community desperately
needs new ways of interpreting data obtained from different species using myriad
techniques and for thinking about neural processing over large length and time
scales and across multiple brain areas. In response to these challenges, two
major goals will drive and define research at the NeuroNex Theory Team at
Columbia: first, integrating the analysis methods and theoretical models used to
infer meaning from data with each other and with the experiments that generate
these data; and second, providing analytic tools and theoretical frameworks to
understand interactions between multiple brain regions and to draw important
overarching lessons from experiments exploiting a variety of techniques across
different species. Progress will be made through a tight integration of
theoretical techniques with outstanding experimental collaborators working on a
variety of systems and species. Graduate and postdoctoral training will stress
technical excellence and broad perspectives in both theoretical and experimental
neuroscience. Outreach will be made to other researchers through visitor and
exchange programs, sponsored meetings and dissemination of research results and
high-quality, user-friendly software. Outreach will be made to the broader
community by sharing the excitement of neuroscience research with elementary and
high school students and with the general public. This NeuroNex Theory Team
award is co-funded by the Division of Emerging Frontiers within the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, the Division of Physics and the Division of Mathematics
within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and by the
Division of Brain and Cognitive Sciences within the Directorate of Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences, as part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's
Understanding the Brain activities.