* 1707221
* NeuroNex Technology Hub: Advancing neuronal and genetic approaches to animal behavior research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ian Duncan, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,642,385.00

Neuroscience is one of the most prominent areas of modern biomedical research,
but its impact on other fields, particularly those related to environmental and
organismal biology, has been limited. This is because an increasing proportion
of neuroscience research has been concentrated on just a few "model" animal
species, such as the mouse and fruit fly, for which powerful genetic tools have
been developed to manipulate their genomes. This focus stands in stark contrast
to the early days of neuroscience research, in which a broader sampling of
biodiversity led to important discoveries. Prominent examples include the
discovery of how neurons become activated in the squid and how long-term memory
is established in a marine slug. The primary goal of this proposal is to
increase the diversity of animal species that can be used to advance
neuroscience research by developing and applying modern neurogenetic tools for
observing and manipulating neuronal activity in any animal species. As a proof-
of-principle, state-of-the-art tools are developed for the honey bee and the
American grasshopper. In addition to having immediate impact on basic
neuroscience, the project has impact on applied research, as these two selected
species are important pests and pollinators, respectively. The new tools and
research findings from the proposed work is disseminated to the research
community via NSF-funded initiatives to increase species diversity in genetic
studies, and national and international workshops. The dissemination efforts
include the development of an annual intensive summer course at Washington
University that entails both lectures and hands-on experiences for organismal
biologists who are interested in incorporating modern neuroscience and genetic
tools into their research programs. Additional educational and training
opportunities served by the project include public neuroscience outreach efforts
in the St. Louis region, training of postdoctoral fellows, as well as mentoring
of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in hypothesis-driven
neuroscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of species diversity in
modern neuroscience research restricts the applicability and interpretations of
general neurobiological principles in the context of organismal, ecological, and
evolutionary questions. Therefore, the primary goal of this proposal is to
increase animal species diversity in systems and behavioral neuroscience
research by enabling easy adoption of universal genetic and transgenic tools for
monitoring and manipulating neuronal activity in any animal species, with a
specific emphasis on insects. The proposed approach is comprised of two steps.
First, Cas9/CRISPR-dependent genome editing is used to replace the non-essential
gene white with a DNA cassette that includes an eye-specific red fluorescent
protein (RFP) flanked by two directional phiC31-integrase attP sites, enabling
rapid screening of both white eye-color and RFP expression as markers of
successful germline transformation. Second, the efficient phiC31-Integrase
reaction is used to replace the RFP cassette with a transgene of choice. As a
proof-of-principle, transgenic lines that express the Ca2+ reporter GCaMP6 in
defined neuronal populations in the honey bee Apis mellifera and the American
grasshopper Schistocerca americana are generated and tested for feasibility. By
enabling the use of modern genetic tools to enhance neuroscience research in
these two economically important insect species, which also serve as important
models for basic organismal biological research, the proposed project is likely
to have broad impact relevant to diverse research fields, including agriculture,
neuroethology, animal behavior, pest ecology, and behavioral neuroscience. This
NeuroTechnology Hub award is part of the BRAIN Initiative and NSF's
Understanding the Brain activities.