* 1707357
* Study of Magnetically Driven Cylindrical Compression to Create Strongly Coupled Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Hiroshi Sawada, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

This project develops a new experimental platform combining strong magnetic
fields for compression of a metal rod, and a high power laser for high-energy
x-ray generation as diagnostics. When a solid material is gradually compressed
to high pressures above a million atmospheres, the solid state can be
transformed to liquid, gas and eventually plasma. This high density, low
temperature state of matter is called a strongly coupled plasma, as found in
laser fusion cores and dense astrophysical objects. Modeling of material
properties in this regime is challenging because it is too cold and dense to
apply ideal plasma theory, but the thermal temperature is too high to be treated
with condensed matter physics. Thus, experimental benchmarking of the physics
models is important for understanding fundamental properties of high-pressured
materials. So far, most compression experiments have been conducted on large
laser or pulsed electrical current facilities at national laboratories with
limited numbers of shots. Using a cost-effective, university-scale facility,
this project will explore the feasibility of magnetically driven cylindrical
compression to produce pressures comparable to or even higher than those with a
planar compression technique used on large facilities. Laser-produced hard
x-rays penetrate through a compressed cylinder, providing information on its
density profile and material structure. If successful, the cylindrical
compression with a compact pulsed power will allow researchers to study a wide
range of materials in the strongly coupled regime for fundamental science and
applications. This project will provide full-time support for a graduate student
to be trained in relativistic laser-plasma interaction and pulsed power plasma
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is twofold:
characterization of short-pulse laser-produced hard x-rays and demonstration of
x-ray probing of a magnetically compressed millimeter-diameter aluminum rod.
Coupled experiments simultaneously using a Mega Ampere (MA) pulsed power and a
high power laser in the same vacuum chamber are currently available only at the
University of Nevada - Reno Nevada Terawatt Facility (NTF) and at the Z-Machine
at Sandia National Laboratory. The experiments will fully utilize the NTF's
coupled capability with the 1.0 MA Zebra pulsed power and 50 Terawatt Leopard
short-pulse laser. Broadband and monochromatic hard x-rays (&gt; 10 keV)
produced in the laser-target interaction will be measured with calibrated x-ray
spectrometers and filter stack spectrometers. Compression of a solid Al rod with
a diameter ranging from several hundred microns to a few millimeters will be
studied with x-ray radiography and x-ray diffraction.