* 1707506
* Photonic Nose: Toward System-On-Chip Optical Gas and Odor Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Chih-hung Chang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2022
* USD 329,999.00

Gas and odor sensing plays pivotal roles in energy industry, healthcare, food
safety, security, defense, and environmental protection, but it still remains a
grand challenge given the stringent requirement of sensitivity and selectivity.
So why not learning from our noses that have been perfected by millions of years
of evolution. The mammalian olfactory system is well recognized for its ability
to identify a large number of airborne molecules, far better than most
artificial sensors. The objective of this project is to develop a bio-inspired
photonic nose (P-nose) system by mimicking the mammalian olfactory system, which
will enable ultra-compact optical gas and odor sensing technology with ultra-
high sensitivity and specificity. This research will point out a unique way to
advance the frontline research of bio-inspired systems and transcend existing
bench-top optical gas sensing technology into system-on-chip level for a broad
spectrum of engineering applications. The synergy of this research and education
will benefit graduate and undergraduate students at the Oregon State University
by enhancing the curricula of nanophotonic technology, broaden the participation
of under-represented minorities through leveraging the summer research programs
of the Student Chapter of the Optical Society of America at OSU, and use a
multidisciplinary approach to educate and develop future high-tech entrepreneurs
in technology-based ventures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to investigate a bio-inspired photonic nose system by mimicking the
mammalian olfactory system, which will enable system-on-chip optical gas and
odor sensing technology with ultra-high sensitivity and specificity. The
mammalian olfactory system is well recognized for its ability to identify a
large number of airborne molecules, far better than most artificial sensors. The
ultra-high sensitivity and specificity of the mammalian olfactory system come
from two critical mechanisms: 1) the mucous membrane inside the nasal cavity
with large surface areas (&gt;70cm2) to capture trace level of gas and odorant
molecules; and 2) a combinatorial response of about four hundred different
olfactory receptor neurons to sense more than ten thousand types of odorant. The
proposed biomimetic P-nose system will integrate the PIs' recent research
breakthroughs in both nanomaterials and photonic devices: 1) nanoporous metal-
organic framework materials as highly efficient and selective gas and odorant
absorbents mimicking the mucous membrane inside the nasal cavity; and 2) narrow-
band plasmonic filter array with ultra-high detection sensitivity that is
analogue to olfactory receptor neurons to probe the finger-print infrared
absorption spectra of various gas and odorant molecules. A fully system-on-chip
optical gas and odor sensing technology will be demonstrated at the end of this
project to simultaneously detect multiplex gases including CO2, CH4, and
volatile organic compounds at the near-infrared wavelength
range.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Significance: Ultra-compact gas and odor sensors
play pivotal roles in many engineering applications. State-of-the-art technology
is dominant by electronic nose that relies on arrayed electronic gas sensors
made of metal-oxides and conductive polymers, which lack sensitivity and
specificity. Compared with exiting E-nose techniques, the proposed biomimetic
photonic nose probes the finger-print IR spectra and is expected to bring
transformative impact in detection sensitivity, specificity, sensing time, power
consumption, as well as the capability to work under extreme conditions such as
in explosive gas atmosphere, radiation, or high electric/magnetic fields. Such
bio-inspired concept of photonic nose can be ultimately implemented by
integrating chip-scale nanophotonic devices with emerging nano-porous materials,
and will open a new path toward system-on-chip optical gas sensing with full
functionalities including gas capture, sensing, spectroscopy, and pattern
recognition.