* 1707946
* Collaborative Research: Curvilinear and Multipatch Methods for General Relativistic Astrophysics in the Gravitational Wave Era
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Manuela Campanelli, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 310,484.00

The recent discovery of gravitational waves by Advanced LIGO ushered in a new
kind of astronomy, one potentially integrating its findings with those obtained
from electromagnetic and/or neutrino observations. Multi-messenger astronomy
promises to revolutionize our understanding of the universe by providing
dramatically contrasting views of the same objects. To understand this
unprecedented wealth of observational evidence, theoretical calculations are
required in order to link data with underlying physics. However, these demand
the creation of new computational tools that can handle an increasingly wide
range of physical treatments, characteristic scales, and levels of complexity.
The main thrust of this project is to develop some of these
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goals supported by this award are to
introduce two new techniques into the repertory of physicists and
astrophysicists studying strong-field gravity: multipatch methods and
regularized spherical coordinates. The former is an infrastructure to permit
efficient computation of heterogeneous systems involving multiple kinds of
physics, multiple length scales, and multiple reference frames. The latter is a
way to systematically remove from partial differential equations the singularity
ordinarily arising at the polar axis. We expect both will be of great value to
studies of astrophysical objects in dynamical spacetimes. To make this
introduction, we will generalize our multipatch infrastructure to make it freely
compatible with many codes, including Athena++, The Einstein Toolkit, and
Harm3D; we will introduce regularized spherical coordinates into the numerical
relativity and MHD solvers of both the Einstein Toolkit and the widely used
relativistic magnetohydrodynamics code Harm3D; and we will demonstrate the
results on selected science problems. With Advanced LIGO now fully operational
and the detection of additional gravitational wave events imminent, we expect
that there will be a surge in the number of researchers interested in performing
simulations of compact binary mergers. Our new curvilinear and multipatch
frameworks will greatly improve the efficiency and ease with which such
simulations may be carried out, thereby improving the accuracy of the
predictions made for all the messengers---gravitational waves, photons, and
neutrinos---of multi-messenger astronomy.