* 1707835
* Devices, Materials, and Controls for Future Gravitational-Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 850,000.00

In September 2015 the two Advanced LIGO observatories reached their initial
goal: the detection of gravitational waves. Advanced LIGO, designed for a 10x
sensitivity improvement and much better low-frequency response, now has seen
inspiraling binary black holes at least three times. The improved sensitivity
came from higher laser power, better isolation from ground motion, and changes
to the interferometers themselves. The higher laser power presented challenges
for the input optics, a responsibility of the University of Florida. This
research will address improvements in performance of the input optics and of
controls for the interferometer as a whole. It also addresses the next
generation of detectors to increaser further the LIGO science reach, enabling
better observations of gravitational waves from black holes, neutron stars and
other massive astrophysical events. The research has impacts that go beyond
gravitational wave science as high-power optical devices developed in this
project have commercial applications to the laser and optics industries. In
addition, the students and postdoctoral scientists develop scientific skills
from a diverse set of disciplines spanning lasers and optics, electronics and
feedback control systems, vacuum and cryogenics, and large-scale detector
commissioning and operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In support of near-term and
longer-range gravitational-wave research, the UF LIGO group will carry out a
number of research projects that impact instrument science for future
gravitational-wave. A method for generating arbitrary modulation sidebands will
be developed. Work on low-loss Faraday isolators (key components of the squeezer
that is planned in the near future) will be completed. Application of modern
estimation and control techniques to LIGO suspension systems will be
investigated. A novel scheme for alignment sensing as well as a novel position-
sensitive laser beam detector will be studied. Looking further into the future,
experiments to measure impurities and free carrier absorption in various types
of high purity silicon suitable for cryogenically cooled test masses will be
conducted.