* 1707999
* Inferring the Physics of mRNA Trafficking in Neuronal Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Mark Bathe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2024
* USD 720,000.00

Active transport mechanisms of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) are core to neuronal
network development and function. Fluorescence imaging is a powerful approach to
resolving the physical basis of mRNA transport using direct reporters of mRNA
location and copy number in live cells. However, resolving these mechanisms
requires quantitative, physics-based approaches that model ribosome-mRNA
associations, copy numbers, and recruitment to synaptic and cytoskeletal sites
where local translation is needed. The present project integrates live-cell
imaging with physics-based modeling and inference of stochastic molecular
transport and copy number variations to characterize the molecular basis of
neuronal synapse development that is core to brain development and function in
living systems. Educational initiatives advanced by the PI include undergraduate
and graduate curriculum enhancements including a discussion based seminar course
on the physics of living systems that is taught jointly between the Departments
of Biological Engineering, Physics, and Biology at MIT. The PI is additionally
active in developing and maintaining free web servers that distribute worldwide
physics-based inference procedures developed by his group. The PI participates
in outreach to under-represented minorities through teaching in an annual
workshop organized by the Department of Biology over the inter-activity period
in January. Educational and research activities of the PI are translated to
undergraduate students through MIT's Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program, as well as through host visitations of international students from
foreign countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
understand the translational dynamics of messenger RNAs that are regulated by
active transport mechanisms in neuronal cells. Neurons consist of highly
elongated axonal and dendritic processes that extend hundreds to thousands of
cell bodies away from the nucleus, where transcription occurs. Consequently,
neuronal plasticity in development and learning requires synaptic and
cytoskeletal proteins to be synthesized locally within these extended processes
that cannot be reached by passive mRNA transport mechanisms alone. To achieve
this function, mRNAs are actively trafficked by molecular motors to synaptic
sites to enable local protein production. In this project the PI will apply
single-molecule live-cell imaging together with physics-based modeling of mRNA
and ribosomal transport to understand the molecular basis of neuronal mRNA
transport. The PI will develop stochastic modeling and inference procedures to
infer the association dynamics of mRNAs and ribosomes, as well as their physical
association with filamentous actin networks, microtubules, and synaptic proteins
to identify cellular landmarks that regulate mRNA translation. Fluorescence
fluctuation analysis is performed to infer copy numbers of mRNAs and ribosomes
in ribonucleoprotein complexes, which are cross-validated using multiplexed
super-resolution fluorescence imaging in fixed neuronal samples with
exchangeable DNA probes. This work will help resolve the physical basis of mRNA
recruitment and trafficking in the formation and turnover of synapses that are
central to neuronal development and plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in
the Division of Physics and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.