* 1707654
* Antiferromagnetic spinor Bose-Einstein condensates: from quantum quenches to quantum information
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Chandra Raman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

This experimental research program uses ultracold matter to study how
instabilities develop and propagate in the microscopic realm, rather than the
macroscopic one. In the microscopic domain, most objects obey the laws of
quantum physics, not classical physics. The difference between these two sets of
laws is what can lend tremendous power to quantum technologies, ranging from
quantum computers that promise unparalleled computational speed, to new quantum
mechanical sensors that herald improved measurement technologies. Today there is
an increased need for understanding the science that enables such quantum
machinery, and to discover the physical laws and limitations relevant to the
quantum world. This team will use an ultracold atomic gas to advance such
scientific understanding. By cooling gases very close to absolute zero, this
team will realize a nearly pure quantum system known as a Bose-Einstein
condensate (BEC), with which they can explore the limits to pure quantum
behavior. One aim of this project is to control the magnetic properties of a BEC
using magnetic fields to generate artificial instabilities and to use these
instabilities to learn how a quantum system heats up and loses its pure quantum
nature, and how one might be able to control that process. In addition to
advancing the science that underlies tomorrow's technologies, this team is also
training a diverse community of students and future educators, some of whom will
become the builders and architects of these future technologies. A focused set
of experiments on sodium spinor Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) is proposed
that probes the multi-mode nature of a quantum quench. The experiments emphasize
the group's unique experimental capabilities and are motivated by intriguing
questions that have emerged from earlier funded work. The probability
distribution of spin mF = +1 and -1 atoms generated by the quench will be
measured, looking for super-Poissonian fluctuations in a multi-mode scenario. In
a second project, the equilibrium physics of a spinor BEC exactly at zero
quadratic Zeeman shift will be explored. Finally, non-destructive imaging of the
spin will be implemented to study the effect of continuous quantum measurement
on a spinor BEC. A combination of destructive and non-destructive experimental
imaging techniques will be honed and deployed to reveal new and richly detailed
information about the system under study. The proposed research will have broad
scientific impact, particularly in condensed matter and quantum optics, and
through outreach efforts, to the broader Atlanta community. Scientific
collaborations with condensed matter and quantum optics colleagues, initiated in
the previous funding cycle, will be strengthened. Graduate student teaching and
training will continue to be emphasized, as will exposure of undergraduates to
research. HD videoconferencing to local area classrooms, participation in summer
workshops for high school teachers and other, related outreach activities will
be important components of the broader impact of this program.