* 1707598
* Protein dynamics and the evolution of enzyme catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Christopher Cheatum, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2019
* USD 160,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division funds this
research. Professors Amnon Kohen and Christopher Cheatum at the University of
Iowa investigate how enzymes accelerate chemical reactions. Enzymes are protein
molecules. They are large and dynamic, and vibrate very fast. The research seeks
to find out if specific vibrations of the protein contribute to the
extraordinary rate accelerations of the enzyme-catalyzed reactions. The
investigators devise new molecular tools that make it possible to measure fast
vibrations in specific places in the enzyme. Comparing the changes in the
reactants with the changes in the motions of the protein reveal the role that
protein's motions play in the reactivity. This research gives graduate and
undergraduate students specialized training in a diverse and unique scientific
skill set. The outreach activities have a demonstrated record of engaging high
school students in basic science and steering some toward studies and careers in
science. These activities enhance scientific awareness for other students who
are not interested in scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project identifies correlations between enzyme dynamics and chemical reactivity
of carbon-hydrogen carbon (C-H C) transfer reactions. The role of networks of
coupled motions of the protein in modulating that relationship in dihydrofolate
reductase is also examined. The effects of both active-site and distal mutations
on the chemical step by the temperature dependence of the primary kinetic
isotope effects (KIEs) and on the protein dynamics by two-dimensional infrared
(2D IR) spectroscopy are measured. Mutants that have previously been studied
using KIEs that suggest a role for enzyme motions in the catalyzed reaction are
used for the combined spectroscopic and kinetic studies. Differences between the
human and E. coli enzymes are assessed and compared to theoretical predictions
for these two related enzymes. This research gives graduate and undergraduate
students specialized training in a diverse and unique scientific skill set. The
combination of methods may be quite general and apply to a range of enzymes.
This project is integrated with an outreach effort to communicate this science
to the public.