* 1707989
* Acquisition of a Second-Generation Liquid Water Isotope Analyzer for Hydrological, Glaciological, and Geochemical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Bryan Mark, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,690.00

This grant supports acquisition of a laser cavity ring down spectrometer (CRDS)
tuned to measure stable isotopic ratios of hydrogen and oxygen in natural
waters. The instrument would replace an aging and no longer supported CRDS at
Ohio State University and allow for continuation of a range of NSF-funded
research and research training in hydrology, glaciology, and aquatic
biogeochemistry that relies on determination of the sources and cycling pathways
of waters in rivers, lakes, glacial melt, precipitation, and ice. Studies of the
effects of changing climate on glacier-fed meltwater dependent regions, the
hydrological cycle of agricultural regions of the American Midwest and the
nature of fluid-rock-gas interactions that occur during hydraulic fracturing are
timely and societally relevant. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity
and welfare given the importance of faculty and student research focused on
water resources, security and the effects of climate dynamics on regional and
global water cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRDS allow for rapid and precise
quantification of the isotope ratios of 18O/16O and 2H/1H as a proxy of water
source regions given known Rayleigh fractionation patterns that vary as a
function of latitude and elevation. Research applications will include but are
not limited to; study of the water sources of Antarctic lakes and streams and
subglacial waters and the sources of glacier fed melt waters in streams of South
America and Asia that are being impacted by climate dynamics; studies of ground
water-surface water interaction in Ohio in conjunction with elemental studies of
water composition to study the changing geochemistry of urban streams in
response to anthropogenic activity (e.g., road salt application and run off);
and geochemical and isotopic studies of deep basinal brines.