* 1708596
* Solid-state nanopore-based MMP/ADAM profiling for early cancer detection
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Xiyun Guan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to the Illinois Institute of Technology is to develop next-
generation of biomaterials based on two groups of biocatalysts, namely MMPs
(matrix metalloproteinases) and ADAMs (a disintegrin and metalloproteinases) for
possible applications in sensing and other technologies. MMPs and ADAMs are
enzymes that are responsible for extracellular matrix degradation and tissue
remodeling, and play important roles in various biological, physiological, and
pathological processes. They are currently under intensive investigation as
novel biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets for the early detection and
possible treatment of human cancers. However, the current MMP/ADAM assays suffer
from low specificity and poor selectivity, which results in their limited
utility for any applications. This project offers a new label-free strategy,
which combines nanopore sensing and substrate-based proteinase assay, to
accomplish highly selective and sensitive measurement of the activity of
MMPs/ADAMs. The proposed studies are expected to lead to a better understanding
of molecular and ionic transport, as well as to develop a versatile tool for
various applications, including biosensing, studying covalent and non-covalent
bonding interactions, investigating biomolecular folding and unfolding, and
exploring enzyme kinetics. In addition to research, educational and outreach
components are also an integral part of this project. The newest research
findings from this work will be incorporated in classroom teaching for the
benefit of students not directly involved in this research. The PI will recruit
undergraduate and graduate students (especially Hispanic and African American
minority groups) to participate in the research through established local
programs. The PI will disseminate nanopore sensing technology by organizing
interdisciplinary symposiums to promote idea exchange and facilitate national &
international collaborations among peers and general public.

Technical: This project will explore a new strategy to measure the activities
of MMPs (matrix metalloproteinases) and ADAMs (a disintegrin and
metalloproteinases), and this is accomplished by real-time monitoring of the
ionic current modulations caused by the protease-substrate peptide interactions
in the nanopore. By taking advantage of both the substrate specificity and the
substrate cleavage sites, the nanopore sensor offers a potential to
significantly improve the selectivity and accuracy of the MMPs/ADAMs assays. The
three objectives of this project will be: 1) to investigate various factors
which affect peptide transport in a nano-channel, and gain understanding of the
underlying mechanism; 2) to study a simple non-array-based methodology for the
multiplex detection and measurement of activities of MMPs/ADAMs to improve assay
efficiency, and reduce the sensor manufacturing and assay cost; and 3) to
develop a portable solid-state nanopore-based protease detection technique for
potential mobile-lab detection of cancer biomarkers for point-of-care
applications. The studies are expected to have broad impact on a variety of
areas where analyses of proteases are important, such as biology,
nanotechnology, pharmaceutical industry, toxicology in general, and biosensing.
The components of the educational plan include: incorporation of research
findings into classroom teaching; active recruitment of undergraduate and
graduate students from underrepresented groups; establishment of a summer
scholar research program for high school students; and organizing
interdisciplinary symposiums. This interdisciplinary project offers an ideal
training opportunity for all participants, particularly with respect to future
career opportunities.