* 1708458
* Pattern Adaptable Antenna Arrays for Networks on Chips in Massively Multicore Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Kathleen Melde, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to advance scientific computing by creating
specialized on-chip antennas that can be placed inside high performance
computers to allow high-speed data transfers between processor chips without
using wires. This will replace hardwired interconnections and will allow
rerouting of signals easily and seamlessly to improve system throughput and
reliability. This may have significant impact on large-scale scientific
computing and applications involving huge amounts of data processing. The
antenna modules mimic "wireless-base-station-on-chip" concept since the antennas
route signals inside the computer to achieve much faster and more efficient
processing output. The project will demonstrate for the very first time a small
compact and reconfigurable antenna module to be designed at high frequencies so
they can be placed in computers. The specific frequency is chosen so that the
antennas do not radiate beyond the computer itself. The research methods include
designing the antenna by using simulations, and by demonstrating and testing
antennas in the environment to verify that the desired goals are met. The impact
of this research is to improve the capability of solving increasingly demanding
computing problems in emerging scientific applications. This technology can
potentially break performance barriers observed in computing and create new
computing architectures. The project will integrate research with education, and
provide learning opportunities merging the areas of computing, interconnects,
high frequency simulations, and measurements to senior-level undergraduate
students and graduate students. High school students and college freshmen will
be able to explore technologies in a new freshman course module that introduces
university students to different opportunities in electrical engineering.
Graduate student course offerings will be enhanced with a signal integrity
course for the online Masters of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering
program at the University of Arizona. Hands-on and engagement activities will be
offered to train and prepare students for their future career in industry or
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create and demonstrate one of
the first chip-compatible antenna arrays that allow real-time pattern adaptation
for use in massively multicore computing. The antennas will be designed on a
separate antenna module that includes a pattern-reconfigurable antenna to allow
for redirection of the antenna patterns in the horizontal direction (chip to
chip). The array will achieve at least eight unique beam positions to allow
communication to neighboring cores. The antenna module has several novel
components: it is thin (1-2 mm), includes a 3D (multilayer) stacked beamformer,
and can be connected to a transceiver using flip-chip (solder ball bump)
attachment technologies. On system level, the project will demonstrate a novel
system design using reconfigurable wireless links to simplify the I/O
(Input/Output) architecture and improve system reliability with reconfigurable
data paths that work around broken links. The project includes developing
accurate link models that takes into account antenna and propagation
characteristics. This will provide for accurate network planning using details
of the physical antennas such as their pattern characteristics in the operating
environment, and enable optimization of the computer network topology. Prototype
antennas will be fabricated and measured, and demonstration test beds using 60
GHz transceiver evaluation boards will validate the link models.