* 1708043
* Mechanical properties and thermomechanical processing of metallic glasses -- the role of elemental distributions and size-dependent properties of shear transformation zones
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Michael Atzmon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 458,576.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molten metallic alloys of certain
compositions can be frozen to produce metallic glasses. In contrast to
conventional metals, which are crystalline, the atomic arrangements in metallic
glasses exhibit significant disorder. The high strength and elasticity of
metallic glasses make them attractive for applications in medical and other
mechanical devices, as well as sporting goods. However, they exhibit limited
ductility and toughness, which can lead to catastrophic fracture. In crystalline
materials, heat and deformation treatment are routinely used for property
improvement, and the associated mechanisms have been understood for many years.
A parallel understanding of the atomic-scale rearrangements in metallic glasses
is a scientific challenge, since the baseline arrangements are not known.
However, such an understanding is crucial to improving their properties. A
recently developed method of characterizing small atomic clusters called shear
transformation zones (STZs), undergo shape change as a result of deformation in
a metallic glass, is used in this research. Analysis of time-dependent shape
recovery reveals distinct signatures of STZs, resolved by the number of atoms
they comprise. Critical experiments will be performed to explain previous
experimental observations. The STZ dynamics will be compared between similar
alloys that differ in their ductility. Atom-probe tomography, a method that can
yield atomic-scale composition mapping, will be used to determine the role of
potentially heterogeneous chemical composition, and its correlation with the STZ
population. The expected results include realistic input into simulations of
macroscopic behavior. The insights gained will help interpret a range of past
experimental results, and assist future development of ductile alloys. The
proposed work will promote the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students, who will learn materials fundamentals, develop the
ability to plan and conduct experiments and modeling, and learn to communicate
their results. The PI and graduate students will participate in high-school
visits in under-resourced parts of the state of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses exhibit high strength and
stiffness, making them attractive for structural applications. However, flow
localization often leads to catastrophic failure at a shear band. As in
crystalline materials, thermo-mechanical treatment can improve their properties.
In contrast to crystalline materials, an atomic level understanding of
mechanical properties of metallic glasses and their response to thermo-
mechanical treatment is still lacking. Plastic deformation of metallic glasses
is accommodated by thermally activated shear of atomic clusters, known as shear
transformation zones (STZs). Because there is no known mechanism for imaging
STZs, their microscopic properties had been studied mostly in physical analogues
and numerical models, which cover a limited dynamic range of time. Recently, the
anelastic relaxation kinetics of different metallic glasses have been measured.
These measurements reveal an atomically quantized hierarchy of STZs, resolved by
the number of atoms they comprise. The shape of the size-density distributions
of potential STZs, obtained from the spectra, varies significantly with the
alloy. The proposed work is aimed at gaining an atomic scale understanding of
how the size distribution of potential STZs a) correlates with ductility, stored
enthalpy and chemical heterogeneity; b) varies between conventional metallic
glasses and those with intense high-frequency (beta) mechanical relaxations,
which have been shown to be ductile; c) is affected by thermomechanical
treatment, including thermal cycling, cyclic and elastostatic deformation. Using
a combination of quasi-static and cyclic experiments, more than eight orders of
magnitude in relaxation time will be covered. Relaxation-time spectra will be
computed from the data. The stored enthalpy will be determined by differential
scanning calorimetry. Atom-probe tomography (APT) will be used to identify
deviations from random elemental distributions, including size distributions of
clusters enriched in an alloying element. Correlating the APT results with the
size distribution of potential STZs will elucidate the role of local chemistry
in shear transformations. Experimental input will be provided for mesoscopic
simulations of macroscopic behavior. The proposed work will enhance the atomic-
scale understanding of processing and deformation of metallic glasses, bringing
the community's understanding of metallic glass properties closer to that for
crystalline metals. The results will assist the future development of ductile
alloys, thus impacting future technology. Graduate and undergraduate students
will a) learn materials fundamentals; b) develop the ability to plan and conduct
combined experiments and modeling, and to communicate their results. The PI
and/or graduate students will participate in high-school visits in under-
resourced parts of the state of Michigan.