* 1708353
* Collaborative Proposal: SI2-CHE: ExTASY Extensible Tools for Advanced Sampling and analYsis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Mauro Maggioni, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2017
* USD 145,643.00

Collaborative Research: SI2-CHE ExTASY Extensible Tools for Advanced Sampling
and analYsis

An international team consisting of Cecilia Clementi(Rice University), Mauro
Maggioni (Duke University) Shantenu Jha (Rutgers University), Glenn Martyna (BM
T. J. Watson Laboratory ), Charlie Laughton (University of Nottingham), Ben
Leimkuhler ( University of Edinburgh), Iain Bethune (University of Edinburgh)
and Panos Parpas(Imperial College) are supported through the SI2-CHE program for
the development of ExTASY -- Extensible Toolkit for Advanced Sampling and
analYsis, -- a conceptual and software framework that provides a step-change in
the sampling of the conformational space of macromolecular systems.
Specifically, ExTASY is a lightweight toolkit to enable first-class support for
ensemble-based simulations and their seamless integration with dynamic analysis
capabilities and ultra-large time step integration methods, whilst being
extensible to other community software components via well-designed and standard
interfaces.

The primary impacts of this project are in the biological sciences. This
software advances our understanding of biologically important systems, as it can
be used to obtain fast and accurate sampling of the conformational dynamics of
stable proteins; a prerequisite for the accurate prediction of thermodynamic
parameters and biological functions. It also allows tackling systems like
intrinsically disordered proteins, which can be beyond the reach of classical
structural biology. Along with the research itself, the PIs are involved with
outreach programs to attract high school students to science.