* 1708873
* Collaborative research: Compact room temperature operated THz emitters with scalable architecture and low electric power consumption
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Alexey Belyanin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 12/31/2020
* USD 164,000.00

Abstract Title: Compact and efficient room temperature operated terahertz
emitters for industrial, medical and home security applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;Terahertz sensing is an enabling
technology for noninvasive detection of biological and chemical hazardous
agents, cancer detection, detection of mines and explosives, security screening
in buildings, airports, and other public space, as well as short-range covert
communications in terahertz transmission windows of the atmosphere. Currently
available terahertz sources are either bulky or require cryogenic cooling
leading to high costs, high complexity, and often low reliability. The proposed
novel design concept aims to address most of the deficiencies of the current
state-of-the-art terahertz emitter technology. The target device implementation
will be similar in terms of the complexity, reliability and size to widely used
standard inexpensive near infrared diode lasers. The success of the proposed
effort will enable wide deployment of terahertz imaging and spectroscopic
sensors for the security screening, medical diagnostics, and industrial
monitoring applications. The project requires strongly correlated effort between
theory and experiment including extensive modeling, optimization of the device
fabrication methodologies as well as detailed characterization and field testing
of the novel laser emitters. The research effort is integrated with educational
and outreach plans aimed at enhancing education opportunities at the New York
and Texas public universities and local communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the project is the
development of high-power diode lasers with built-in resonant nonlinearity for
efficient intra-cavity difference frequency generation in the terahertz spectral
range. The gain sections based on asymmetric coupled quantum wells utilize the
unique band alignment that can be realized in an antimonide material system.
Laser modes generated at two closely spaced wavelengths near 2 microns will
serve as an intracavity pump field for difference frequency generation. The
antimonide-based diode lasers emitting in that spectral region demonstrate some
of the lowest threshold current densities ever achieved for semiconductor
lasers, excellent temperature stability, and watt level output power, all at
room temperature. The expected electrical power input necessary for the proposed
device operation with micro to milliwatt terahertz output level will be two to
three orders of magnitude lower than those of existing technologies. The
proposed research offers experimental and theoretical studies of the fundamental
problem of resonant optical nonlinearities in antimonide-based quantum-well
systems in a wide range of carrier populations from nondegenerate to highly
degenerate. The future development of the proposed devices will include
fabrication of widely tunable terahertz emitters as well as integration with
silicon photonics. Transfer of the technology to the arsenide or silicon
platform will enable epi-side down mounting of large area arrays of the
terahertz emitters to scale up the output terahertz power to tens of milliwatt
level and perform terahertz beam shaping.