* 1708036
* Quantum Phase Measurement and Metrology using Four-Wave Mixing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Paul Lett, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

Precision optical measurements are limited in sensitivity and resolution by the
noise on the light used to make them. In everyday life a classical description
of light usually suffices. However taking this approach leads to limitations on
the sensitivity of measurements that are not fundamental. If one uses a quantum
mechanical description of the light, then one can envision "non-classical" light
fields that will lead to more sensitive measurements than with "classical"
light. This extra sensitivity can be used for ultrasensitive detection in
defense applications and is especially useful at very low light levels. Thus it
is interesting in the field of imaging of live biological tissues where one
would like to avoid damage to the tissue. This project will use the non-linear
optical properties of certain materials to create non-classical light and
investigate how much advantage over the limits for classical light can be
achieved. In particular, this team has demonstrated an optical phase measurement
device that has more sensitivity to length changes than a "classical"
interferometer using a laser source. The group will further investigate the
design of different quantum-based phase measurement devices and study what
aspects of these approaches lead to better measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-classical light, which has different noise statistics
than classical light, will allow this team to make measurements with noise
levels that are below those obtainable with a coherent state or other "nearly
classical" optical fields. The use of intrinsically quantum states in
metrological applications, such as interferometry, will allow the group to
improve such measurements beyond what can be obtained with classical light. This
team studies how to take advantage of quantum states for noise reduction and
demonstrate the usefulness and/or limitations of these states. In particular,
this project is centered on studying phase-measurement devices based on "active-
media", with gain or stimulated loss. The team will study seeded versions, based
on phase measurements using an amplified seed beam, as well as unseeded
versions, based on the use of spontaneous emission alone. They plan to both look
at these interferometers as phase measurement tools, and as a means to study the
quantum states that are internal to these devices. In terms of the quantum
states, they will study the effect of directly modulating a quantum state, and
in particular, modulating one mode of a two-mode squeezed state.