* 1708506
* Collaborative Research: Developing Items to Assess Students' Understanding of Scientific Practices in Chemistry Laboratory Settings
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Melanie Cooper, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 244,539.00

Almost all introductory college chemistry courses have a laboratory component
where students are supposed to learn about scientific practices such as
designing experiments, analyzing data, and using experimental evidence to
explain their findings. However, few valid and reliable tests exist that can
reliably measure students' ability to do these scientific practices. Instead,
chemistry laboratory tests typically focus on measuring students' knowledge of
chemistry concepts and their skill at manipulating laboratory equipment. This
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE:EHR) Exploration & Design project
will fill this important gap in general chemistry laboratories by developing and
validating questions that can measure how well students can do specific
scientific practices. The questions will include both open-ended and multiple-
choice formats, to make them useful for small and large enrollment courses. The
questions will initially be tested at a research university (Michigan State
University, MSU), a Hispanic-serving institution (Florida International
University, FIU), and a primarily undergraduate institution (Grand Valley State
University, GVSU). As a result, the project team may be able to identify
specific laboratory activities that help students become more proficient at
using particular scientific practices. The scientific practice questions and
effective laboratory activities identified will be shared with college chemistry
instructors and could be adapted for use by high school chemistry teachers.

To accomplish these goals, the project team will develop sets of questions (i.e.
assessment items) for the three scientific practices of (1) planning and
carrying out investigations; (2) analyzing and interpreting data; and (3)
constructing explanations and engaging in argument from evidence in four
different chemistry topic areas (spectroscopic measurements, gas law
relationships, stoichiometry, and kinetics). Development of the assessment items
will use an iterative process that includes identifying the key elements of each
practice to assess; developing questions and scoring rubrics; and establishing
validity, reliability, and practicality of the assessment items. Assessment
items will be reviewed by an advisory board of members with extensive expertise
in both laboratory instruction and instrument development, tested using students
?think aloud? interviews, and revised as necessary. Next, the project team will
administer these assessment items in general chemistry labs at MSU, FIU, and
GVSU. They will score student performance and examine the relationship between
the levels of student engagement with scientific practices in the various
laboratory courses and students' abilities to perform the practices effectively
in the corresponding assessment items. Establishing a process for assessing
students? proficiency in scientific practices will provide a model that others
may use to develop assessments for additional scientific practices or for other
scientific disciplines.