* 1708256
* SusChEM: Artificial Hydrogenases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kara Bren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 448,451.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is making this
award to Professor Kara L. Bren of the University of Rochester to develop and
investigate complexes of cobalt with peptides for catalyzing the production of
hydrogen gas from water using solar energy. Hydrogen is an attractive fuel
because of its high-energy density and clean combustion. The catalytic activity
of the cobalt complex is characterized using electrochemistry. These catalysts
are integrated into photochemical systems for converting light energy to
chemical energy. Investigations of reaction pathways and the effects of reaction
conditions on the efficiency and rate of hydrogen production are emphasized in
this research. Graduate students are trained in state-of-the-art biochemical,
electrochemical, and photochemical techniques in this project. This award also
supports the participation of hearing-impaired students from the National
Technical Institute for the Deaf in Rochester in research, enhancing scientific
workforce diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new
metallopeptide catalysts and investigates catalytic mechanisms for the hydrogen
evolution reaction in water, using electro-catalysis as well as photocatalytic
systems and assemblies. Catalysis of hydrogen evolution by the metallopeptides
studied in this work involves a proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) step in
which the peptide amine acts as a proton shuttle. In the research, Professor
Bren determines the effects of altering peptide sequence and amine pKa on PCET
and on the rate and overpotential for hydrogen production. In addition, the role
of buffers in delivering protons to the catalyst is investigated in work with
broad implications for understanding catalysis in an aqueous environment.
Finally, integrated systems optimized to prevent back electron transfer and
other unproductive pathways in the photochemical reaction are engineered and
investigated. Success in this project provides environmentally friendly, water-
soluble systems for the storage of solar energy in the form of hydrogen fuel and
further develops our understanding of PCET in catalysis. This proposal is
considered under the SusChEM program as it uses earth abundant, non-precious
metal catalysts (cobalt).