* 1708245
* Mutual Synthesis of Conjugated Polymers and Dopants for Well-Ordered Self-Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Howard Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 399,653.00

This award is funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry. Professor Howard E. Katz of Johns Hopkins
University is supported to explore the idea that the main components of
conducting plastics - the polymeric material and the dopants -- can be designed
simultaneously for best performance. This requires that their molecule-sized
subunits fit well together, continuous paths for conducting electricity are
created, and the dopants maintain their ability to stabilize the electrical
charges that move when the electricity is conducted. A fundamental issue to be
explored is whether it is better for dopants to be mixed equally through the
entire volume of the plastics, or whether it is better for separate parts of a
mixture to be rich in the plastic and others be rich in the dopant. New ways to
make plastics and dopants, more detailed understanding of how they fit together
and promote electrical conduction in the plastic mixtures, and computer-based
models for predicting the properties of the plastics in advance of making them
are expected outcomes of this project. Conducting plastics are the basis of
numerous emerging technologies such as plastic solar cells and light emitters
for more efficient use of energy, detectors for dangerous chemicals important
for defense operations, and medical devices to detect diseases. All of these
technologies have created new economic opportunities. Integrating the research
with education and outreach trains graduate students as future members of the
plastic electronics workforce, and brings the opportunities of plastic
electronics to elementary school, high school, and art institute students in the
City of Baltimore.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is
to design and synthesize pairs of conjugated, high-charge-carrier-mobility
polymers and corresponding chemical dopants that induce charges in those
polymers, such that the pairs form assemblies that retain favorable charge-
transporting molecular organization. The supramolecular structure of the
original polymer is a consequence of pi-interactions among the conjugated
polymer main chains and regular spacing caused by alkyl side chains. The idea is
to explore different chemical design elements in the polymer and dopant
components so that the dopants become accommodated in the supramolecular
structure, or even enhance the structure. These design strategies are compared
to the extreme cases of dopants covalently attached to main chains, known as
"self-doped polymers", and dopants that would be expected to phase segregate
from the charge-transporting polymers and thus exist in separate domains. The
molecular packing of the polymer-dopant assemblies is elucidated using x-ray and
neutron scattering techniques. Absorbance, photoelectron, and electron spin
resonance spectroscopy indicate the formation of charge carriers. Computational
modeling creates a theoretical basis for both the packing and charge transfer
efficiency. The outcome of this project guides the design of polymers that
conduct electricity with high efficiency using only electrons or holes as charge
carriers, without ionic contributions. The project may resolve the uncertainty
about whether structures with dopant functionality adjacent to main chains or
remote from main chains lead to better defined crystallinity and higher
electronic conductivity. A theoretical basis for selecting among various
assembly types for future designs is developed. Because the polymers are
assembled from blends with dopants, the dopant concentration is tunable for the
maximum conductivity, or alternatively for optimization of other functions such
as charge injection into optoelectronic devices or matrices for thermoelectric
composites.