* 1708210
* Structural and Functional Diversity in Well-Defined Graphene Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* T. Don Tilley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

This award is funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry. Professor T. Don Tilley of the University
of California Berkeley is supported to develop a general approach for the
synthesis of structurally well-defined and functionally diverse graphene
nanostructures. The sought-after graphene nanostructures are carefully designed
with an eye for novel or enhanced properties and future applications. The
synthetic methods being developed target carbon-carbon bond formations, which
are central to the advancement of polymer, materials, and medicinal chemistry.
Graphene's extraordinary properties have generated considerable interest in this
material and its substructures for many applications, including molecular
electronics, catalysis, and sensing. However, progress in this area has been
severely hindered by a lack of reliable synthetic methods that allow control
over graphene's properties. The project provides young scientists with a broad
overview of critical issues in science and technology as well as extensive
technical skills in chemical synthesis, X-ray crystallography, electrochemistry,
computational chemistry, and a range of spectroscopic techniques. The PI and the
students involved in this project organize, lead, and participate in outreach
activities, including hosting local high school summer students and teaching
basic scientific principles through interactive lessons at nearby elementary
schools.

The construction and elaboration of graphene nanostructures using organic
chemistry promises a much higher level of control over properties than that
offered by top-down methods. The synthetic manipulation of electronic properties
for graphene-based materials, by generation of structures with well-defined
dimensionalities, edge structures, and dopants, is challenging given the
inherent difficulty associated with fusion of many aromatic rings. In this
project, Professor T. Don Tilley and coworkers at UC Berkeley are developing a
general, organometallic approach to address this ring-fusion challenge, with a
focus on [2+2+n] cycloadditions of alkynes and/or nitriles. This chemistry is
being used to target several novel classes of graphene nanostructures and
related large polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and all syntheses are driven by
the pursuit of novel or enhanced properties. Electronic and optical properties
are firmly established at the molecular level using various absorption and
emission spectroscopies and electrochemical methods. As appropriate, these
properties are then probed at the supramolecular, monolayer, and/or solid-state
levels. An important aspect to this work is the use of advanced physical methods
in the characterization of electronic properties, and their relationship to
structure.