* 1708158
* Strain Engineering of  Band Structure and Electronic Properties in Two Dimensional Materials.
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Eva Andrei, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 439,647.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new material properties has
historically been an engine for technological advances, prosperity and societal
well-being. This prospect has fueled an age-old search for new materials and for
techniques to endow existing ones with desirable properties. Traditionally,
materials discovery was the result of painstaking exploration of a myriads of
chemically synthesized compounds. A new era of materials research was ushered in
with the breakthrough isolation of free standing two-dimensional (2D) crystals,
such as graphene, and the discovery of a slew of their exceptional physical
properties. One of the unique characteristics of these materials is that, with
all the atoms residing at the surface, it is possible to access and manipulate
their properties by non-chemical means. In particular the introduction of strain
by stretching or bending the 2D membrane, can play a crucial role in shaping the
material and electronic properties. This research is aimed at developing
strategies to induce, to characterize and to exploit the extraordinary potential
of strain as a handle for manipulating and engineering electronic and material
properties. By modifying the distance between atoms and the geometry of the
crystal structure, strain can transform the material properties and has the
potential to radically change its behavior. The development of methods to
introduce strain in a controlled matter will make it possible to systematically
investigate novel strain-induced material properties and unleash their potential
for device applications. The research project has a strong educational component
that provides excellent opportunities for students and trainees at all levels to
gain hands-on experience with advanced scientific equipment and to develop
sophisticated data analysis skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;One of the remarkable qualities of two-dimensional (2D)
crystals is the possibility to use external strain to manipulate in a controlled
manner their electronic properties. These materials are highly stretchable, have
large Young's modulus, low residual stress and enormously large breaking
strength which enables them to sustain very large strains without breaking. This
research aims at developing techniques to induce, characterize and exploit the
extraordinary potential of strain as a handle for manipulating and engineering
electronic properties. Introduction of strain by stretching or bending a 2D
membrane, makes it possible to change and control the lattice spacing and
crystal structure and can play a crucial role in shaping the band structure and
the electron dynamics. The team investigates novel properties expected to arise
in the presence of strain, such as opening or closing spectral gaps, strain
induced superconductivity and topologically protected transport properties by
controlling the strength and geometry of the induced strain. Local probes such
as scanning tunneling microscopy and Landau level spectroscopy as well as global
transport measurements are used to characterize the strain-induced electronic
properties. The materials studied include graphene, transition metal
dichalcogenides and group IV monochalcogenides, where the effects of strain on
the band structure and electron dynamics are expected to be most pronounced.