* 1708954
* Quantum Phase Transitions And Many-Body Localization In Unconventional 1D Josephson Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Michael Gershenson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 05/31/2021
* USD 468,768.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;We live in the classical world which is built
upon quantum mechanics. How does the fascinating complexity of classical
behaviors emerge from the underlying quantum nature of our world? This research
project addresses this fundamental question by designing the complex quantum
systems made of superconductors (the so-called arrays of Josephson junctions)
and exploring their behavior at ultra-low temperatures using the methods
developed for the characterization of quantum bits. Realization of the research
program is important for the nascent field of quantum superconducting
electronics: the Josephson arrays offer novel exciting opportunities for
building quantum bits with improved coherence. The project supports the
education of graduate students who enjoy broad exposure to the state-of-the-art
tools of modern solid state research. The multi-component Educational and
Outreach Program, an essential part of the project, is designed to develop
innovative nanoscience curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental research on two fundamental
problems of quantum mechanics of interacting quantum systems: the quantum phase
transitions in one dimension, and the many-body localization in complex quantum
systems isolated from the environment. To address these phenomena, novel arrays
of nanoscale Josephson junctions are designed to emulate the range of quantum
models. The objectives of the research program are to explore the emergence of
novel symmetries near the quantum critical point and the dynamics of these novel
systems using the microwave spectroscopic and time-domain techniques developed
for the characterization of superconducting qubits at ultra-low temperatures.
Realization of the research program is important for the broad field of quantum
superconducting electronics. In particular, the development of Josephson arrays
with large kinetic inductance and minimal losses offers new functionality, such
as fault-tolerant qubits and high-impedance isolation of quantum circuits. The
project supports the education of graduate students who enjoy broad exposure to
the state-of-the-art tools of modern solid state research. The multi-component
Educational and Outreach Program, an essential part of the project, is designed
to develop innovative nanoscience curricula.