* 1708792
* A Mechanistic Neural Field Theory for Loss of Consciousness During General Anesthesia
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Wassim Haddad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 01/31/2021
* USD 346,022.00

The goal of this research is to merge dynamical systems theory and dynamic
network notions to develop a framework that predicts the qualitative salient
characteristics of the anesthetic transition. Specifically, we propose to
develop and analyze mean field models to model the electrocortical activity of
the central nervous system as a dynamical system and show that the transition to
the anesthetic state exhibits multiple bifurcations (i.e., transitions) with the
awake state transitioning to a stable limit cycle and subsequently to a stable
unconscious equilibrium state as the concentration of the anesthetic agent
increases.

The proposed framework will allow for the development of models that go beyond
words to dynamic equations, leading to mathematical models with greater
precision and self-consistency. This research can foster the development of new
frameworks that can allow us to interpret experimental and clinical results,
connect biophysical findings to psychophysical phenomena, explore new hypothesis
based on the cognitive neuroscience of consciousness and develop new assertions,
and ultimately improve the reliability of general anesthesia.

Intellectual Merit: The results will be applied to excitatory and inhibitory
biological neuronal networks to explain the underlying neuronal mechanisms of
action for anesthesia and unconsciousness from a macroscopic neural field
electrocortical perspective, thereby providing a theoretical foundation for
general anesthesia using the dynamic network properties of the brain.

Broader Impacts: While the primary focus is general anesthesia, the proposed
dynamical systems framework has potential applicability to understand seizure
activity and schizophrenia. This also has applicability to the phenomena of
multistability seen in biochemical systems, ecosystems, gene regulation and cell
replications as well as numerous conditions in medical science including
epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, and Alzheimer's disease. The primary impact of
this research will be to allow for the development of mathematical models that
advance our understanding of the wide effects of pharmacologic agents and
anesthetics leading to improvements in medical care, health care, and
reliability of drug development and dosing.