* 1708926
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Eco-evolutionary processes linking hosts, microbial symbionts, and pathogens
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Obed Hernandez-Gomez, Hernandez-Gomez         Obed
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Obed Hernández-Gómez, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Erica Bree Rosenblum at the University of California-
Berkeley. The fellow is exploring interactions between amphibian hosts, skin
microbial communities, and pathogens. The pathogen Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis (Bd) has decimated numerous populations of amphibians. Several
bacteria living on the skin of amphibians produce anti-fungal chemicals that
repress the growth of Bd. These bacteria can be used to treat/prevent infections
by this pathogen, but it is unknown whether Bd can develop resistance to these
bacteria over time. The fellow's research characterizes the skin microbiome of
several amphibian species, to identify commonalities and differences in services
provided by skin microbes. In addition, the fellow is evaluating whether
repeated pressure from common anti-Bd bacteria induces evolutionary changes in
Bd over generations. The project is generating knowledge on the long-term effect
of microbial therapies on pathogen evolution, information that has applications
in biomedical, agricultural, and wildlife conservation fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objective of this project is to characterize
eco-evolutionary processes that link amphibian hosts, their cutaneous
microbiomes, and the pathogen Bd. The research implements metagenomics
sequencing to characterize cutaneous microbial communities of multiple amphibian
species and identify generalities and inconsistencies in skin community
functionality. In addition, the fellow is assessing whether repeated exposure to
probiotics in-vitro invokes an adaptive response of Bd in serial passage
experiments (SPEs), by characterizing the genome of Bd throughout the SPEs. The
passaged strains are being used in inoculation experiments to measure whether
prolonged exposure to anti-Bd probiotics leads to changes in virulence and
interactions with cutaneous microbial communities. The fellow is being trained
in laboratory techniques including implementation of SPEs, metagenomics/genome
sequencing library preparation, bioinformatics, and inoculation experiments. The
fellow is broadening the participation of underrepresented groups by working
with English as a Second Language programs in the San Francisco Bay Area to
develop a bilingual (Spanish/English) science curriculum in microbiological
science. The curriculum introduces students to the scientific method under the
scope of microbial ecology and will be published via the California Academy of
Sciences.