* 1708929
* Fate of Topological Semimetals in the Presence of Magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Fazel Fallah Tafti, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 374,826.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project, which is supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry and Condensed Matter Physics programs of the
Division of Materials Research, puts forward a systematic way to synthesize a
new class of quantum materials named magnetic topological semimetals. These
materials are characterized by a small concentration of highly mobile electrons
with polarized magnetic moments. As a result of the small concentration and the
high mobility of these polarized electrons, quantum effects can be observed at
low magnetic fields and moderate temperatures within the reach of most small
laboratories. The main quantum effect in the magnetic topological semimetals is
that their magnetic order determines their electrical conduction and vice versa.
Therefore, they can act as magnetic switches, memories, or sensors capable of
operating at very small magnetic fields and moderate temperatures which is the
most useful range for applications. The project relies on a feedback loop
between theoretical calculations, materials synthesis, and characterizations
through a combination of chemistry, physics, and materials science techniques.
The cross-disciplinary nature of this project provides a unique educational
platform for young scientists, from postdocs to graduate and undergraduate
students. A new interdisciplinary course is designed by the PI to teach the
chemistry and the physics of novel quantum materials to graduate students from
both disciplines. The PI makes a conscious effort to connect his research to the
society by presenting public lectures and demonstrations at several libraries to
explain the physics and the chemistry of materials to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;While most of the
current studies on topological semimetals are focused on non-magnetic
intermetallic compounds, the PI wants to deliberately take a different
trajectory to look at the magnetic compounds with topological potentials. The
materials explorations in this project exploit recent advances in the
theoretical classification of topological systems based on the crystalline and
the time reversal symmetries. The impact of the project is to open a new
direction in topological materials design by incorporating magnetism with
Dirac/Weyl physics in a systematic way. The project is particularly timely due
to the rapid advances in the field of non-magnetic semimetals. The final goal is
to engineer novel electronic phases such as chiral conductors which are
stabilized by the internal molecular field of the material without the need for
an external magnetic field. The project relies on a feedback loop between
material synthesis, x-ray crystallography, physical measurements, electron
microscopy, and DFT calculations to identify materials candidates, to grow high
quality single crystals, and to thoroughly characterize them. The
interdisciplinary environment of the PI's lab provides a unique educational
environment from undergraduate to postdoctoral level. Connected to this
research, a new course titled "from bonds to bands" is developed by the PI for
both physics and chemistry graduate students to demonstrate the formation of
extended solids from bonding between atoms and molecules.