* 1708688
* Induced Topological Superconductivity in Two Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Amir Yacoby, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 680,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nearly a hundred years after its discovery,
superconductivity remains one of the most intriguing phases of matter. In 1957
Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer (BCS) presented their theory of superconductivity
describing this state in terms of pairs of electrons arranged in a spatially
isotropic wave function with no net momentum and a spin singlet configuration.
Immediately thereafter, a search began to find materials with unconventional
superconductivity where pairing deviates from conventional BCS theory.
&lt;br/&gt;One particular class of unconventional superconductors involves pairs
arranged in triplet rather than singlet configurations. Such superconductors may
enable dissipationless transport of spin and may also give rise to elementary
excitations that do not obey the conventional Fermi or Bose statistics but
rather have non-Abelian statistics where the exchange of two particles
transforms the state of the system into a new quantum mechanical state.
&lt;br/&gt;This project explores unconventional superconductivity that arises
due to the proximity effect between a conventional superconductor and a
semiconductor with strong spin-orbit interaction. The research team looks to
identify signatures of non-Abelian excitations and explore their properties
using a variety of transport techniques. The research addresses three of the
broader impact criteria set forth by the NSF: Benefits to Society through the
exploration of dissipationless storage and transfer of information; Promoting
teaching, training and education through the development of undergraduate
courses; and broader participation of underrepresented groups through the active
hiring of promising female scientists into the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;A research project
is proposed to investigate topological superconductivity in two dimensional
systems. The work follows recent theoretical work suggesting three distinct
experimental platforms where topological superconductivity in two dimensions
emerges. The first consists of topological HgCdTe quantum wells. The robust
helical nature of the quantum spin Hall Effect seen in this system and its
predicted dependence on an external magnetic field is particularly promising for
exploring the underlying Andreev bound states spectrum as direct means for
observing signatures of Majorana modes. The second platform consists of two
dimensional Josephson junctions where the normal medium consists of non-
topological 2D semiconductors with strong spin-orbit interaction (such as InAs
quantum wells and narrow wells of HgCdTe). Such a platform was recently proposed
as a promising controllable system where topological superconductivity can be
tuned using an external in-plane magnetic field and the phase difference across
the two superconducting contacts. The third approach consists of using quantum
Hall edges in HgTe and quantum Anomalous Hall edges in vanadium doped
(Bi,Sb)2Te3 for exploring topological superconductivity in chiral edges. The
strong spin orbit coupling in HgTe quantum wells and the absence of an external
magnetic field required for exploring the anomalous quantum Hall effect opens up
rich and unexplored possibilities for exploring chiral Majorana modes. The
experimental methods proposed include tunneling spectroscopy of Andreev bound
states and noise magnetometry using nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond for
exploring the fractional current phase relations in these systems.