* 1708499
* Controlling Magnets and Electrons Using Spin-Orbit Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Daniel Ralph, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 560,646.00

Non-technical Abstract:

Magnetic memory devices that store information based on the orientation of the
north and south magnetic poles of a tiny magnetic layer are an attractive
alternative for replacing silicon-based random access memories for many
applications. Magnetic memories have the advantages: they retain information
even with the electrical power turned off and they never wear out. At the same
time they can be made very dense, fast, and inexpensive. The remaining challenge
standing in the way of widespread application of magnetic memories is to reduce
the electrical energy required to write their information. This project is
investigating physics questions related to solving this challenge. The research
team is focusing on promising new physical effects that emerge when a thin layer
of magnetic material is coupled to a second material containing heavy atoms such
as tungsten or tantalum so that it possesses what is known as strong spin-orbit
interactions. The team is studying materials and device geometries that enable
these spin-orbit interactions to drive magnetic switching with record-low values
of applied energy. They are also investigating related effects of how
interaction with a magnetic layer can affect the electrical properties of the
material with strong spin-orbit interactions. This project contributes to the
development of high-performance magnetic memory and logic, the education of
graduate students and undergraduates involved in the research, and participation
in outreach activities focused on a partnership with 4-H.

Technical Abstract:

This project is investigating new physics phenomena that emerge when a thin
layer of magnetic material is coupled to thin layer of a material with strong
spin-orbit interactions. The research team is examining both the effects of the
spin-orbit coupling on the magnetic layer, and the effect of magnetic
interactions on electrons inside the material with strong spin-orbit coupling.
This research builds, in part, on recent discoveries by the principal
investigator and collaborators concerning current-generated "spin-orbit torques"
that can be used to manipulate very efficiently the magnetization direction of
magnetic memory devices, and it seeks to answer several of the most important
unresolved questions in this field: (1) Is there a practical way to use broken
symmetries to reorient spin-orbit torques into the direction most desired for
applications? (2) Can the scattering of spin-polarized electrons from an
interface with strong spin-orbit coupling generate spin-orbit torques via
mechanisms that are not yet understood? (3) Can the large spin and orbital
moments present in some f-electron elements be used to enhance spin-orbit
torques? The project is also exploring other new scientific opportunities
enabled by interfacial interactions between magnetism with spin-orbit materials,
to better control both the properties of the magnetic film (e.g., magnetic
damping, Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions, magnetic anisotropy) and the spin
and valley dynamics of electrons within the spin-orbit material (e.g., magnetic
control of optical properties, valley Hall effect, valley ferromagnetism, and
superconductivity).