* 1708239
* Three- and Four-Dimensional Triangulations and Mathematical Visualization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Henry Segerman, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2021
* USD 267,895.00

Topology is the study of geometric objects, in which lengths and angles are
ignored, but connectivity is paid attention to. A triangulation is a subdivision
of a surface into triangles. Analogously, we subdivide a three-dimensional space
into tetrahedra, and higher dimensional spaces into similar higher dimensional
geometric shapes. Triangulations are one of the most effective ways to describe
topological objects, particularly for use with computers. There are many ways to
triangulate a topological object, each of which may be better or worse for a
particular purpose. However, different triangulations can be related to each
other by sequences of simple, local moves. One of the central goals of this NSF
funded project is to better understand how useful properties of triangulations
change as we alter them by these moves. Another goal centers on mathematical
visualization to aid in research, pedagogy and outreach. This includes finding
effective ways to visualize mathematical objects using new technologies,
including 3D printing, virtual, and augmented reality. The PI has developed an
undergraduate course integrating 3D design skills with the mathematics needed to
produce 3D printed objects. He plans to extend this pedagogical method to other
subjects in quantitative science. With colleagues, the PI is planning to write a
resource book to help others create and teach mathematics with 3D printing.
Outreach activities to the broader community will include expository papers,
public talks, YouTube videos, open-source visualization apps, and collaboration
with mathematics museums.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this NSF funded project,
together with his collaborators, the PI aims to study classes of triangulations,
including triangulations with essential edges or angle structures, 1-efficient,
geometric or veering triangulations: relations between these classes and
topological and geometric invariants, methods of constructing triangulations in
these classes, and the structure of subgraphs of the Pachner graph of
triangulations corresponding to these classes. Another aim is to generalize
properties and results from three-dimensional to four-dimensional
triangulations. The methods used will be largely combinatorial, and accessible
to beginning graduate and undergraduate students. One visualization project is
to find canonical 3D geometric representations of topological objects, so that
models can be 3D printed. Subjects include Seifert surfaces, fibrations of knot
complements, and conformally correct tilings of surfaces. Algebraic descriptions
and discrete optimization processes will be used to generate geometry. Other
projects in 3D printing include study and construction of interesting linkages
and other mechanisms. Previous work in implementing virtual reality simulations
of 3D hyperbolic geometry, and the product of 2D hyperbolic geometry with the
line, has already been successful in inspiring mathematicians, physicists, and
members of the public. The PI plans to extend this work to the other Thurston
geometries and beyond, aid other researchers in visualizing objects they are
interested in within these geometries, and construct engaging interactive
experiences to make these geometries more accessible to the public. Finally, the
PI aims to implement interactive topological simulations, for example to allow a
user to physically manipulate a virtual sphere that behaves as in the context of
sphere eversion.