* 1708436
* Understanding the Role of Zwitterionic Polymers or Peptides in the Bioactivity of Conjugated or Fused Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 04/30/2020
* USD 388,122.00

Nontechnical: Stabilizing protein-based therapeutics without sacrificing
biological activity is a major challenge in the delivery of protein drugs.
Conjugation with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) or PEGylation has been widely used
to increase protein stability, but often accompanies an unwanted detrimental
effect on protein bioactivity. At present, many polymer-protein conjugates
suffer significant bioactivity loss. Zwitterionic materials are a promising
alternative for preserving the bioactivity of conjugated proteins. The
objectives of this work are to gain a fundamental understanding of the role of
biomaterials in protein bioactivity when these biomaterials are conjugated to
proteins and to develop new conjugates with improved stability, but minimum
bioactivity loss. The success of this work will provide a fundamental
understanding of the interactions of biomaterials with biomolecules and
macromolecules at the molecular level and guide the design of new protein-
conjugates for practical applications. The PI will recruit undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups through established local programs and
provide multidisciplinary research projects to graduate students, undergraduate
students and high school students. The PI will promote the field of zwitterionic
materials through organizing international conferences, editing journal special
issues and promoting international collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Conjugation with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) or
PEGylation has been widely used to increase protein stability, but often
accompanies an unwanted detrimental effect on protein bioactivity. The
objectives of this work are to gain a fundamental understanding of the role of
biomaterials in the bioactivity of polymer (or peptide)-protein conjugates and
to develop new conjugates with improved stability, but minimum bioactivity loss.
Through this work, it will be demonstrated that conjugation with zwitterionic
polymers (or zwitterlation) or alternating-charge EK peptides (or EKylation) is
better than PEGylation to retain protein bioactivity. In this work, several new
biomaterials of different architectures, different types, and well-defined
lengths will be used. Interferon (IFN)-alfa-2a will be used as a model protein
for this fundamental study since the bioactivity of PEGylated (IFN)-alfa-2a is
only 7% of its native form. This work employs state-of-the-art biomaterials and
protein conjugation methods to solve one long-standing issue, i.e., significant
bioactivity loss after PEGylation, particularly for large binding targets. The
PI will recruit undergraduate students from underrepresented groups through
established local programs and provide multidisciplinary research projects to
graduate students, undergraduate students and high school students. The PI will
promote the field of zwitterionic materials through organizing international
conferences, editing journal special issues and promoting international
collaborations.