* 1708699
* Collaborative Research: Nucleobase-Modified Peptide Nucleic Acid (PNA) for Sequence Selective Triple-Helical Recognition of Non-Coding Ribonucleic Acid (RNA)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* James MacKay, Elizabethtown College
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 196,455.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding a collaborative effort between Professors Eriks Rozners
(Binghamton University) and James A. MacKay (Elizabethtown College). The
research develops new methods for molecular recognition of biologically-
significant, non-coding ribonucleic acid (RNA). The majority of cellular RNA
consists of non-coding RNAs that play important roles in regulating gene
expression even though these processes are not fully understood. Selective
recognition, imaging, and functional regulation of such RNAs are useful for
fundamental studies and practical applications in biotechnology. The project
expands interdisciplinary, collaborative research across traditional
institutional boundaries. The project establishes a bridge for Elizabethtown
College (a primarily undergraduate institution) students to transition from
undergraduate studies to advanced graduate studies at a research university.
Undergraduate students, especially women, minorities and first generation
college students, participate in the project. The project also contributes to
improving STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of sequence
selective RNA binders is important for understanding the biochemistry of non-
coding RNAs. Such binders may impact fundamental RNA biology and practical
applications in biotechnology and synthetic biology. This collaborative study is
developing new peptide nucleic acid (PNA) nucleobases that enable recognition of
the entire Hoogsteen face of Watson-Crick and non-canonical base pairs of
double-stranded RNA. The properties of the novel nucleobases are optimized using
synthetic organic chemistry to enable recognition of any sequence of double-
stranded RNA. This approach may solve a long-standing problem in molecular
recognition of RNA and enables a variety of applications. Examples of such
applications are: imaging and functional control of regulatory RNA, designer
riboswitches for synthetic biology, and inhibition of biologically-important RNA
for fundamental studies.