* 1708362
* Collaborative research: Evaluating a Data-Driven Approach to Teaching Technical Writing to STEM Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Hoeinghaus, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2020
* USD 185,141.00

With continuing demands for a diverse professional workforce with strong content
knowledge in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) and solid
communication skills, the research project seeks to improve the quality of
writing instruction for STEM students. Recognizing that English is a global
language and that many students lack the required written communication
competencies when they graduate, the project engages students in data driven
learning (DDL). Through this teaching approach, students learn how to write in
ways that conform to the writing practices of the STEM disciplines in which they
earn degrees. The team will develop and test a set of DDL instructional units
for writing-intensive service courses and STEM-focused content courses. Content
knowledge and students' application of scientific and technical writing skills
will be validated by faculty and peer review of written products and tested
through a research design that compares the written products of four diverse
student populations: students in technical and scientific writing intensive
courses who are taught writing using DDL materials; students in technical and
scientific writing intensive courses who are taught writing without DDL
materials; students in upper-level physiology courses; and students in upper
level ecology courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory study aims to shed
light on how data-driven instruction and corpus linguistic analyses of writing
by STEM professionals (1) improve disciplinary writing skills and (2) affect
student engagement and learning. The quasi-experimental design investigates how
and to what degree -- instructional materials, (DDL/non-DDL instructional
materials), different course contexts, and different student characteristics --
influence the development of the rhetorical and linguistic patterns of
scientific and technical writing. The mixed effects models that are developed
will allow the R&amp;D team to predict student mastery of discipline-specific
writing skills as evident in written products. Instructional materials and tools
to assess the degree to which students write in ways that conform to the
practices of STEM disciplines will be available online to STEM faculty teaching
writing intensive courses and faculty teaching scientific and technical writing
service courses.