* 1708874
* Janus Brushblock Copolymer Phase Behavior: Morphology and Thermodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Mahesh Mahanthappa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2021
* USD 405,000.00

Part I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specialty polymers that form
precise and tailorable structures at the nanometer length scale (1/10000th of
the width of a human hair) provide a route for developing useful porous
membranes for selective water and gas purifications, as well as templates for
patterning faster computer microprocessors with ever smaller components. This
research program will educate the next generation of scientists and engineers in
the guided design and development of such polymers, within an interdisciplinary
research group situated at the interface between chemistry, chemical
engineering, and materials science. Through combination of advanced polymer
synthesis, detailed structural characterization at the nanoscale, and
characterization of the resulting polymer properties, this project will reveal
new molecular design rules for nonlinear polymers that lead to their spontaneous
self-organization at length scales below 15 nanometers. These studies will
provide American industry with technological knowledge that enables the
development of innovative products that maintain global competitiveness. The
educational outreach activities associated with this project will focus on the
development of simple, visually attractive demonstrations featuring spontaneous
self-organization of macroscopic materials into structures visible to the naked
eye. These demonstrations will furnish opportunities for educating and exciting
students at the K-12 and college levels, as well as the general public, about
advanced technologies based on polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block polymers self-assemble into a variety of
nanostructured morphologies, as a consequence of the molecular frustration
induced by coupling two or more immiscible polymer segments into a single
macromolecule. A delicate thermodynamic balance governs the lowest degree of
polymerization (N) at which an AB diblock polymer microphase separates, which
then dictates the smallest microdomain size that can form. One potential block
polymer application relies on their periodic microdomains as templates for
advanced microelectronics and mesoporous inorganic materials with sub-15 nm
features. A common approach to reducing diblock polymer domain sizes is to
decrease N, while increasing the chemical incompatibility of the A and B
segments. However, applications of these new materials often require costly
development of new materials processing protocols. This project investigates the
microphase separation behavior of Janus bottlebrush polymers, a nonlinear
polymer architecture derived from covalently linking linear AB diblocks through
their junctions, as a new means for driving AB diblocks to self-assemble at
smaller length scales than their linear homologs. Using a combination of small-
angle X-ray scattering, transmission electron microscopy, and rheological
measurements, the phase behaviors of Janus bottlebrushes will be studied as a
function of their compositions, the chemical incompatibility between the
homopolymer arms, and the graft density of the bristles along the backbone.