* 1708177
* The Exchange Mechanism and Exciton Migration in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Blank, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,999.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors remain the focus of a
broad range of next generation optical and electronic materials applications.
Compared with inorganic semiconductors such as silicon, the molecular variety
available for organic semiconductors, thanks to synthetic organic chemistry,
offers near limitless potential. When combined with materials science, this rich
molecular tapestry suggests availability of extraordinary control over optical
and mechanical properties, materials cost, environmental impact, and simplicity
of device construction. Efficient transfer of energy in the solid state is one
of the fundamental aspects of both light-emitting and light harvesting devices.
A better understanding of the relationship between molecular design and the
transfer of energy in organic materials enables design of a broad range of more
efficient next-generation optical and electronic devices. This research targets
one of the energy transfer mechanisms that historically received less attention,
a mechanism known as exchange. This mechanism is operative in all molecular
systems, and a better understanding of how it contributes to energy transfer in
the solid state will open the door to a broad range of new, and more efficient
organic electronics. This project includes introducing thousands of third
through sixth grade students from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds to the
fundamental concept of energy and the basic idea of pursuing a college education
in a STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The first
step in exciton transport is inter-chromophore energy transfer. Historically,
simplicity has promoted binary association of emissive materials with an
inductive transfer mechanism and non-emissive materials with an exchange
mechanism. This distinction has not always been consistent with observation.
This research is developing a better understanding of the role of each
mechanism. Experimental accessibility has focused previous attention on
luminescent systems. Realizing that the high molecular density inherent to
devices facilitates exchange, and acknowledging that exchange does not have the
same limitations as induction, this work is filling gaps in the understanding of
transport in non-luminescent materials. At the same time, this work is
elucidating the combined roles of both mechanisms. Employing methodologies to
probe exciton diffusion in both luminescent and non-luminescent materials, this
work is elucidating ways to exploit combined approaches to transport,
quantifying parasitic exciton quenching via annihilation and polaron trapping,
and measuring the effects of exciton fission on energy transport. Taken in
aggregate, this research is providing a significant contribution to the
understanding of exciton transport in organic semiconductors and developing
design principles to enhance the next generation of light harvesting and light-
emitting devices. The project is simultaneously training multiple graduate
students in a wide range of state-of-the-art physical and materials science
theory and experimental techniques.