* 1708622
* EAGER:   Model-Free Classification of Collective Behavior Based on Automated Detection of Symmetry from Video Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Nicole Abaid, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2021
* USD 123,691.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project brings
together an expert in emergent dynamics in animal collectives with an expert in
automated scientific discovery. Automated discovery concerns the search for
underlying patterns -- specifically, the search for symmetry -- in observed
data. Symmetry refers to the property of remaining unchanged under relocation or
reorientation, and many fundamental physical laws exhibit some type of symmetry.
This project will extend methods for finding symmetries in measured motion to
apply to raw video data. This extension will then be applied to videos of
animals moving singly and in flocks, schools, or swarms. The results will be
used to understand how collective motion is related to, and different from,
individual motion, and which common factors relate collective motion in
different animals. The results will have value for safe and effective
performance of engineered multi-agent systems, such as platoons of self-driving
cars, robots interacting with human groups, and swarms of quadrotor
drones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a quantitative method
to discriminate and measure collective behavior in multi-agent systems using an
automated discovery algorithm, based on "dynamical kinds," which are defined in
terms of the dynamic symmetries of a system, and have been used to assess
whether a pair of time series are realizations of the same governing dynamics.
The existing algorithm can analyze time series from coupled dynamical systems.
For this project, the algorithm will be applied to data from animals,
individually and in groups. To accommodate the most widely available form of
data, the algorithm will be modified to take raw video directly as input. The
algorithm will be used to explore individual versus collective behavior in
selected numerical models, and in video data from biological swarms. Finally,
the algorithm will be used across a multi-species dataset, to quantitatively
relate animal groups and their models across species and behaviors. The method
created here will constitute a powerful protocol for model validation, and will
offer insight into differences between collective behaviors exhibited by animals
groups, both within and between species.