* 1708615
* Beyond Binary: Understanding Multi-State Stability in Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Lane Martin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: There is desire to create devices that function in a
"beyond binary" sense - meaning that they can access and make use of multiple
states (not just the "0s"? and "1s" of standard computers today) to complete
logic, memory, and other function. Such systems could emulate brain-like
function and lead to transformative changes in how we do computation and store
data. Such approaches have stringent requirements for materials which are not
readily available today. These include materials that can exhibit multiple,
precisely and uniquely addressable "microstates" based on an intrinsic feature
of that material which must not fluctuate or degrade significantly over time.
Identifying suitable materials that can function in this manner remains a
foremost challenge. This project explores ferroelectric materials, which are
intrinsic stable and fast, but have traditionally exhibited only binary (not
multi-state) function to find new routes to create multi-state function. This
project provides new fundamental understanding of materials that are important
for a range of applications, expands our knowledge of how to synthesize and
control complex, candidate materials critical for a range of next-generation
applications, provides foundation understanding for novel technological
development including potential impact on neuromorphic, metamaterial,
logic/memory, and energy transduction applications, and trains and educates a
modern workforce in cutting-edge materials and experimental approaches while
deepening our abilities to synthesize/fabricate complex materials thereby
enabling new intellectual property and entrepreneurial
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The ability to access
multiple configuration states (i.e., going beyond binary) in materials will
enable transformative changes in how we do computation and store data.
Neuromorphic computing architectures (designed to emulate neuron function in the
brain) require materials exhibiting multiple, precisely and uniquely addressable
"microstates" based on a readable macroscopic order parameter which does not
fluctuate or degrade significantly over time. New adaptable materials are
required to enable such transformative technologies. Identifying suitable
materials - structures, chemistries, morphologies and stochasticities - that
enable true neuromorphic (multi-state) principles remains a foremost challenge.
This program explores aspects of fundamental materials design, control, and
understanding through an innovative combination of advanced materials synthesis,
fabrication, and characterization to enable novel, multi-state function in
intrinsically bi-stable ferroelectric materials. The research investigates
routes to transition from stochastic to deterministic production of non-volatile
multi-states by understanding how to control the polarization, electrostatic,
gradient, elastic, and other energies in ferroelectrics. This is achieved by 1)
using epitaxial growth to produce complex, multi-ground state domain
architectures wherein long-range collective interactions enable multiple states;
2) developing designer strain and energy landscapes that enable non-volatile,
multi-state stability in chemically-inhomogeneous films; and 3) synthesis and
application of electric field and stress to induce multi-state configurations
based on defect-polarization coupling. The research provides foundational
insights about the nature of ferroelectricity and how polarization can be
controlled, how to produce complex, multi-component materials with ever-
increasing precision, how ferroelectric switching evolves in systems, and how
multi-state function can be achieved in solid-state materials. This project
additional provides for training and education of high-tech researchers,
research opportunities for underrepresented student groups, and could enable
technologies of importance to a range of important technical fields.