* 1708181
* Readout Systems for Cryogenic Dark Matter Detectors/SuperCDMS SNOLAB
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Martin Huber, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,631.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. This award will support students and scientists
working on the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment that aims to achieve world-leading
sensitivity for dark matter searches in the 1-10 GeV/c2 mass range.

The impact of the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment extends beyond the search for dark
matter. The CU Denver group prepares undergraduates for graduate education or
careers in technical fields through their integral involvement in all R&D
activities. Undergraduate students, working closely with the PI, will study the
sensitivity of the SuperCDMS SNOLAB SQUIDs to ambient magnetic fields and the
associated degradation of sensitivity (increased noise levels) when operated in
a lightly-shielded magnetic environment. The PI participates in outreach
activities with two local magnet schools. The experiment will be located at
SNOLAB, in Ontario, Canada, the deepest underground laboratory in North America.
This support will primarily allow the PI and his students to conduct the
specific responsibilities this group has agreed to undertake within the
collaboration. Among the collaboration responsibilities, CU Denver serves as the
primary facility for post-fabrication SQUID verification of all devices to be
used in SuperCDMS SNOLAB and test facilities, and is heavily involved in design
of and measurements on the readout electronics. The CU Denver group will
participate in the pre-operation and commissioning activities for SuperCDMS
SNOLAB, specifically integration of the tower electronics, the readout
electronics, and the DAQ, and installation and commissioning of the experiment
at SNOLAB.