* 1708766
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Understanding of the Environmental Fate of Disinfection By-Products Arising from Desalination Plants
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Andrew Heyes, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,424.00

This award is supported jointly by the Chemistry Division's Environmental
Chemical Sciences Program and the Environmental Engineering Program in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. Dr.
Michael Gonsior and colleagues at the University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Science collaborate with Dr. Susan Richardson at the University of
South Carolina. They study the formation of chemical compounds that arise during
disinfection of seawater, which is required before water can be used in major
desalination plants in the U.S. and Australia. Desalination is an important
method for turning salt water into drinkable (potable) water in many parts of
the world. It is becoming an increasingly important treatment technology as
freshwater supplies are becoming scarcer. However, currently potentially harmful
organic compounds produced during disinfection treatments are discharged into
the aquatic environment in the waste water stream. The consequences of these
organic compounds to aquatic organisms are largely unknown. This study provides
new knowledge regarding the formation of previously unknown disinfection by-
products (DBPs) produced during desalination. New quantification methods for
organic compounds in aqueous environments are also developed. Undergraduate
students are exposed to this research through internships, such as through the
Maryland Sea Grant REU program and at USC. The CBL Visitor Center host displays
about seawater DBPs, how they are formed and what impact they may have on the
coastal ocean. In partnership with the Chesapeake Biological Laboratory Visitor
Center, the research team hosts a summer workshop for 7-12th grade school
students/teachers. The investigators also collaborate with colleagues in the
U.S, Australia, and Germany, including industry partners from major desalination
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future reliance on desalination and water reuse to
provide suitable drinking water is expected globally. During the desalination
process, chlorination of water is required to limit biofouling of membranes and
to kill potentially harmful bacteria. The formation of Disinfection Byproducts
(DBPs) during drinking water chlorination and the compounding factors presented
by different sources of fresh water, such as high levels of dissolved organic
matter (DOM), is well recognized. However, during the chlorination of seawater,
hundreds of brominated and iodinated compounds are formed, few of which have
been characterized, and some of which are already known to be highly toxic. The
researchers utilize new analytical techniques to investigate the production,
fate and toxicity of DBPs in the coastal environment. Ultrahigh resolution mass
spectrometry has been utilized to describe complex organic matrices at the
molecular level, and has successfully demonstrated the complexity of DBPS formed
after chlorination of ship ballast water as well as characterizing DOM in
natural waters. All of these studies have shown that highly precise mass
measurements combined with soft ionization are capable of assigning unambiguous
and exact molecular formulas. In combination with traditional gas chromatography
interfaced with mass spectrometry methods to support quantification of a subset
of compounds, the team characterizes DBPs at different steps of the desalination
process and evaluates the fate of produced DBPs released into the environment.
The students and faculty combine desalination plant measurements with controlled
laboratory studies to better understand the mechanisms and factors contributing
to the production, fate and the toxicity of known and newly discovered DBPs
formed in seawater during pre-chlorination and accumulated in waste waters
discharged into coastal ecosystems.