* 1708338
* Instrument Development:  High Performance Electrostatic Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry and Tandem Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Scott McLuckey, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 806,000.00

Mass spectrometry plays a major role in many areas where molecular measurements
are critical, such as the life sciences, the environmental sciences, energy,
security, etc. Important characteristics of a mass spectrometer include the
resolution and accuracy with which it can determine molecular masses and the
range of masses accessible, as well as practical instrumental features such as
size, weight, power consumption, and cost. With support from the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Scott McLuckey
and his group at Purdue University seek to develop a conceptually new and simple
means for mass analysis that combines impressive performance capabilities with
potentially small size, low weight, low power consumption and relatively low
cost. The work promises to make high performance mass spectrometry much more
widely accessible to scientists across a wide range of fields, while providing
valuable training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. McLuckey is developing a relatively small
electrostatic linear ion trap based on opposing ion mirrors. The instrument will
be useful for high-performance mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry
applications either as a component of larger systems or as a stand-alone device.
The work targets mass resolution in the tens of thousands in analysis times well
under one second, with capabilities for tandem mass spectrometry experiments
using several dissociation methods. The net result will be a highly flexible and
powerful tool that is simple enough to be built in academic laboratories for
support of specialized experiments. It may also be attractive for commercial
development to support a wide range of commonly performed experiments. Possible
application areas range from field measurements (including extraterrestrial
applications) to laboratory-based measurements that require high mass resolution
and mass accuracy at relatively low cost. The relative ease with which dual-ion
mirror devices can be fabricated will also facilitate the adoption of this
technology in specialized research tools that are constructed to address
research problems that cannot be addressed with commercially available
instruments.