* 1708240
* Synthetic Mimics of Avidin/Biotin for In-Situ Capture Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 572,000.00

Nature often uses large biomolecules to capture and remove small targets from a
mixture, in the same conceptual way that a fisherman employs a net to secure a
fish. But biomolecules are relatively fragile which limits their utility, and
there is a need for synthetic mimics that can capture specific targets, such as
colored dyes, with high affinity and selectivity. The Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program supports Professor Bradley Smith of the
University of Notre Dame to synthesize and study cylinder-shaped molecules that
capture dyes on the surface of small beads. The dye coated beads can be easily
detected using a cheap camera or even the naked eye. They are potentially useful
in environmental and biomedical applications. The research activities provide
rigorous student training in chemical synthesis and data analysis, as well as
extensive experience in oral and written presentations. As part of a pedagogical
project, Professor Smith and his students are upgrading the free internet
workbook Organic Structure Elucidation by including a series of video answers to
the problems. Free and unrestricted access to the video answers helps students
who lack access to advanced educational resources or experienced
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a recent discovery that
water soluble squaraine dyes with appended polyethylene glycol chains can be
threaded with extremely high affinity by a water soluble tetralactam macrocycle
containing anthracene side-walls. The term Synthavidin (synthetic avidin) is the
generic name for this host/guest association system. The research develops the
underlying synthetic and supramolecular chemistry to produce strong and rapid
capture of highly fluorescent squaraine dyes in water, and complexation-induced
changes in absorption and fluorescence properties. The work produces molecular
design concepts that guide supramolecular researchers towards high affinity
receptors for operation in water. The bead capture assay is endowed with two
powerful attributes, namely, the capability to remove enzyme cleaved fluorescent
dye from turbid media and the creation of amplified signal due to self-assembly
of a hyperbranched fluorescent shell around the bead. The assay design is
generalizable and can be expanded to include many types of cleavage enzymes.