* 1708185
* Polarization-Resolved Single-Photon Measurements of Nonlinear Thomson Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Justin Peatross, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 399,474.00

Advances in laser technology have made it possible to create exceptionally
bright light inside a tiny region where a laser beam is focused. This project
will develop a new way to study the optical fields near such a laser focus. The
electric and magnetic fields in such extreme light can rip electrons away from
any substance and then accelerate the electrons at more than sextillion
(thousand billion billion) g's, where one g is the acceleration due to gravity
on Earth. The freed electrons are then propelled to very near the speed of
light, so Einstein's equations of relativity are required to describe their
motion. Electrons under these extreme conditions scatter wavelength-shifted
light out of the laser focus (called nonlinear Thomson scattering), and this can
reveal the dynamics of the electron motion and thus the structure of the laser
fields. This research team has developed techniques to distinguish the scattered
photons from the quintillion background photons that comprise the laser pulse
that drives the electrons. With this project, the team will use the scattered
light as a probe to map the strength and polarization of the optical fields in
and around the focus. Such a laser focus is challenging to characterize in any
other way, since the focus is often as small as an individual pixel on a camera.
Furthermore, at full power any camera placed in the focus would be destroyed.
Analysis of the electric and magnetic fields inside a very intense but tiny
laser focus will be helpful for understanding interactions between laser light
and atoms, molecules, and solids that are studied with the world's most powerful
lasers. This project will also provide an opportunity for students to be trained
on optics and photonics technologies and contribute to progress in fundamental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to measure individual photons
scattered from only a few electrons in a laser focus enables observation of
fundamental relativistic phenomena at very low densities (essentially a vacuum).
This will allow this team to avoid the confounding influence of plasma dynamics
that occur for higher densities. They will study the polarization of nonlinear
Thomson scattering in the spatial distribution of the scattered fundamental,
second, and third harmonic light. The polarization contains an added dimension
of information, which has not previously been investigated or measured. The rich
structure in polarization-resolved scattering plots promises new insights into
electron dynamics. This team's simulations of relativistic electron trajectories
within a tight laser focus show that electron trajectories are sensitive to the
details of the field vectors of the laser. The use of a deformable mirror will
allow them to create ideal and exotic focal shapes to test the sensitivity of
nonlinear Thomson scattering to the details of the vector field distributions in
the focus.