* 1708284
* Heegaard Diagrams and Holomorphic Disks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Peter Ozsvath, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This National Science Foundation award supports research to develop new tools to
study three- and four-dimensional spaces as well as knotted curves, bringing
together techniques from many mathematical disciplines. As these objects closely
relate to our physical world and the space-time, this line of research is
partially inspired by modern physics. As such, it lies at a fertile intellectual
crossroads, bringing new perspectives to neighboring subjects, and providing
novel methods for attacking old problems. The PI and his collaborators pioneered
new invariants, known as "Heegaard-Floer homology" and "knot Floer homology,"
and developed a technique known as "bordered Floer homology" for effectively
utilizing simple component pieces of a space. Research funded by this award
deals with further developing these bordered techniques for three-dimensional
spaces and for knotted curves, to get both a better conceptual understanding of
these invariants, and for giving effective computational techniques for studying
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with Zoltan Szabo, the PI
constructed an invariant for three- and four-dimensional spaces known as the
"Heegaard-Floer homology." Heegaard-Floer homology brings together tools from
various mathematical disciplines, including symplectic geometry, analysis, and
homological algebra, to study problems in knot theory and low-dimensional
topology, in a way that was partially inspired by modern physics. A variant of
this construction, called "knot Floer homology," is used to study knots in
three-dimensional manifolds. In collaboration with Robert Lipshitz and Dylan
Thurston, the PI defined "bordered Floer homology," a technique for
reconstructing one variant of Heegaard-Floer homology from a three-manifold that
is decomposed into simple component pieces. In the research funded by this
award, the PI aims to study bordered Floer homology as a tool for studying
various versions of Heegaard-Floer homology and knot Floer homology. Part of the
project will start by extending the bordered theory to include the full
(unspecialized) Heegaard-Floer homology for three-manifolds with torus boundary.
In a different direction, bordered Floer homology is extended to a tool for
studying and computing knot Floer homology.