* 1708903
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Awards: Recursive Human - Environmental Interaction In An Estuary Setting
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* James Daniels, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 25,137.00

James Daniels, a graduate student at the University of California San Diego,
will examine human adaptations to environmental pressures and the subsequent
environmental responses to those adaptations. This co-evolutionary relationship
can be investigated via study of the archaeological record in conjunction with
study of natural sediment and soil profiles that record changes in past
environments. The combined study of human adaptation and human impacts on the
environment can provide insight into how environments respond to human
activities and whether those responses are beneficial or detrimental to humans.
Studying these processes may also provide insight into current and future human
impacts and the kinds of human adaptation that produce the most favorable
outcomes for both the environment and future generations of humans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the shift to settled village life
on tropical coasts of the New World. Mr. Daniels will investigate the recursive
relationship between humans and their environment in this setting by focusing on
the archaeological and sedimentary records that accumulated between
approximately 5000 and 3000 years ago on the Pacific coast of southern Chiapas,
Mexico. This wetland environment lies behind wide barrier beaches and consists
of mangrove forests and lagoons within which there is a rich archaeological
record of the Archaic and Early Formative periods. The project will unravel how
Archaic and Early Formative occupants' manipulation of the environment through
land clearance, planting, and other activities affected the stability of the
estuary-lagoon system and may have created conditions conducive for the
emergence of settled village life. The main hypothesis that will be explored is
that increased inland land clearance during the Archaic and initial Early
Formative periods contributed to the expansion of the mangrove estuary, thus
creating an opportunity for Early Formative people to exploit a new abundance of
wetland resources and ultimately to develop more sedentary subsistence
strategies. The investigation will combine excavations on small mounds within
the mangroves with examination of the history of barrier-beach formation
downstream from the mounds. A precise chronology of changes in the two settings
will facilitate reconstruction of what the environment was like when it was
first colonized by people and how the environment responded to initial and
subsequent human impacts.