* 1708108
* RUI:  Investigations of One- and Two-Color Laser-Assisted Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Bruno deHarak, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 154,500.00

Knowing the microscopic structures of molecules and materials is key to
understanding their physical and chemical properties and therefore their basic
functions and technological applications. However, in addition to measuring
structures, which is widely carried out using electron scattering, physicists
seek to understand the interactions that occur between electrons and molecules
during the scattering process itself. This knowledge can then be used to develop
more sensitive techniques for determining structures, for example, while a
molecule is undergoing a structural change. Knowledge gained through these
studies can also influence applications of electron-atom-laser interactions,
which include the generation of short pulses of extreme ultraviolet light that
are used to measure ultrafast physical and chemical processes. The goal of this
research is to understand electron-atom scattering in the presence of an intense
laser field, in particular, how electrons in atoms and molecules respond to
intense fields. Without the laser field, the simplest thing that can happen is
that the electron and the atom do not exchange energy and continue on their way
after the collision with the same energies that they had before the collision,
possibly changing only their direction. Addition of light from a laser can cause
such ?elastically? scattered electrons to absorb some number of photons, which
increases the energy of the electron, or emit photons, thereby reducing the
electron's energy. These are called laser-assisted free-free (LAFF) processes
because the electron is free, i.e., not bound to an atom or molecule, both
before and after the collision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will involve
experimental LAFF studies, with the broad aim of increasing our basic
understanding of these processes. Particular attention will be paid at looking
for interference effects in LAFF experiments that use a two-color (photon energy
= 1.17 eV, and 2.34 eV) laser field, and which might be used to control
scattering processes. In addition to the advancement of our basic understanding
of scattering processes, this work has applications to a variety of fields, both
basic and applied. For example, LAFF processes are important for understanding
the interiors and atmospheres of stars. Free-free transitions also play a major
role in the gas breakdown that occurs in electric discharges, and provide a
method for laser heating of a plasma (a gas of ionized atoms). This work will
primarily take place at an undergraduate institution, and will directly involve
several undergraduate students in research.