* 1708300
* Understanding Heterogeneous Nucleation in Nanocrystal Growth with Molecular Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Dong Qin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Nanocrystals are geometrically well-ordered solids with diameters on the order
of 0.00000005 inches. Bimetallic nanocrystals, made of two different metal
species, have properties that are often superior to their single-metal
counterparts. The arrangement of the two different metals relative to each other
in the nanocrystal is very important in determining the nanocrystal properties,
and considerable effort has been made to deposit one metal atop the nanocrystal
surface of another metal with precision in location. It remains a grand
challenge to detect and quantify the metal being deposited, particularly when
the nanocrystals are still suspended in the reaction medium undergoing growth.
Dr. Dong Qin addresses this challenge by developing a class of molecules, the
isocyanides (molecules containing the -NC chemical group), as probes for in situ
characterization with detection of the isocyanides by a spectroscopic technique,
surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). The ultimate goal is to establish a
scientific basis for enabling the rational synthesis of bimetallic nanocrystals
with well-controlled compositions and shapes, which have broader societal impact
through their need in a variety of applications. This research project
encompasses multiple disciplines such as materials science, chemistry, colloidal
science, solid-state physics, photonics, and surface science, with a focus on
the following components for student development: i) active learning in
interdisciplinary areas involved in understanding the structure and property
relationships of nanomaterials; ii) training that provides hands-on experience
in the synthesis of nanomaterials in the Qin laboratory, and on the
characterization of nanomaterials in the state-of-the-art facilities at Georgia
Tech and national laboratories; and iii) exposing the community and society,
including high school students and teachers, to nanoscale science and technology
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, Dr. Dong Qin from the Georgia
Institute of Technology is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to study the fundamentals involved in the
heterogeneous nucleation and overgrowth of bimetallic nanocrystals.
Specifically, a novel class of isocyanide-based molecular probes (R-NC) are
developed for in situ detection and analysis of the overgrowth of a second noble
metal (M: Pd, Pt, Ir, Rh, or Ru) on Ag nanocrystals suspended in the original
growth solution by surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). Because the binding
of the isocyanide group to a metal surface is similar to that of carbon
monoxide, it is anticipated that the stretching frequency of the NC bond differs
when the isocyanide group binds to the Ag and M atoms, respectively. Therefore,
it is feasible to monitor the M atoms being deposited onto Ag nanocrystals by
following the stretching frequencies and intensities of NC vibration in real
time. On the other hand, the SERS hot spots on the Ag nanocrystals can be
designed to coincide with the sites favored by M atoms for heterogeneous
nucleation, allowing for unprecedented sensitivity with a detection limit below
one monolayer. By leveraging their consummate sensitivity toward metal atoms,
the novel SERS probes open up new opportunities to elucidate the mechanistic
details involved in the seeded overgrowth of a second noble metal on the surface
of Ag nanocrystals. The mechanistic insights support the rational design and
knowledge-based synthesis of bi- and multi-metallic nanocrystals for a variety
of applications. This research project encompasses multiple disciplines such as
materials science, chemistry, colloidal science, solid-state physics, photonics,
and surface science, with a focus on the following components for student
development: i) active learning in interdisciplinary areas involved in
understanding the structure and property relationships of nanomaterials; ii)
training that provides hands-on experience in the synthesis of nanomaterials in
the Qin laboratory, and on the characterization of nanomaterials in the state-
of-the-art facilities at Georgia Tech and national laboratories; and iii)
exposing the community and society, including high school students and teachers,
to nanoscale science and technology concepts.