* 1708742
* Synthesis of Doped, Plasmonic Nanodiamonds from Vapor Precursors by Plasma-based Strategies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Mohan Sankaran, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 446,687.00

Nontechnical Description: When light impinges on a metal it may cause the free
electrons in the material to move in unison, with the collective oscillations
known as plasmons. The plasmonic properties of metals are responsible for some
of the vibrant colors of stained glass windows decorating buildings all around
the world. At the same time, plasmonic phenomena are at the heart of emerging
telecommunications devices, energy harvesting technologies, and healthcare.
However, the most commonly studied plasmonic metals, gold and silver, have
several drawbacks including their relatively high cost, limited optical
properties, and energetic losses. Alternately, semiconductors grown with
intentionally added impurity atoms also exhibit tunable plasmonic properties
while additionally being compatible with microelectronics manufacturing
processes. This project seeks to add impurity-doped diamond, due to its optical
transparency, chemical inertness, and biocompatibility, as a new semiconductor-
based plasmonic material. Undergraduate and high school students are involved in
the research to motivate and prepare them for careers in science, technology and
engineering desciplines. In addition, international experiences are planned in
sub-Saharan Africa and Italy for graduate students to illustrate the connection
between research and societal challenges.

Technical Description: The goal of the project is to develop diamond as a
plasmonic material. The project is divided into two thrusts. The first thrust
comprises synthesis of nanodiamonds doped with impurities, which can support
localized surface plasmon resonances. The second thrust addresses optical
characterization of the plasmonic properties of doped nanodiamonds. To
synthesize doped nanodiamonds, a plasma process is utilized in which molecular
vapor precursors are dissociated to homogeneously (substrate-free) nucleated
aerosol particles. Doping is carried out by co-precipitation of the diamond
nuclei with the impurity atoms, analogous to chemical vapor deposition.
Assessment of the doping level and nature of doping (surface vs. bulk) is
carried out utilizing a suite of materials analysis techniques. The optical
properties of the resulting material are characterized by variable angle
spectroscopic ellipsometry and dark field microscopy. An interdisciplinary team
is collaborating on the research, exchanging knowledge in materials synthesis,
materials characterization, and optical spectroscopy, with a common goal of
creating a de novo class of superior plasmonic materials. Low loss and
biocompatible plasmonic nanodiamonds may unlock several technological
opportunities, spanning applications from quantum computing to precision
medicine.