* 1708714
* Chemistry and Biology of the Peptide Signals Used by Bacteria for Cell-Cell Communication
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Helen Blackwell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the NSF's Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Helen E. Blackwell from the University of Wisconsin-
Madison to investigate the chemical signals that bacteria use to communicate
with each other. This communication pathway is important, as many common
bacteria use it to initiate infections in humans, animals, and plants. This
project aims to study the chemical structures of the signals used by one class
of bacteria and use the obtained information to design and create signals that
the bacteria cannot make themselves. These non-natural signals are used to
activate and inhibit bacterial communications pathways on demand. Such a
chemical approach provides fundamental new insights into the biological
mechanisms by which bacteria communicate and shape basic understanding of
bacterial signaling. Realization of these project goals is providing research
training for graduate students in modern experimental techniques, preparing them
for advanced careers in science. Another major thrust of this project is, in
collaboration with an established artist, creating artwork and an immersive
installation piece where the potential of bacteria to act as cooperative
partners is re-imagined. This medium is being used in communicating the presence
of bacteria, their chemical signaling networks, and their importance to a broad
non-scientist audience in the USA and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad
goals of this research project are to characterize the chemistry and biology of
the autoinducing peptides used by Gram-positive bacteria for cell-cell
communication, or "quorum sensing" (QS), and to exploit these findings for the
development of new chemical tools. QS in Gram-positive bacteria depends on
peptide-derived signals and is best characterized in staphylococcal species.
These bacteria use agr-type, two-component signaling systems for QS that are
reliant on autoinducing peptide (AIP) signals and cognate AgrC receptors. Many
infection-related (i.e., virulence) phenotypes are under the control of the agr
QS system. Accordingly, there is significant interest in the development of
chemical and biological strategies to modulate agr-type QS signaling and thereby
attenuate the impact of these pathogens. Professor Blackwell's laboratory
recently discovered a suite of non-native, AIP-derived peptides that are the
most potent synthetic inhibitors and activators of AgrC receptors, and thereby
QS. Despite their potency, AIP-derived AgrC modulators possess physical
qualities that limit their utility as chemical tools. Further, there is a lack
of basic mechanistic understanding of how these ligands interact with AgrC
receptors and modulate their function. This project addresses these limitations
with the integrated use of synthetic chemical, biochemical, microbiological and
structural biological approaches. The expectation is an expansion in the current
knowledge of agr-type QS.