* 1708280
* NSF/DMR-BSF: FORCES &amp; FLUCTUATIONS OUT OF EQUILIBRIUM
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mehran Kardar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education that pursues the consequences of fluctuations which may
be due to the random motion of particles that obey classical mechanics or due to
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle which lies at the foundations of quantum
mechanics. Physics is the study of force and motion, while statistical physics
is concerned with the influence of fluctuations. The pressure of a gas, the van
der Waals attraction between molecules, and the Casimir force in quantum
electrodynamics are classical examples of forces resulting from equilibrium
fluctuations. Several aspects of fluctuation-induced force, especially in
systems out of equilibrium, are explored in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research on "Active Matter" studies collective
behaviors of large groups of self-driven entities, such as flocks of living or
artificial self-powered things, whose random motions superficially resemble
thermally fluctuating particles. However, the presence of internal drive leads
to distinct phenomena from equilibrium matter, such as directed forces, and a
pressure that depends on the shape and structure of the confining wall. The
internal drive of artificial active particles is easily tunable, for example by
shining light. This project will investigate the collective behaviors that can
be programmed by different temporal patterns of
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forces between molecules and those between
macroscopic charge-neutral bodies are mostly due to thermal and quantum
mechanical fluctuations of the electromagnetic field. These forces themselves
exhibit weak fluctuations whose magnitude, and relevance will be explored, in
particular for bodies at different temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research activity is closely incorporated in seminars and courses of the PI
which through his published textbooks and web-pages reach a broad scientific
community. The proposed research is interdisciplinary, and has had impact in
diverse areas from applied mathematics to
immunology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education that pursues consequences of
fluctuations. Quantum and thermal fluctuations of the electromagnetic field are
the cornerstone of quantum and statistical physics. Precision measurements of
heat transfer and Casimir forces at sub-micron scale have made possible probing
these phenomena at unprecedented detail. Thus, developing theoretical tools for
treatment of systems out of thermal equilibrium, where concepts such as entropy
and free energy are inapplicable, is of particular relevance. This research is
aimed at developing and refining methods, based on scattering theory and so-
called fluctuational QED, to characterize novel features of these forces,
especially in the non-equilibrium contexts of objects held at different
temperatures, or in relative motion.&lt;br/&gt;Interestingly, there are
conceptual connections to the very different system of collections of self-
propelled active particles. Due to conservation laws, say of the number of
particles, fluctuations in driven matter acquire long-range correlations and
exhibit long-range interactions akin to Casimir forces. Using a combination of
numerical and analytical methods, this project will explore patterns and forces
in driven classical particles. The numerical studies shall focus on simple
lattice models, such as Active Brownian Particles or Driven Diffusive Systems,
with sufficient complexity to capture collective behaviors. On the analytical
front, methods of statistical field theory, used on symmetries and conservation
laws to construct stochastic equations for active matter, and stress tensors to
compute force, shall be employed.