* 1708931
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Mites, microbes, and fungal pathogens: the ecology and evolution of an indirect defense trait
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Ash Zemenick, Zemenick                Ash            T
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow, Ash
Zemenick, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow is being
mentored by Marjorie Weber at the Michigan State University. This research
explores how mites influence the pathogens of plants. Many plants have small
tufts of hairs on the leaf ("domatia") that house mites. Mites can benefit
plants by reducing the success of pathogens (bacteria and fungi), but the
mechanisms and extent of variation are not well understood. Mites can directly
reduce success of pathogens by eating them. Also, by influencing the abundance
of microbes that inhibit pathogens, mites may indirectly influence pathogen
success. Finally, because not all plants have domatia, the way in which mites
and/or microbes influence pathogens may vary across plant species. The fellow is
disentangling these effects using an experiment that manipulates the access of
mites to plants, and the occurrence of potential pathogens. This research will
increase the understanding of these widespread ecological interactions, and
contribute to sustainable pathogen management in agroecosystems. This project
also includes two explicit broader impacts that address some stereotypes that
fuel underrepresentation in biology. First, the fellow has experienced life as a
woman and transgender person, and thus serves as a role model in mentoring
undergraduates involved in research. Second, the fellow is developing a
repository of teaching materials to humanize biology and biologists by
highlighting how research applies to societal issues and what it's like to be a
biologist. The fellow is using examples provided by biologists that self-
identify as members of underrepresented groups in STEM (e.g. in terms of race,
ethnicity, gender, income, nationality, immigrant status, cognitive and physical
ability, etc.).Â 

The fellow is conducting manipulative experiment to understand how mites
influence pathogen success directly (via consumption) and/or indirectly (via an
altered microbial community composition that is less invasible). Leaves from 20
species of grapes (Vitis) will be experimentally manipulated with four
treatments. Two (T1 and T2) will block mites, and two (T3 and T4) will have
mites. After 2 weeks, half of all leaves will be harvested to assess leaf
microbial communites. Fungal and bacterial DNA will be amplified using barcoded
ITS and 16S primers and the resulting multiplexed amplicons will be subject to
Illumina sequencing. A difference between no-mite (T1 and T2) and mite (T3 and
T4) leaf microbial communities would empirically demonstrate that domatia-
inhabiting mites influence leaf microbe community structure, and could therefore
indirectly influence pathogen success in Vitis. The other half of replicates
will remain in the field, with mites allowed only on T2 and T4. All leaves will
be challenged with powdery mildew. If mite presence lowers pathogen infection of
Vitis leaves, then leaves from T2-T4 will have lower infestation of powdery
mildew than control (T1) leaves. If this reduction in pathogen infection is
through direct consumption rather than indirectly through a modified leaf
microbe community, then T2 and T4 leaves will have lower powdery mildew
infestation than T2 leaves. To evaluate patterns of microbial community
evolution and pathogen resistance across leaves, multi- and unidimensional
comparative phylogenetic models will be used to assess whether microbial
community composition and structure, as well as pathogen resistance, are
evolutionarily correlated with domatia presence and size across Vitis species.
If domatia presence and size are correlated with powdery mildew resistance
across the phylogeny, there will be evidence for either: A) the selective
environment for domatia included pathogen resistance, or B) evolution of domatia
selected for the loss of direct pathogen resistance.