* 1708937
* RUI: Mono and Bis Gold Resorcinarenes: New, Potent Supramolecular Cataylsts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Schramm, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,498.00

Efficient chemical transformations are essential for cost effective industrial
synthesis of pharmaceuticals and manufacturing of commodity chemicals and useful
materials. Inspired by enzymes (a type of protein) that catalyze chemical
reactions in living organisms, Prof. Schramm conducts research to gain a better
understanding of the principles for designing efficient catalysts and to develop
new methodologies for chemical transformations. This project provides research
training to undergraduate students and Master's degree candidates, including
women and members of underrepresented groups. The researchers also have the
opportunity to engage with collaborators in another country to broaden their
perspectives in science. Through this process of discovery, they are trained to
become experts in this area of study and help advance knowledge.

Prof. Schramm and coworkers synthesize resorcinarene-based cavitiands with one
or two coordinated gold(I) atoms for catalyzing the reactions of alkynes with
nucleophiles. Inspired by the architectural principles of enzymes, these
catalysts are designed to have a pocket for binding substrates (alkynes) and the
catalytic functional groups (gold atoms) directed inwardly towards the binding
pocket. There are three main thrusts in this project. The first objective
focuses on studying chemical transformations catalyzed by a cavitand that has
one gold(I) atom coordinated to a 3-walled resorcinarene. This research aims to
differentiate the supramolecular catalyst with well-defined binding pocket from
simpler gold catalysts and to evaluate the role of molecular recognition on
substrate selectivity, regio- and diastereo-chemical properties of reaction
products, and reaction rates. The second thrust explores the catalytic
properties of bis-gold(I) cavitands. The confined space and placement of two
adjacent gold atoms result in new modes of alkyne reactivity, e.g., yne-yne
coupling reaction. The third thrust aims to gain a better understanding of the
effect of the "walls" of the cavitands on stabilizing reactive intermediates and
modulating reactivity. The long term goal of this project is to develop
selection rules for recognition and for favoring specific reaction outcomes.