* 1708743
* Widely Tunable Cavity-Enhanced Ultrafast Spectroscopy and the Dynamics of Hydrogen Bond Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Thomas Allison, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 01/31/2022
* USD 533,602.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Allison and his research group at Stony Brook University
further develop a new type of spectrometer for recording the behavior of gas
molecules. In particular, Professor Allison records snapshots of the vibrations
of hydrogen bonds between water molecules when a few water molecules stick
together in a ring but are otherwise isolated from the environment. These
snapshots of simple systems help to understand how the motions of hydrogen atoms
in more complex networks such as liquid water are coupled to one another. The
information allows scientists to make better computer models of hydrogen-bonded
matter. The new ultrafast spectrometers developed by the Allison Lab will be
able to record signals from much more dilute samples than currently possible.
Professor Allison's techniques, once developed, can be used to study motions of
other molecular systems and find many uses in fundamental and applied research.
For example, the developed technique could allow scientists to study how water
molecules interact with each other to understand how clouds form or to study how
protein molecules interact with their surrounding molecules to understand
enzymatic functions in biological processes.Professor Allison works with
graduate and undergraduate students closely in the research. He also
participates in a school summer program on campus targeting high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast optical spectroscopy methods, such as
transient absorption spectroscopy and two-dimensional spectroscopy, are widely
used across many disciplines. However, these techniques have been typically
restricted to optically thick samples, such as solids and liquid solutions.
Professor Allison and his group work on a widely tunable cavity-enhanced
ultrafast spectrometer and apply it to the dynamics of elementary hydrogen bond
networks. This involves substantial instrument development in concert with a
series of experiments on jet-cooled gas-phase molecules and clusters. Cavity-
enhanced two-dimensional infrared (CE-2DIR) spectroscopy is another technique to
be developed to study hydrogen-bonded carboxylic acid dimers. The study of small
deuterated water clusters will provide critical data for understanding and
modeling the complexities of liquid water. The development of a widely tunable
cavity-enhanced ultrafast spectrometer is expected to open new opportunities for
many future applications where classic ultrafast spectroscopy has been limited
by its sensitivity and spectral information. The project provides students
involved in the project with an interdisciplinary research opportunity.
Professor Allison also participates in the University's laser teaching center
for the outreach to high school students and general publics.