* 1708344
* Collaborative Research:  Fire Influences on Forest Recovery and Associated Ecosystem Feedbacks in Arctic Larch Forests.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Michelle Mack, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,681.00

Larch forests overlie extensive areas of Arctic permafrost and contain half the
carbon (C) in some boreal forests. Although larch is a fire-dependent tree
species, previous research and that of others suggests that increased fire
activity may limit larch forest recovery and potentially trigger forest loss and
a shift to alternative vegetation dominated by shrubs or grasses. Forest loss
could have large consequences for climate because of changes in C storage and
reflection of heat and light (albedo). Larch forests occur across much of the
Arctic latitudinal treeline, and future larch recruitment dynamics will be a
primary determinant of whether boreal forests respond to climate warming via
treeline migration. Despite the global importance of these forests and the
potential for an altered fire regime to modify recruitment patterns and future
forest cover, larch forests remain largely understudied compared to the boreal
forests of North America. The many mechanisms governing post-fire larch
recruitment and the consequences for system-level feedbacks to regional and
global climate remain untested. This research will link constraints on larch
forest recruitment after fire to system-wide observations of larch recruitment
failure and associated feedbacks to
climate.&amp;#8232;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boreal forests cover a large portion of
the vegetated land area above the Arctic Circle and are a critical component of
the Arctic System. In larch forests, increased fire activity associated with
climate warming and drying can lead to larch recruitment failure, which in turn
can limit forest recovery and trigger forest loss. A transition from forests to
successional trajectories dominated by shrubs or grasses could have important
consequences for climate feedbacks. The primary objective of this research is to
delineate the causes of varying larch recruitment after fire and to quantify the
consequences of larch recruitment failure for climate feedbacks via changes in C
storage and albedo using a combination of field-based measurements,
dendrochronological analysis, remotely-sensed data, and statistical modeling.
The project hypothesizes that post-fire larch recruitment will be most
constrained by seed sources (i.e., biological legacies) but that environmental
conditions (e.g., soil organic layer depth) and biotic interactions (e.g.,
degree of mycorrhizal colonization and community structure) will impose
secondary limitations on recruitment when seed sources are available. Larch
recruitment failure will shift successional trajectories to those dominated by
shrubs and grasses, resulting in reduced C storage, higher albedo, and cooling
of regional climate. We will test hypotheses via field observations and
experimental manipulations, combine field- derived data and statistical modeling
to determine the factors that most influence larch recruitment, use high-
resolution satellite imagery to determine the recent extent of regional larch
recruitment failure after fire, and estimate C pools and albedo across gradients
of larch recruitment and stand succession to determine the relative system-level
consequences of changes in these parameters for regional climate forcing. By
focusing on the mechanistic connections between fire and larch recruitment, the
research will provide critical information on the net feedback of an intensified
fire regime in arctic ecosystems to regional and global
climate.&amp;#8232;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train about 16
undergraduate students, one MS student, three PhD students, and two post-
doctoral scholars. It will provide support for four female scientists, two of
whom are early-career. It will share results with researchers in Amsterdam for
inclusion in a circumpolar map of fire activity and forest recruitment, further
improving international collaborations. Research findings will be widely
disseminated to the scientific community through publications in scientific
journals, presentations at national conference, and professional seminars. PIs
will develop and lead a workshop aimed at improving middle school teachers'
understanding of climate change science and their ability to effectively teach
climate science to students.