* 1708593
* Ultrawide Bandgap Gallium Oxide: Fundamental Understanding From Materials Synthesis to Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Walter Lambrecht, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 09/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical description: Gallium oxide is a promising material for high-
voltage, high-temperature, and high-frequency components in radar and
communication systems, wind turbines, and rail traction. Its band gap of ~4.9
electron volts and estimated high breakdown voltage significantly goes beyond
currently developed materials, such as GaN and 4H-SiC, while still presenting
semiconductor properties. This research focuses on the theoretical modeling of
gallium oxide for predicting its fundamental material properties, and the
experimental synthesis of this material by using high purity metallic gallium
and oxygen as sources. The project aims to produce high quality gallium oxide
and to advance the fundamental understanding of this emerging material.
Theoretical studies of the fundamental properties of imperfections in the
material provides guidance for experimental material growth and material
characterization. The development of strategies for synthesis of this material
and progress in understanding their properties contribute an important body of
work to the research infrastructure. A successful execution of this research is
expected to provide a knowledge foundation to power electronics industry with
positive impacts on the US economy. This project trains two graduate students in
the areas of advanced semiconductor materials synthesis, material
characterization, first-principles modeling and device technologies. The
research is integrated with educational activities and outreach to benefit the
broader community.

Technical description: The key research goal is to identify and address the
fundamental material challenges of synthesizing high quality ultra-wide-band-gap
(UWBG) gallium oxide to advance the next generation high power electronics and
short wavelength optoelectronics. The synthesis and fundamental understanding of
gallium oxide is still very much in its infancy. The exploration of native
defects such as vacancies, interstitials, antisites, and impurities or
intentional dopants is expected to be complex because three different oxygen
sites and two different gallium sites need to be considered. The research team
investigates these problems by combining first-principles modeling with a
proposed novel synthesis method for achieving high quality epitaxial gallium
oxide films. Specifically, the research efforts include: (i) a low pressure
chemical vapor deposition approach to grow gallium oxide; (ii) reduce defects
and improve material quality by growing gallium oxide on off-axis substrates;
(iii) calculations of the energy of formation and defect levels for point
defects, candidate dopants and defect complexes and their experimental
signatures, such as electron paramagnetic hyperfine and g-tensors and optical
properties; (iv) investigate the crystal defects on electrical properties of
gallium oxide. This project provides fundamental understanding of electronic
structure, phonons, transport, defects and growth optimization. The theoretical
studies will assist in identifying the chemical nature of specific defect levels
and thereby will provide guidance for experimental material synthesis and
material characterization. The results from this project will fill the knowledge
gap in this field, and build a foundation for future applications of this
material system.