* 1708147
* Collaborative Research:  Excited-State Dynamics in Organic Charge-Transfer Compounds: An Experimental and Theoretical Study
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Veaceslav Coropceanu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 05/31/2020
* USD 289,200.00

Non-technical description: This project is a study of crystals made up of
carbon-based organic molecules that conduct electricity in a way similar to the
behavior of the silicon that makes up computer chips. The project aims to
develop a fuller understanding of how these organic materials respond to light,
and how the flow of electricity through them is affected by the vibrations of
the molecules. Experiments that measure light absorbed and emitted by the
crystals are compared to calculations of the various energies of the electrons
in the crystal. From these experiments and calculations it is now possible to
determine how the vibrations of the molecules affect the electrons that are
responsible for the flow of electricity, thus gaining fundamental understanding
of the electronic properties of these materials. The findings of this project
help determine the best materials to use to make more efficient and cheaper
electronic devices such as displays for flat-screen TVs and other media,
photosensors, and solar cells. Graduate students and undergraduates
participating in the project are developing valuable skills in experimentation
and computation while contributing to fulfilling a national and global societal
need for more efficient and sustainable
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Organic semiconductors
are of significant interest due to their potential for opto-electronic
applications such as solar cells and photosensors. Charge transfer compounds,
which are made of two or more different organic molecules in which one species
acts as a donor of electric charge and the other as an acceptor, could provide
new properties or improved performance to increase the range of application of
organic semiconductors. The goals of this project are to elucidate the excited-
state dynamics of selected charge transfer compounds and develop a deep
understanding of electronic couplings and electron-phonon couplings in them.
Charge transport and excited-state dynamical processes are critical to
applications of these materials in opto-electronic devices, and depend on a
subtle interplay between electronic and electron-phonon interactions. Transient
absorption and fluorescence lifetime measurements, when interpreted in light of
computational evaluation of the rates of various electron-transfer processes,
allow the decay mode of excitons in these materials to be determined. Resonant
Raman experiments are used to extract relaxation energies and transfer
integrals. These experimental findings are interpreted in light of site
energies, electron-phonon and electronic couplings computed using a variety of
methods, including density functional theory calculations of large molecular
clusters and those based on periodic boundary conditions, semi-empirical
approaches, and tight-binding models, and molecular dynamics simulations. This
strongly-coupled series of experimental investigations and theoretical modeling
opens a large range of functionalities not manifest in monomolecular solids. The
findings ultimately contribute to fulfilling a national and global societal need
for more efficient and sustainable technology.