* 1708227
* Synthesis of Controlled III-Nitride Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Jonathan Wierer, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical description: This project aims to develop methods for producing
advanced nanometer-scale semiconductor materials, called quantum dots. The
research effort employs a new synthesis technique to create ensembles of these
quantum dots, enabling better control of their size, density and distribution.
By controlling the quantum dots characteristics, their properties could be tuned
closer to theoretical predictions and desired performance. These new materials
are aimed to be used as active components in more efficient electronic devices
for applications that positively impact the nation's economy, including solid-
state lighting, photovoltaics, visible lasers, high temperature sensors, and
ultra-violet light-emitting diodes. The research is incorporated into K-12
education and outreach activities, and is also integrated into graduate and
undergraduate courses to broaden the educational experience beyond the
laboratory. This project trains two graduate students in the highly important
areas of advanced semiconductor materials synthesis, materials characterization,
theory, and device technologies.

Technical description: The principal goal of this project is to explore
synthesis methods to produce monodisperse epitaxial quantum dots in III-Nitride
semiconductors. Specifically, this project efforts include: (i) synthesis of
quantum dot ensembles using quantum-sized-controlled photoelectrochemical
etching, (ii) regrowth of capping layers on top of these quantum dots; (iii)
forming p-n junctions with quantum dot active layers, and (iv) characterization
of optical properties of the quantum dots and resulting gain, spontaneous
emission, and radiative efficiency to established models. These quantum dot
ensembles with controlled energy distribution, density, and alloy composition
are expected to enable strong quantum effects in III-Nitride semiconductors,
addressing various limitations in III-Nitrides by tailoring their bandstructure
in order to overcome the Auger recombination, poor radiative efficiencies at
longer visible wavelengths, high thresholds in laser diodes, and unfavorable
optical polarization in AlGaN ultra-violet emitters.