* 1708646
* Collaborative Research: Student Produced Audio Narratives (SPAN)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Laura Guertin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2022
* USD 66,860.00

The U.S. needs more, and more diverse geoscientists for the workforce, but
recruiting new geoscience majors is difficult. This project will test the impact
of a simple but potentially effective curricular change in large, introductory
courses with a goal of improving non-science major student engagement in STEM by
introducing student-produced audio narrative assignments to the curriculum.
Student-produced audio narratives (SPAN) are assignments in which students
engage with geoscience content by telling a scientific story using simple audio
recording and production techniques. The overall goal of using of SPAN in STEM
courses is to develop methods that will change the learning environment so that
students feel an increased personal connection to STEM, particularly in the
geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPAN assignments are ideally suited to the
challenges of introductory courses, such as large classes, minimal laboratory
materials/access, and limited faculty support, especially in underserved
programs. This pedagogical approach has the potential to positively impact
students' perceptions of geosciences, and science in general, and to increase
their engagement with the learning environment. The research team will develop a
collaborative and iterative implementation model with a regional Partner Faculty
network and embedded assessment. In the first semester, Partner Faculty (focused
in the mid-Atlantic region) receive training on technical and storytelling
aspects of audio production and developing audio assignments tailored to their
own classes. Partner Faculty will implement the assignments over the next three
semesters. This project explores and implements the tool of student audio
production, develops an implementation model though a Partner Faculty network,
and measures the learning outcomes using mixed methods to research students'
perception of and engagement in science. A collaborative regional network of
faculty will design and implement student-produced audio narratives in their
introductory-level classes, including at two-year community colleges. This
project creates and tests flexible, adaptable assignments incorporating student-
produced audio narratives. Finally, it researches the impact of student-produced
audio narratives on students' perceptions of their learning environment and
attitudes toward science using novel educational research methods.