* 1708718
* HCC: Small: AccessMath: Improving Mathematics Lectures for Low Vision Students through Integrated Video, Note-Taking and Search
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Stephanie Ludi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2019
* USD 60,242.00

Access to mathematics education is critical to facilitating careers in the
sciences, engineering, technology, and in many professions, as well as to
providing the mathematical literacy needed in everyday life. The PI's goal in
this project is to increase real-time access in the classroom to mathematical
material for low vision students (who are visually impaired but not blind),
which is currently mostly lacking as these students must primarily rely on
assistive technology and human note takers to provide access to course materials
after the class meeting. The PI's approach is to bring together expertise in
computer science, mathematics, and accessibility to provide a useful and usable
solution to this problem for the iPad. Called AccessMath, the prototype
application will provide zoom-able camera views as well as a view of notes
written at the whiteboard (captured by a Mimio), which may be altered through
magnification and contrast adjustment features. The system will support
consulting and searching course content during lecture, including textbooks,
handouts, notes written at the whiteboard, and audio in video (e.g., to find the
word "eigenvalue" in recorded lectures for the course). A novel note-taking
facility will be employed, where notes are represented on note "cards" that can
be attached to a specific location in the current view (e.g., at a spot in the
whiteboard view), then manually moved, resized, rotated, stacked, and "flicked"
out of view, providing a natural means for interacting informally with notes
created during lecture. Notes are created as blank cards, or as cards containing
views of whiteboard data, video excerpts, or existing notes. Notes are also used
in constructing search queries. Linear algebra (in particular matrices) is the
pilot scope for the project, due to the many challenges in conveying a matrix,
individual items within the matrix, following derivations, and the scale of the
matrix needed when completing non-trivial problems. AccessMath users will have a
single iPad which connects to a server providing video feeds and recognition and
retrieval services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: AccessMath will assist
low-vision students with mathematical instruction in and out of class, at the
high school and university levels, by providing immediate access to lecture
materials, including searches for mathematical content in whiteboard notes,
handouts, textbooks, and lecture videos (through word spotting in audio). The
system will afford student ownership in note taking and customizing access,
which will be significantly better than current solutions, and will reduce or
eliminate the extent to which visually impaired students fall behind their
sighted peers in the classroom setting. The project will also advance the state-
of-the-art in recognition and retrieval for mathematical notation, and will
create a novel note-taking model using the metaphor of photos on a tabletop,
which should be applicable to domains other than mathematics.