* 1708927
* Collaborative Research: Expanding the repertoire of chemical tools to study and characterize bacterial Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase functions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Daniel Becker, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 54,000.00

This National Science Foundation Research in Undergraduate Institutions award
from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program funds Dr. Misty L. Kuhn from San
Francisco State University (SFSU) and Dr. Daniel P. Becker from Loyola
University Chicago to create biochemical tools to study enzymes in the family of
Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) proteins of unknown function from the
soil microorganism, Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Specifically, these tools are used
in combination with structure determinations via X-ray crystallography to gain a
greater understanding of how molecules bind to GNATs. Since relatively little is
known about the structure/function relationship of GNATs from P. aeruginosa,
this work fills this gap in knowledge. Determining these functions is important
because human welfare depends on healthy agriculture. This project enhances the
research infrastructure at SFSU by establishing its first protein
crystallization resource and increasing the repertoire of sophisticated
biochemistry skills of underrepresented minority and disadvantaged undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve the
functional annotation of P. aeruginosa GNATs of unknown function using a
combination of protein X-ray crystallography, molecular modeling, organic
synthesis, and enzymology. The architecture of the acceptor site of several GNAT
proteins are probed using biochemical tools and X-ray crystallography. Active
site residues that are critical for catalysis and substrate specificity are
identified and tested using molecular modeling, site-directed mutagenesis, and
enzyme kinetics. The results of this project provides the foundational knowledge
to categorize experimentally uncharacterized members of the GNAT family and
improve computational functional annotation of GNATs of unknown function.