* 1708990
* Rational Design of High Dielectric Constant and Low Loss Dipolar Glass Polymers with Enhanced Orientational Polarization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Philip Taylor, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2021
* USD 465,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Numerous applications have been found for flexible hybrid electronics, including
human performance monitoring, wearable medical sensors, information storage, and
soft robotics. An indispensable component for flexible electronics is the
printable dielectric layer, which regulates the electric current in the
semiconductor. In response to this demand, this project is aimed at the design
and development of novel printable high-performance dielectric polymers. In this
project, a polymer theoretician will use advanced computer simulation to design
and predict the dielectric properties for these new materials. A polymer chemist
will synthesize the designed dielectric polymers, whose various properties and
performance will be characterized by a polymer physicist (who will also be
coordinating the research). A close loop among theoretical prediction, chemical
synthesis, and polymer characterization will be built in the project to
accelerate the progress. If successful, not only will our knowledge on polymer
dielectric phenomena be advanced, but also new printable dielectric materials
could ensue for future flexible electronics and energy-related applications. In
addition to its industrial relevance, this project will also provide a
comprehensive platform for education and outreach on science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The project is aimed to include
undergraduates and high-school students in research and to enhance diversity. It
will also benefit an undergraduate/graduate course on Advanced Polymer
Engineering which will include electrical properties of polymers for practical
applications. Students will be encouraged to present their findings at local and
major national meetings.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

A high-performance printable gate dielectric is an important component for
future flexible field-effect transistors (FETs). To enhance the performance,
past research has focused on decreasing the thickness of the gate dielectric,
e.g., via self-assembled monolayers. Although high capacitance density can be
achieved using ultrathin dielectrics, manufacturability has been challenging due
to the susceptibility of ultrathin films to intrinsic defects, such as pinholes
and grain boundaries. To circumvent this manufacturing challenge, the dielectric
constant of printable gate dielectrics has to be substantially increased while
keeping the dielectric loss low. In addition, gate dielectrics should have good
mechanical stability and good response to external fields in a wide range of
frequencies. To realize reliable printable/flexible FETs, this project aims to
design and develop novel high-dielectric-constant and low-loss dipolar glass
polymers with intrinsic microporosity (DG-PIMs). First, theoretical analysis and
computer simulation using mixed full atomistic and coarse-grained molecular
dynamics will guide the design and synthesis of DG-PIMs. Post-modifications will
be employed to convert conventional PIMs into novel DG polymers. Both structural
and dielectric properties will be characterized, and computer simulation studies
will be refined on the basis of the experimental results. Through this cycle of
computer simulation, polymer synthesis, structure/property characterization, and
feedback, enhanced orientational polarization in the proposed DG-PIMs will be
fully explored and improved new materials produced.