* 1708234
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Kinetic Study and Mechanism of L-DOPA dioxygenase, a new type of vicinal-oxygen-chelate (VOC) dioxygenase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Larryn Peterson, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 114,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Keri Colabroy from Muhlenberg College and Dr. Larryn
Peterson of Rhodes College to investigate an unstudied family of enzymes that
cleave ring-shaped molecules called catechols. Catecholic rings are found in the
woody tissue of plants to provide structure and strength. Nature refashions
these rings into antibiotics and other bioactive materials. The complex
relationship between enzyme structure and function is not well understood. This
lack of understanding limits the ability to exploit the use of enzymes to make
new natural products and degrade plant material into biofuels. The researchers
generate new knowledge through the collaborative study of the enzyme-catalyzed
reactions in real-time using small molecules carefully designed to expose the
inner workings of catalysis. In addition to the direct mentorship of
undergraduate students in faculty research labs, students transfer between
institutions to experience the project from different perspectives. Part of the
project is integrated into undergraduate coursework at each of the home
institutions to give additional undergraduates the opportunity to conduct
original research. Instructional videos of the established and emerging
technologies and methods used in this research are published to a freely-
accessible, online research archive for training of the next-generation science,
technology, engineering and mathematics workforce both at the partner
institutions and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project expands
understanding of the extradiol dioxygenase mechanism by exploring structure and
function for evolutionarily distinct, but representative members of a discreet
topology (type IV) group within the vicinal-oxygen-chelate (VOC) superfamily.
The synthesis of novel small-molecule substrates fuel the study of reaction
kinetics, both in the pre-steady state and at equilibrium. This work also uses
X-ray crystallography and mutagenesis to define the roles of active site
residues and global kinetic modeling of substrate and mutant data to develop a
mechanism. These experiments broaden the structural and kinetic understanding of
extradiol dioxygenase mechanism, while also providing the opportunity to
understand the extent of conservation versus permutation of dioxygenase
mechanism as a function of topology within the VOC enzyme family.