* 1708759
* A System of Minimalist Protein Labels for Fluorescence Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Ernest Petersson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 703,609.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry of Life
Sciences Program and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster fund Professor E. James
Petersson of the University of Pennsylvania to develop tools to study the
molecular details of protein motions. In order to function, proteins must fold
into the correct shape and with the proper flexibility. Dynamic shapes are
important to healthy cells, but folding into the wrong shape can cause a protein
to become toxic to cells. The Petersson laboratory is developing a system of
computational and experimental tools to study protein shape changes. The tools
consist of fluorescent labels that can be incorporated concomitantly as proteins
are made in cells. In addition, computational methods for predicting the best
labeling sites are being developed. These computational tools are also assisting
in producing and interpreting results that can be used to make movies of protein
motions, which will be helpful to better understand protein shape in a dynamic
environment. Importantly, both the labeling materials and computer programs are
being made available to other laboratories via websites. The broader impacts of
this work include training undergraduate and graduate students in a
multidisciplinary laboratory environment. The training environment makes use of
organic synthesis, physical chemistry as well as molecular and cellular biology
to investigate biological phenomena. The project is also developing hands-on
demonstrations to teach K-12 students about fluorescence and protein folding in
health and disease. In order to make these popular activities more accessible,
videos and downloadable materials are being made available. These materials
allow K-12 teachers to carry out similar exercises with their students. Both the
proposed research products and educational tools are designed to benefit a wide
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flexibility of proteins allows them to access
a variety of folded structures. Shifts between these structures are used to
transmit signals within cells, facilitate enzymatic catalysis, or even generate
mechanical force in the case of motor proteins. Recently, much attention has
focused on intrinsically disordered proteins. These proteins have no stable
structures and yet play important functional roles in cell health and disease.
The Petersson Laboratory is developing new fluorescent amino acids probes based
upon small aromatic scaffolds. These probes are genetically incorporated into
the peptide backbone and are minimally perturbing to protein folding. The
project builds upon the principal investigator's discovery that thioamide
substitutions of the peptide backbone can serve as small fluorescence quenchers.
In this case, equally minimalist sidechain thioamide probes are generated and
genetically encoded. Photophysical studies of the fluorescent amino acids and/or
thioamide quenchers are used to pair them in appropriate sets. The pairs are
used to probe conformational changes over all relevant distance ranges in
proteins. These minimalist tools are particularly valuable in co-translational
protein folding studies or labeling the interior of a folded protein. Such
experiments are currently inaccessible to common post-translational fluorescent
labeling strategies. The project is also creating computational tools to
identify non-perturbing sites for label incorporation. A strategy for
incorporating fluorescence data as conformational constraints in models of
protein motion is being developed. The computational tools are implemented in
the popular, open-source platform Rosetta, so that they can be accessed and
modified by the protein research community.