* 1708006
* Stanford Program in Support of LIGO - Seismic Isolation and Controls
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Robert Byer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,650,000.00

In modern telescopes, much of the instrument's value lies in the stability of
the mount and tracking. This is especially true for the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) - the value of the suspension and
isolation is paramount because the mirrors must be suspended above the shaking
ground. The work at Stanford is focused on the design and implementation of the
mount that supports the optics for the 4-km long LIGO interferometer. The
current facilities excel at isolating LIGO from the typical shaking of the
ground; this grant will fund several related efforts to improve the robust
operation of the LIGO detectors during large seismic disturbances, and it will
also fund development of new techniques to isolate the optics of future,
cryogenic detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve the duty cycle of the
existing observatories, this grant supports work to mitigate the impact of wind
storms on the detectors by combining computational fluid dynamics, wind tunnel
tests, and observatory field measurements to develop low-cost wind barriers and
improved control algorithms. The grant also supports development and testing of
novel control schemes to help improve the operation of the detector during
large, teleseismic earthquakes. Recent work has shown that nearly 90% of the low
frequency ground motion during an earthquake is common to all the optics in the
detector. The new research will actively coordinate the motion of all the
platforms to simultaneously minimize the common-mode drives and the
differential-mode motion over the 4-km length of the observatory. The large
reduction in control force, and the improvement in differential excursions is
expected to significantly improve the overall robustness of the detector.
Stanford University operates the Engineering Test Facility, a 10-meter vacuum
system with a prototype isolation system, where integrated hardware and software
development for gravitational wave development is conducted. This grant funds
research in this facility for seismic isolation of observatories which are now
in the early planning stages. Future detectors are expected to use cooled optics
to reduce the thermally driven (Brownian) noise of the mirrors. However, these
mirrors will have more than a megawatt of laser power incident upon them, so
running them at cryogenic temperatures requires the ability to continuous remove
significant thermal energy. Techniques to do this will be tested on the
prototype isolation platform so that the requirements for cooling and vibration
control can be developed and tested simultaneously.