* 1708692
* RUI: Forbidden Transitions and Quantum Dynamics in Molecular Nanomagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Friedman, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 687,594.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computers have the potential to solve
certain problems that are intractable on any classical computer. A quantum
computer takes advantage of the unique properties of quantum systems, such as
interference and entanglement, to process information. The information stored
and processed in a quantum computer is very delicate and can easily be corrupted
by fluctuations of uncontrolled external environmental elements. Many physical
systems are being investigated as potential qubits, the processing elements of
quantum computers. This project focuses on exploring the viability of molecular
nanomagnets as qubits. One of the project's main goals is to make use of so-
called atomic-clock transitions to help isolate the magnets from external
fluctuations. Using microwave photons to probe and manipulate the magnetic
states of these molecules, the research team is endeavoring to learn how long
quantum information can be stored in these systems before becoming degraded and
how to chemically engineer the molecules to improve that benchmark. In addition,
the researchers aim to implement basic quantum-computing operations on coupled
molecules and assess the suitability of these nanomagnets for potential
integration into a large-scale quantum processor. In tandem with these goals,
the research team is investigating related fundamental quantum properties of
these magnets that involve coupling them to a microwave radiation field. The
research is being conducted at a primarily undergraduate institution with the
participation of undergraduate student-scholars, a postdoctoral researcher and a
graduate student, all working under the supervision of the PI. These researchers
are all gaining valuable research skills that further the development of their
careers in scientific and technical fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Many physical systems are being investigated as potential
qubits. Typically, microscopic (e.g. atomic-scale) systems have long coherence
times but are difficult to control and address while macroscopic systems offer
greater control but less coherence. The project focuses on exploring the
viability of molecular nanomagnets as qubits. These systems occupy a middle
ground in which they have qubit properties that can be tuned (through, e.g.,
chemical engineering) while maintaining the long coherence times of microscopic
systems. The molecules under investigation exhibit so-called atomic-clock
transitions, which make them less susceptible to the decohering effects of
dipole or hyperfine fields. The researchers use pulsed electron-spin resonance
to measure the decoherence times for these nanomagnets near atomic-clock
transitions. In addition, the researchers aim to perform quantum gates (such as
CNOT) on supramolecular dimers with coupled states built from clock transitions
of the magnets. Such experiments may herald the development of a molecule-based,
solid-state quantum processor that exploits atomic-clock transitions to limit
decoherence. In tandem with these goals, the research team is investigating
related fundamental quantum properties of these magnets involving coupling the
magnets to a microwave resonator. The research is being conducted at a primarily
undergraduate institution with the participation of undergraduate student-
scholars, a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student, all working under
the supervision of the PI. These researchers are all gaining valuable research
skills that further the development of their careers in scientific and technical
fields.