* 1708717
* Collaborative Research: Ultrafast Laser-Driven Phase Transitions in Nanoparticles near their Melting
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Hani Elsayed-Ali, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the melting of solids is
the most ubiquitous of phase transitions, its atomistic mechanism is still not
well understood. Experimental observations show that melting nucleates at
surfaces and extended defects. Besides their technological applications,
nanoparticles provide interesting opportunities to study the melting phase
transition since their properties can be dominated by their surfaces. The study
of melting is complicated by the ultrafast nature of the transition. In this
project, ultrafast electron diffraction is used to resolve the atomistic
dynamics for nanoparticles heated with a short laser pulse. The electron
diffraction maps the structural evolution of the nanoparticles while they melt.
Modeling using an accurate description of atomic bonding simulates the electron
diffraction results. Improved understanding of nanoparticle response to the
laser excitation is likely to make a strong impact on the development of
biomedical, nano-electronics, and sensing applications. A post-doc, two Ph.D.
students, and undergraduates are actively involved in this research and
contribute to outreach activities to high school students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this project is to understand the mechanisms of the rapid phase
transitions in metal nanoparticles driven up to their melting by femtosecond
laser irradiation. Ultrafast electron diffraction (UED) is used to map the
structural dynamics of the laser-irradiated nanoparticles. Molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations with a realistic description of the laser energy coupling and
partitioning in the nanoparticles complements the UED studies and provide
atomic-level insights into the laser-induced phase transitions. Since melting
and diffusionless solid-solid phase transitions can occur on a picosecond time
scale, ultrafast measurements are needed to probe transient states along the
transition pathways. Ultrafast laser melting of well-characterized, size-
selected metal nanoparticles (In, Pb, and Bi) will be studied. The low vapor
pressure of these nanoparticles enables structural studies near their melting
point without affecting their size. The experiments are conducted on
nanoparticles fabricated in an ultrahigh vacuum on substrates with weak surface
van der Waals forces. The experiments are designed to study the structural
pathways through which the phase transitions occur and their dependence on
heating rate; electronic excitation effects; electron-phonon coupling; limits of
superheating and supercooling; and interface and substrate effects on melting
and solid-state transitions. MD simulations include the effect of the thermal
pressure from the excited electrons, which is parameterized based on the
predictions of ab initio calculations and the UED results.