* 1708942
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Evolutionary patterns in sand-entrapment in plants and consequences for insect herbivores
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Eric LoPresti, LoPresti                Eric
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Specifically, this proposal examines an often-noted, but
virtually unstudied phenomenon: a great many plants entrap sand or other
substrate with sticky trichomes. Sand entrapment traits are well-preserved in
herbarium specimens, but the distribution and evolution of such traits in plants
is poorly-known. Entrapped sand and dust have negative effects on insect and
mammalian herbivores, wearing down their mandibles and teeth, and the presence
of this substrate lessens herbivory on plants. During this experiment, the
fellow and undergraduate researchers will use herbaria, insect collections, and
laboratory experiments to further explore this interesting phenomenon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award has four primary
goals. (1) To determine the extent of sand-entrapment across the plants,
utilizing herbarium collections and compiled floras for desert and dune regions.
(2) To determine whether plants trade-off this effective physical defense with
chemical defenses, using a live collection of sand verbenas (Abronia species)
and a common pest caterpillar (Hyles lineata). (3) To determine whether sand-
entrapment dictates which insects can eat these sand-covered plants. Lastly [4]
to determine whether insects feeding on these and other gritty plants have
evolved similar "tooth" morphology to herbivorous mammals - the ability to wear
down their grinding surfaces. These projects will be conducted with several
undergraduate assistants, and will be incorporated into lessons for elementary
through high school students. Results form the studies will be distributed in
peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific meetings and symposia.