* 1708153
* SuperCDMS SNOLAB: Calibration, Commissioning, and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Enectali Figueroa-Feliciano, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2018
* USD 112,500.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. This award will support students and scientists
working on the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment that aims to achieve world-leading
sensitivity for dark matter searches in the 1-10 GeV/c2 mass
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment will have a broad
impact which extends beyond the search for dark matter. The experimental and
R&amp;D efforts further advance phonon-mediated detectors and new active veto
concepts, which can have applications in cosmology, astronomy and industry. This
effort will contribute to the training of undergraduate and graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers, continuing the group?s strong involvement in
mentoring undergraduates from underrepresented groups by participating in the
Summer Research Opportunities Program (SROP), which brings undergraduates from
across the U.S. to do a summer of research at Northwestern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award has the following objectives: (1) to measure a
dark matter signal or place world-leading limits for the WIMP-nucleon cross
section at masses below 10 GeV/c2 by analyzing the electron-recoiling dark
matter candidates from the existing SuperCDMS Soudan data; (2) to performance
test the first production SuperCDMS SNOLAB detectors at the CUTE test facility
in SNOLAB; and (3) to play a central role in the pre-operations and
commissioning of the SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment. This award will focus on the
calibration of the nuclear energy scale, which is a measurement which is
essential to obtain science from SuperCDMS SNOLAB. The nuclear energy scale will
be measured in a dedicated testing campaign using both high resolution
ionization yield measurements using small R&amp;D detectors at the Triangle
Universities Nuclear Laboratory (TUNL) neutron beam facility, and full-size
SuperCDMS SNOLAB detectors at the new NEXUS (Northwestern Experimental
Underground Site) at Fermilab.