* 1708581
* Collaborative Research:   A Mechanistic Study of Chemical Enhancement in Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and Graphene Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 08/31/2021
* USD 265,192.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Cronin at University of Southern California and
Professor Jensen at Pennsylvania State University investigate the use of Raman
spectroscopy as a powerful tool that measures the energies of specific bond
stretches. This technique provide the unique fingerprint for chemical
identification. As such, Raman spectroscopy is extremely useful for a number of
applications in chemical, environmental and threat detection monitoring. While a
highly useful technique, the Raman scattering cross-section of most molecules is
extremely small, and this generally limits its potential uses. Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering (SERS) and Graphene Enhanced Raman Scattering (GERS), the
techniques investigated in this research project, can be used to improve the
small signal intensities, thus making Raman spectroscopy-related applications
more practical. In terms of broader impacts Dr. Cronin creates workshops for Los
Angeles high school chemistry teachers. He leverages existing relationships
between USC and its neighboring high schools (e.g., USC's Good Neighbors
Campaign, Joint Education Project, and the Service Learning Program) to increase
the attendance from disadvantaged schools (i.e., central Los Angeles inner city
schools) serving underrepresented minority groups. The content of the workshop
is reformulated to expose underrepresented students to the results and, more
importantly, the excitement of research. Research projects for undergraduate
students introduce them to fundamental scientific research and give them
confidence to pursue careers in science and engineering. A new module devoted to
SERS is developed for a new course at USC on nanoscience and nanotechnology, and
their research accomplishments are discussed in class and integrated into the
curriculum. Professor Jansen uses a website, nanoHub.org, to share their
computational tools with scientists outside of his labs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaboration, Professors Cronin and Jensen
investigate the mechanism behind the strong spectroscopic responses observed in
two surface-based spectroscopic techniques: Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering
(SERS) and Graphene Enhanced Raman Scattering (GERS). They use both experimental
and computational tools to carefully isolate the enhanced Raman signals caused
by Chemical Enhancement (CE) from those signals caused by ElectroMagnetic
Enhancement (EM) in order to understand the CE mechanism. Specifically,
Professor Cronin's group at USC performs Raman spectroscopy of single molecules
on various SERS substrates, which enables a direct comparison with the
theoretical calculations preformed at the Jensen's group at PSU. The Raman
spectra are collected under various electrochemical conditions in order to
explore the role of the molecule-metal energy level alignment and decouple the
vibrational-mode-specific chemical enhancement from the uniform chemical
enhancement. Professor Jensen's first principles calculations provide a detailed
theoretical framework for interpreting chemical enhancement in SERS and GERS
spectra to facilitate a better understanding of the chemical enhancement
mechanism. Students in both groups experience the interdisciplinary training
opportunities. Both groups' are actively engaged in outreach activities to local
high school teachers and general public.