* 1708820
* Active Incoherent Millimeter-Wave (AIM) Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jeffrey Nanzer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 380,000.00

The use of millimeter-wave technology for imaging and remote sensing has
expanded significantly in recent years. Due to the small size of millimeter-wave
antennas and electronics combined with the ability of millimeter-wave
propagation through fog, smoke, clothing, and some building materials,
millimeter-wave sensors are becoming critically important tools in areas such as
security sensing, medical imaging, autonomous vehicle sensing, and scientific
research. Millimeter-wave imaging furthermore enables imaging and sensing in an
electromagnetic regime that is presently underutilized, and is thus becoming
increasingly important in the areas stated above. Antenna arrays in particular
are becoming of greater interest due to their smaller size and greater
flexibility than mechanically-scanned millimeter-wave imagers. This project will
develop a new method of millimeter-wave array imaging called active incoherent
imaging. The proposed incoherent imaging approach has the potential to
significantly reduce the cost of millimeter-wave and sub-millimeter-wave imaging
without sacrificing image resolution. Furthermore, the image quality of the
proposed approach does not degrade significantly even if part of the receiver
array elements fail, which improves its long-term utility over pixel-based
imaging methods. The results of this project will enable millimeter-wave imagers
to become more accessible to society and to be easily implemented in a broad
range of applications. Furthermore, the results of this research will be used to
enhance existing courses and develop new courses in radar and millimeter-wave
technology at Michigan State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining aspects
of sparse array theory and spatial frequency sampling, the proposed active
incoherent millimeter-wave imaging utilizes a spatio-temporal incoherent
transmitter array combined with a sparse, coherent receiver array. While
resolution is the primary limiting factor in millimeter-wave imaging in many
applications, sparse receiver arrays using spatial frequency sampling can be
utilized to generate images with resolution equivalent to a fully filled array
with at least an order of magnitude fewer elements. Incoherent imaging has the
additional benefit of improved efficiency because fewer receiver elements are
needed and incoherent transmitter arrays are more energy efficient to implement
than coherent transmitter arrays. This project will also investigate a novel
modular packaging format, where individual transceiver chips are wirelessly
phase locked and the received data is wirelessly downlinked. This distributed
approach enables the new imaging method to be directly scalable and easily
implemented in future millimeter-wave imaging systems.