* 1708397
* Understanding and Controlling Coupled Molecular Motion on Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* E. Charles Sykes, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2020
* USD 448,292.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Charles Sykes and his students at
Tufts University are investigating ways to couple single molecule devices,
already pioneered by his research team with prior NSF funding, into molecular
machines and molecular-sized devices capable of performing higher tasks. The
ultimate goal of the work is the discovery of design principles for the
construction of molecular machines and molecular-sized devices that can more
easily integrate with existing technologies. A goal is to gain a better
understanding of molecular motion. Control of molecular motion is crucial for
the design of new approaches for unique new applications, including tiny
molecular-sized pumps, sensors, and optoelectronics. To engage broad audiences
in this project, the Sykes research team gives presentations about nanoscienceat
local high schools with newly developed demonstrations. YouTube videos featuring
the project results are produced. The group has developed a Science Fair between
Tufts and Medford High which enables ~300 students per year to interact with
graduate researchers about their science project presentations.

Single molecule devices are capable of performing a number of functions from
mechanical motion to simple computation. Their utility is somewhat limited,
however, by difficulties associated with coupling them with either each other or
with interfaces such as electrodes. This project takes a new approach using
molecular self-assembly to produce 2D crystalline arrays of molecular rotors
that display emergent properties like correlated rotational switching. The
arrays are synthesized by the Ullmann reaction of precursor molecular rotors
with a Cu (111) surface, yielding 2D networks of metal-organic complexes in
which the rotary units can interact with each other. Scanning tunneling
microscopy enables excitation of the individual rotor groups and the ability to
study how reorientation of an individual molecular rotor affects its neighbors.
By studying the effect of voltage, current, and tunneling gap distance on rotor
motion, the mechanism of excitation will be explored. Altering the size and
functionality of the precursor molecules enables control over the placement of
the rotor units in the 2D molecular crystals and the ability to study the effect
of rotor-rotor spacing and angle on correlated rotational switching. By changing
the functionality of the rotor itself, both steric and dipolar coupling will be
explored. Finally, chiral rotary units will be introduced as a way to induce
unidirectional rotation via a flashing temperature ratchet-like mechanism.