* 1708690
* Multi-Layer Permanent Magnets for On-Chip Miniaturized Power Inductors with High Saturation Current
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Jaber Abu Qahouq, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

The main goal of the project is to investigate and develop multi-layer permanent
magnets and/for on-chip miniaturized power inductors with twice the saturation
current for switching power converters which are indispensable parts in
electrical platforms and systems. The developed multi-layer permanent magnets
and permanent magnet-based power inductors will result in efficient switching
power converters and inverters with smaller footprint and overall volume and
weight while maintaining all other desired characteristics. The nature of this
project will make contributions to power and energy management in many
applications that these power inductors and power converters are critical for
and indispensable part of including renewable energy systems, computing
platforms, communication and mobile systems, medical systems, electric vehicles,
electronics, military systems, energy harvesting systems, aerospace systems, and
most other peripherals and devices. This project identifies and addresses the
issue of undesired non-uniform and uncontrolled flux distribution when the
permanent magnet layer is vertically magnetized and as the permanent magnet
thickness-to-surface area becomes smaller which prevents a practical permanent
magnet-based power inductor from achieving an increase in or doubling the
saturation current. The results of the project will be disseminated using
different methods that include refereed journal and conference publications,
classroom educational components, seminar lectures and public demonstrations.
These and other events will also be used to attract students specifically from
minority groups and rural districts to engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of the project plans to achieve the main
goal of the project by (1) fabricating permanent magnet-based integrated
magnetic power device structures which result in practically doubling the
saturation current which otherwise will not be possible, (2) developing multi-
layer permanent magnet concepts which allow for the control of the permanent
magnet magnetic field by controlling the dimensions and thickness of each layer
which is very important to achieving the doubling of the saturation current by
flux distribution and cancellation, (3) developing fabrication schemes to
realize the multi-layer permanent magnets and multi-layer permanent magnet power
inductors, (4) growth of magnetic materials in order to meet the desired
properties in the multi-layer permanent magnet power inductor devices, (5)
testing and evaluating these power inductors while operating as a part of real
experimental switching power converters, and (6) performing theoretical
analysis, circuit models, and physical modeling for the multi-layer permanent
magnets and multi-layer permanent magnet power inductors for design optimization
and performance prediction before fabrication.