* 1708061
* Growth, Form, and Self-Organization
* MPS,PHY
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Andrzej Herczynski, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 03/31/2020
* USD 170,200.00

This project is to support leading United States scientists to participate in
the research program on "Growth, Form, and Self-Organization", planned over the
period of August 22 - December 20, 2017, at the Isaac Newton Institute for
Mathematical Sciences in Cambridge, UK. The specific aim is to extend the
planned activities by supporting and encouraging participation by a larger
number of leading American researchers, including 12 junior researchers, who
would otherwise not be able to participate. The planned program at the Newton
Institute is to mark the centenary of D'Arcy Thompson's influential book, "On
Growth and Form" - arguably the first treatise on the physics of living systems
- by bringing various contemporary strands of inquiry in the spirit of his work
into focus and to look into the future of understanding biology. The program
will stimulate new interactions and collaborations between physicists, applied
mathematicians, computer scientists, biologists, and other researchers
interested in morphology, broadly understood. It will aim to open fruitful lines
of inquiry and invite new approaches to address the fundamental issues and
features of form and function in living as well as inanimate systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will provide opportunities for cross-
fertilization of ideas within and across disciplines on various aspects of shape
dynamics in diverse contexts and at diverse scales. Program participants will
foster, and in turn be immersed in, an energetic and informal research
atmosphere, conducive to innovative ideas, daring propositions, and potential
breakthroughs, and to forming new kinds of fruitful collaborations. The
Institute offers an ideal environment for such a "ferment" and actively promotes
diversity. The program and the Institute work together to attract and ensure
participation of women researchers. Considerable efforts and funds will also be
devoted to supporting junior researchers and students, assuring lasting impact.
All lectures and seminars will be open to the public, filmed, archived and made
freely accessible on the Institute's website. The four planned thematic
workshops will provide further opportunities for sharing and developing ideas,
which will be disseminated through proceedings, papers, and newly emerged
research directions and endeavors.