* 1708991
* Collaborative Research: Directing Charge and Energy Flow in Discrete Nanocrystal-Dendrimer Hybrids and in Their Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jason Baxter, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2021
* USD 216,250.00

In this collaborative project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jason Baxter of
Drexel University and Professor Christopher Murray of the University of
Pennsylvania are developing new particles comprised of two components. The core
is a nanoparticle made from a semiconductor, and attached to the core are
branched organic molecules called dendrimers. These nanocrystal-dendrimer (NCD)
hybrid particles offer promising and superior optical and electronic properties
that can be tailored through chemical design of the constituent organic and
semiconductor components to manipulate the flow of charge and energy on
nanometer length scales. The NCD platform has potential for broad impact across
many fields and applications, including solar cells, solid state lighting and
display technology, biological imaging, and photocatalytic fuel production and
chemical synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, inorganic NC donors
are functionalized with tailored dendrimer ligands that incorporate molecular
acceptors, precisely controlling the acceptor location and orientation to enable
fundamental investigations of charge and energy transfer. Studies of these NCD
hybrids are greatly advancing understanding of photophysical processes at
organic / inorganic interfaces and are establishing new design rules to optimize
the coupling between the quantum states of the NCs and the molecular energy
levels of the functionalized dendrons. The NCD hybrids harness advances in both
organic and inorganic synthesis to offer a new class of solution-processable
building blocks to engineer the flow of energy and the separation and transport
of charge. Objectives of this project include synthesizing and characterizing a
library of NCD hybrid nanostructures as well as measuring dynamics and
understanding mechanisms of ultrafast charge and energy transfer in NCDs. The
broader technical impacts of this work include potential societal benefits from
the design and discovery of next-generation particles that offer superior
performance in optoelectronic and photocatalytic devices. Broader non-technical
impacts include education and training of graduate and undergraduate students,
as well as outreach to underrepresented groups within the West Philadelphia
Promise Zone.