* 1708635
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Interfacial Partitioning and the Structural Modifications of Polyatomic Ions in Model Aerosol Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Joshua Patterson, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 239,989.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Science Program (ECS) of
the Chemistry Division. It represents a collaboration between Professor Joshua
D. Patterson of the Department of Molecular Biology and Chemistry at Christopher
Newport University and Professor Arunkumar Sharma of the Physical Sciences
Department at Wagner College. They use a combined experimental and computational
approach to study the properties of ions containing many atoms (polyatomic
ions). Ions are found in large concentrations in aerosol particles throughout
the atmosphere. These ions participate in reactions that often take place in the
boundary of atmospheric aerosol particles. This project aims to improve
understanding of these reactions. The structures and availabilities of the ions
within the boundary region of model aerosols are determined. The research is
carried out by the investigators and their undergraduate students. The students
who participate in the project gain experience in physical, computational, and
atmospheric chemistry. The students participate in an exchange program between
the two institutions and receive training in the complementary disciplines. This
training broadens the undergraduate research experience and builds synergy
between the computational and experimental elements of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous reactions that occur in aerosol
particles are of critical importance to the atmosphere. They are a crucial
component of chemical reaction cycles linked to Arctic and Antarctic ozone loss,
tropospheric ozone production, and acid rain. Despite the importance of these
reactions, the ability to predict their outcomes is limited by the complexity of
the environment where these reactions occur. Interfaces have unique chemical
properties that cannot be described by gas or liquid properties. The
preferential allocation of ions to the interface, a process not observed in
liquids, is believed to have a strong impact on heterogeneous reactions. This
project utilizes spectroscopic and computation methods to examine the structures
of polyatomic ions. Interfacial properties (affinity, interfacial-core
partitioning, and ion depth) are quantified. The approach uses reverse micelles
(aqueous droplets in a non-polar liquid) as model systems for atmospheric
aerosols. The quantification of the interfacial properties of polyatomic ions
improves our knowledge of heterogeneous chemistry and the predictive accuracy of
atmospheric chemistry models.