* 1708945
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: How does temperature affect pathogens, microbiota, and medicinal value of flowers for bumble bees?
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Evan Palmer-Young, Palmer-Young            Evan           C
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2020
* USD 207,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Evan Palmer-Young, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Quinn McFrederick at the University of California-
Riverside. The fellow's research examines how temperature affects health of
bumble bees that are infected with a common disease, which is very widespread in
bee populations, and related to several human diseases. The goal is to see
whether high temperatures will help bees rid themselves of infection, but also
whether there are side effects of high temperatures that might harm beneficial
bacteria that live in the bee gut. The health of bumble bees is important to
society because wild bees are key pollinators of crops and wild plants, and many
bee populations are declining. The question of how temperature affects disease,
including both beneficial and harmful microbes, is important for many species
that are living in warming climates. It is also important for human health,
because humans use fever as a defense against infection, yet it is not known
whether fever is harmful to beneficial bacteria that are important for human
health. To promote the participation of groups underrepresented in biology, the
Fellow will mentor undergraduate students on the diverse UC-Riverside campus
(>70% minority students) in independent research, and conduct outreach
activities with the public.

The project has three objectives designed to elucidate effects of increased
temperature on interactions between bumble bees and their pathogens and
symbionts. (1) Comparison of in vitro thermotolerance of symbiotic microbes and
the trypanosomatid parasite Crithidia bombi, to generate hypotheses for how
increased temperature affects infection in vivo. (2) In vivo test of how
temperature elevation affects infection intensity and alters populations of core
gut microbiota. (3) Evaluation of how temperature affects chemical profiles and
antimicrobial properties of plant nectar and pollen. To promote participation of
groups underrepresented in biology, the Fellow will: (1) Mentor research of
undergraduates in the California Alliance for Minority Participation (2) Teach a
course that introduces underclassmen to biology research and engages them in one
of the Fellowship?s objectives. (3) Use Chinese and Spanish language skills to
lead outreach events at the University and local library, to build appreciation
for plants and pollinators.