* 1708734
* CQIS: A Quantum Electro-Optic Converter
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Amir Safavi-Naeini, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

Quantum information science promises fundamentally new and vastly more powerful
paradigms of computation, sensing, and communications. It also necessitates new
classes of devices that are capable of processing quantum signals. One promising
approach to engineered quantum systems uses low-temperature superconducting
circuits to perform quantum information processing. These quantum machines are
now being developed actively in academic, government, and industrial labs around
the world. However, there is no way to connect these systems to one another
across more than a few inches while preserving their important quantum
properties. Creating links that traverse longer distances and leave the low
temperature environments of the qubits demands converting the quantum
information from a form suited for processing to another form suited for
transmission, and vice versa. In fact, all computation, sensing, and
communication systems depend on devices that convert information from one form
to another. The lack of this capability in the quantum domain impedes the
emergence of truly compelling quantum technologies that promise to perform tasks
beyond the means of today's technologies. The proposed research effort is
focused on creating such a capability to address a basic and long-standing
challenge in engineering science. The program will develop and demonstrate a
device that can convert quantum information across the electromagnetic spectrum
while preserving its important quantum properties. Such a device, a quantum
electro-optic converter, will convert information between optical photons
capable of travelling long distances, and microwave photons in low-temperature
superconducting circuits being used to implement the first quantum computers.
Much like the electro-optic modulators that enable the Internet, quantum
electro-optic converters may someday enable the quantum
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a
device that can interconvert quantum information between optical and microwave
frequencies. The approach is to fabricate high-Q optical cavities and microwave
superconducting cavities on the same electro-optical substrate, heterogeneously
integrated silicon on lithium niobate, and to generate interactions between
excitations in the two cavities. To achieve this, recently developed techniques
for creating high-Q electro-optic photonic crystal cavities, techniques for
making high-Q superconducting inductors with very low stray capacitance, as well
as theoretical insight on perfect quantum state conversion methods will be used.
The PI's lab will develop the technology for quantum electro-optic converters by
advancing and synthesizing techniques from photonics, heterogeneous integration,
superconducting circuits, and cryogenic optical and microwave experiments to
realize this vision. The quantum electro-optic converter being developed in this
program promises to 1) connect these quantum machines to each other, 2) allow
optical access to quantum nonlinearities at microwave frequencies, and 3) to
simplify their scaling to larger numbers of superconducting qubits by allowing
multiplexing of many microwave signals over an optical fiber. This will have a
major impact on experimental quantum information science. Finally, the device
will demonstrate for the first time quantum optical control of microwave
circuits using laser light, which can enable new and unforeseen types of quantum
sensing and communications capabilities at microwave frequencies.