* 1708741
* International summit to integrate the scientific knowledge available about nanomaterial exposure, fate, effects and risks in the environment(Mar.12-17,2017, Switzerland)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Mark Wiesner, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2018
* USD 41,700.00

The benefits of nanomaterials and their enabling properties have resulted in
widespread use in industry and consumer products. As we approach 20 years of
research on the potential impacts of nanomaterials on human health and the
environment, differences remain in the scientific and regulatory communities
regarding whether nanomaterials need to be assessed differently and more
stringently than conventional materials. There is however a growing consensus
that nanomaterials exhibit complex and interesting interactions with organisms
and ecosystems. There is also visible convergence regarding methods of
evaluation and assessments where nanotechnology is likely to yield greater
environmental benefits or risks. This conference will take stock of what has
been learned, point the scientific community towards specific conclusions,
discuss needs for data integration, and finally identify remaining research
gaps. The overall goal of the conference will be to integrate the scientific
knowledge available about nanomaterial exposure, fate, effects and risks in the
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together experts
from around the world to discuss the state of the science on nanomaterials,
their impacts, and their applications, with a dedicated discussion of
applications and implications at the nano-bio interface. Specific scientific
objectives of the conference will be: &lt;br/&gt;- Discuss environmental
exposure of nanomaterials including their release from products and their
detection &lt;br/&gt;- Summarize known transport and transformation pathways of
nanomaterials &lt;br/&gt;- Discuss recent findings on uptake and effects in
organisms and food-chains &lt;br/&gt;- Present the progress towards
environmental risk assessment of nanomaterials &lt;br/&gt;- Identify nano-
specific issues in exposure, fate, effects and risks &lt;br/&gt;- Discuss the
relevance of nanomaterials compared to natural particles &lt;br/&gt;The main
results obtained from addressing the above objectives will be summarized in a
synthesis paper, which concludes on the topic of whether nanomaterials pose a
novel threat under environmentally relevant conditions.