* 1708617
* A New Look at Classic Materials Systems: Advanced Synchrotron X-ray Characterization of Colloidal Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Sharmila Mukhopadhyay, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2021
* USD 307,543.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Although semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) show
great promise for applications in photovoltaics, solid state lighting, and
nanoscale electronics, the success of the assembled devices will be determined
primarily on how well an assembly of NCs can conduct electricity. The
conventional experimental probes used to characterize these systems typically do
not explore techniques that are either sensitive to the atomic species or that
are performed in situ. It is imperative, therefore, to identify new experimental
probes that can provide crucial information on NCs that cannot be achieved via
other methods. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program at NSF, employs state-of-the-art x-ray characterization
methods to elucidate a wide range of unanswered problems in the NC literature,
including the mechanism of cation exchange in NCs and effects of ligand
chemistry on charge carrier dynamics in NCs. The project focuses on both
operando/in situ soft and hard x-ray absorption spectroscopy and well as ultra-
fast x-ray absorption spectroscopy. These techniques, for the most part, have
not been exploited to probe the chemistry and physics of semiconductor NCs and
it is anticipated that they will provide crucial insight to answer important
questions regarding the bonding and charge transfer dynamics in these materials.
In turn, the results from this research proposal will have a strong impact on
the ability to fabricate next generation nano-electronic materials. This
research leverages the vast infrastructure within the Laboratory for Surface
Science and Technology (LASST), an interdisciplinary center that brings together
researchers from Physics, Chemistry, Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering, and
Chemical &amp; Biological Engineering. This research project provides advanced
graduate training in the fields of physics, chemistry, and materials science,
specifically in ultra-high vacuum surface science and materials characterization
including synchrotron research at the Advanced Light Source and Advanced Photon
Source. In addition, the research laboratory, which is housed in LASST, is on
display via tours and will introduce many underprivileged students, including a
substantial Native American population, to cutting edge instrumental tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, provides an
unprecedented look into the fundamental mechanisms behind processes such as
charge transport and cation exchange in semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs). The
research activities focus on both operando/in situ soft and hard x-ray
absorption spectroscopy and well as ultra-fast x-ray absorption spectroscopy.
These techniques, for the most part, have not been exploited to probe the
chemistry and physics of semiconductor NCs and it is anticipated that they will
provide crucial insight to answer important questions regarding the bonding and
charge transfer dynamics in these materials. In turn, the results from this
research proposal will have a strong impact on the ability to fabricate next
generation nano-electronic materials. The transformative feature of this work is
the use of cutting-edge x-ray techniques to probe NCs in their most common
environment: solution phase. Armed with the knowledge that the interplay between
controlling carrier densities and mobilities in NCs will play a strong role in
making highly conductive NC devices, the project research objectives focus on
two related research thrust areas: (a) in situ x-ray spectroscopy of NC
materials undergoing cation exchange processes and (b) effects of surface
ligands on the interfacial charge carrier dynamics in NCs as probed by ultrafast
x-ray spectroscopy. Materials of systems of interest include CdSe as the
archetypal nanomaterial. The general mechanisms that are investigated, however,
will lead to the study of new materials, such as other binary semiconductors
like PbSe or metallic nanostructures such as Ag or Pb. This research project
provides advanced graduate training in the fields of physics, chemistry, and
materials science, specifically in ultra-high vacuum surface science and
materials characterization including synchrotron research at the Advanced Light
Source and Advanced Photon Source.