* 1708907
* RUI: Atomically thin monolayer semiconductors for ultrasensitive UV photodetectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Akm Newaz, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,977.00

Title: Atomically thin semiconductors for ultrasensitive UV
Photodetectors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract: This research
focuses on atom-thick, two-dimensional semiconductors derived from transition
metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with the ultimate goal to lay the foundation for
developing an ultrasensitive, gigahertz speed photodetector in the ultraviolet
(UV) range. Currently, such a semiconductor-based UV photodetector is not
available, which hampers many high speed and low signal applications. TMD
semiconductors reveal remarkable properties. Their unique crystal structure
leads to the creation of a unique type of strongly bound excitons, known as van
Hove singularity excitons that are created when a UV photon interacts with a TMD
semiconductor. TMD materials will be studied to understand the basic physical
properties of these excitons and to utilize them for optoelectronic applications
in the UV region and ultimately for the development of a new ultrafast, fast-
response, and high-sensitivity UV photodetector. This research is expected to
have significant technological impacts ranging from everyday life to new
communication tools. It will be conducted at a Primarily Undergraduate
Institution and will involve undergraduate and Master's students and students
from local high schools. The active participation in the project will provide
students an excellent nanoscience research experience and an outstanding
opportunity to train in nanoscale optoelectronics preparing them for careers in
industry and academia. The principal investigator will reach out to the local
community at the Annual Bay Area Science Festival to showcase the underlying
principles of nanotechnology seeding public interest in science and encouraging
young adults to pursue science degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical-Abstract:
Newly developed atomically thin van der Waals crystals reveal remarkable
electronic, optical, and optoelectrical properties and show great promise for
the development of novel nanoscale optoelectronic devices. The goal of the
project is to advance the fundamental understanding of such devices by studying
the intriguing properties of monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs).
Ultimately a prototype of a nanoscale, ultrasensitive (~few photons) and fast UV
photodetector will be developed by exploiting van Hove singularity assisted
excitonic transitions in atomically thin monolayer TMDs derived from MoS2,
MoSe2, WS2 and WSe2. The unique crystal structures of these semiconductors
create a Mexican hat-like optical band structure. The joint density of states
diverges at the bottom of the Mexican hat creating the van Hove singularity. The
objectives of the project are: (i) Investigate the van Hove singularity assisted
optoelectronic properties of monolayer TMDs derived from bulk crystals by
measuring the photocurrent spectra, photoresponsivity, and time responses. (ii)
Investigate the intrinsic optoelectronic properties of large-scale chemical
vapor deposited TMDs and measure their photocurrent and time responses to
elucidate how line defects and grain boundaries affect the optoelectronic
properties. (iii) Stack monolayer TMDs to develop a UV photodetector that
exhibits high absorption, a GHz photoresponse speed, and a few photon detection
ability. This research will advance the fundamental understanding of novel,
many-body excitonic phenomena in physics, not only in 2D systems, but also in
other nanoscale systems ranging from Bose-Einstein condensation to excitonic
solar cells and has great promise for the development of scalable nanophotonic
devices.