* 1708850
* RUI: Development of A Synthetic Platform for Highly Tunable Cationic Porous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Xianhui Bu, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 383,500.00

NON-TECHNICAL Abstract: This project seeks to develop new synthetic concepts and
methods to invent crystalline porous materials impregnated with mobile anions.
The uniform and tunable pore size, together with the control over the charge and
functionality of the framework combine to enable new and more efficient
applications in anion exchange, separation, detection, and conduction. Nature
abhors cationic frameworks and comes out with various neutralization ways to
prevent their formation. This project combats this nature's tendency using novel
concepts and strategies to counter such natural tendency proactively and
preemptively. Being at an undergraduate institution with a large population of
students including those from underrepresented groups, the PI strives to utilize
the NSF support to promote teaching and training of students by establishing a
highly stimulating and important research project and by developing the state-
of-the-art synthetic and instrumental capability to broaden learning
opportunities for students with diverse backgrounds.

TECHNICAL Abstract: The project seeks to develop new synthetic concepts and
methods to create porous materials with the positively charged framework
integrating uniform and tunable pore size with mobile anions for applications
such as anion exchange, sequestration, separation, sensing, as well as fast
anion conduction. It deals with fundamental issues in materials design such as
the control of ratio between negative and neutral functional groups and the
ratio between metal ions in mix-valence or heterometallic systems. Such issues
are fundamental to the control of the framework charge property and their
applications. The core strategy involves designing cluster-type structural
building blocks with propensity for being cationic and simultaneously inventing
advanced methods to proactively prevent possible neutralization of such units.
Various methods are used to tune the pore size and properties to enhance process
selectivity based on size, shape, and charge of molecules and ions. The project
integrates a variety of student-training activities ranging from chemical
synthesis, crystal growth, to crystal structure analysis and property
characterizations with the goal to broaden the participation of undergraduate
and graduate students in chemical research and to promote a diverse student
population in materials sciences.