* 1708388
* Collaborative Research: The Self-Assembly of Multicomponent Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Modarelli, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 284,998.00

Many of the remarkable features seen in nature, ranging from the strength of
spider silk to the light-harvesting ability of plant leaves, arises from
sophisticated, multicomponent architectures. These biological nanostructures are
comprised of multiple, discrete components that are assembled with nanoscale
(one billionth of a meter scale) precision into a highly integrated functional
system. Self-assembly offers a convenient, albeit often trial and error-based
strategy, to make single-component, synthetic materials in the nanoscale regime.
However, these systems rarely exhibit the high level of performance seen in
natural systems due to the difficulties in reliably designing self-assembling
systems composed of multiple, precisely positioned components. To address this
challenge and progress toward higher levels of functional performance,
Professors Parquette of The Ohio State University and Modarelli of The
University of Akron, are developing strategies to self-assemble multiple,
discrete building blocks into multicomponent architectures to serve as
optoelectronic materials for solar energy conversion. Creating reliable
strategies to create non-covalent architectures that rival the sophisticated
systems in biology may enable new technologies capable of addressing societal
problems in areas such as renewable energy, greenhouse gas conversion, and
medicine. Additionally, this project is used as a platform to enhance public
awareness of the potential role that science plays in addressing these issues.
The research team continues to present science exhibitions at the Columbus
Center of Science and Industry (COSI) to allow younger students to experience
the hands-on excitement of scientific discovery. Also, the investigators use
Ohio State's REEL program to offer opportunities for large numbers of
undergraduate students to perform nanotechnology research in a teaching
laboratory environment in addition to providing opportunities for undergraduates
in the research laboratory. Professors Parquette and Modarelli provide research
experiences to minority students in the area of nanotechnology through the NSF
HBCU-RISE program and through the SROP (Summer Research Opportunities Program)
at OSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division supports the work of Professors
Parquette and Modarelli, which aims to develop a versatile strategy to assemble
multiple optoelectronic components into self-sorted domains that are integrated
within a single nanostructure. This approach creates composite nanostructures
using a sequential layer-by-layer strategy to organize pre-assembled systems
into one architecture. The morphology, dimensions, and positional arrangement of
the components are correlated with the corresponding photophysical properties,
measured using ultrafast spectroscopic techniques. The research activities
include: (1) the co-assembly of nanotube-polymer composites displaying a
coaxial, bicontinuous array of conjugated polymers that establish a redox
cascade; (2) the co-assembly of discrete, monomeric building blocks into
composite structures comprised of separate, self-assembled nanostructures; (3)
measurement of the photophysical properties of the assemblies via ensemble and
single-molecule femtosecond spectroscopy; and (4) to measure photo-
electrochemical coupling of aligned nanotube co-assemblies via surface-tracked
scanning electrochemical microscopy (ST-SECM).This project integrates
fundamental research with outreach and communication efforts to engage a diverse
group of students in interdisciplinary science, and the community at large, to
show how nanotechnology impacts their lives.