* 1708019
* Functional Metal-Ligand Assemblies: Reactivity, Self-sorting and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Richard Hooley, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 476,138.00

The human body uses large, complex molecules such as enzymes (a type of protein)
to control many cellular processes. Chemists strive to mimic the complexity of
these biological structures with artificial analogs, but these mimics cannot
approach the complexity of natural enzymes. Self-assembly is a powerful approach
to create large, complex molecules without the challenge of complex step-by-step
synthesis. This process is similar to molecular-level Lego, whereby individual
pieces can be simply put together to make a larger, more complex structure. In
this research project, Prof. Hooley aims to develop self-assembly approaches to
creating new chemical structures that act in a manner similar to enzymes and to
explore the potential applications of these structures in catalysis. This
project provides interdisciplinary research training to graduate students and
opportunities to underrepresented undergraduates for intellectual and creative
development. Educational innovations are integrated with research to encourage
undergraduates and underrepresented minorities to pursue careers in science and
to improve the chemistry curriculum at UC Riverside with a focus on increasing
retention of students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembled cage
complexes can display novel material and sensing properties, but simple
molecular polyhedra have limits in their functional applications. Prof. Hooley's
research group seeks to remedy this by creating new functional synthetic
receptors via metal-ligand based self-assembly. This project focuses on three
specific areas: 1) the application of internal functions of ligands to control
(via secondary weak interactions) the self-assembly process, including self-
sorting and the control of stoichiometry and stereochemistry of cage complexes;
2) post-assembly modifications of internal functional groups to alter reactivity
and to allow controlled, reversible structural switching between different
polyhedral geometries and trapping of cage complexes; and 3) the application of
these complexes as biomimetic catalysts in tandem, orthogonal catalysis. An
important objective in this area is to demonstrate that the sequestration of
acidic and basic functions in cage interiors allows normally incompatible
reactions to be performed in a single pot.