* 1708592
* Heme Propionates as Proton Transfer Sites in Biological Redox Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ekaterina Pletneva, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2022
* USD 465,317.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Ekaterina Pletneva from Dartmouth College to investigate
mechanisms of reactions that take place in proteins and involve transfer of both
protons and electrons. Proton-coupled electron-transfer (PCET) reactions are
central to a wide variety of biological processes and also underlie the action
of many chemical systems for energy conversion in small-molecule catalysis,
electrochemical devices, and solar cells. The specific assignment of sites with
protons in proteins is challenging, especially when time dependent information
is necessary. Using unique site modifications and protein reengineering, Dr.
Pletneva and her students will develop and test new approaches for tracking
protons in reactions and will explore the effects of the protein in controlling
these processes. They will detect the presence of protons at specific protein
sites. The project will provide opportunities for multidisciplinary training of
students of all levels and for instilling appreciation for quantitative
descriptions of biological phenomena. Dr. Pletneva will offer guidance to the
volunteers from the Dartmouth Undergraduate Journal of Science (DUJS) in the
design of outreach activities at schools in the Upper Valley. She, her students,
and DUJS staff will also work together to discuss biological reactions and
strategies for artificial photosynthesis with local
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Propionate groups at the periphery of the heme
cofactor are sites of proton transfer in PCET reactions of a variety of enzymes,
electron carriers, and redox complexes. Despite their prominent role in
biological redox mechanisms, heme propionates (HPs) have received little
attention and their reactivity is not well understood. Using three systems of
progressively increasing complexity (a heme peptide, a monoheme protein
cytochrome (cyt) c2, and a tetraheme protein cyt c3), this project is
establishing the factors set by the biological environment to control the
interplay between proton transfer (PT) and electron transfer (ET) in HP-mediated
PCET reactions. The effects of the biologically relevant solvent, protein
scaffold, neighboring amino acids, and multiple redox centers on the PCET
reaction landscape are being examined. With special emphasis on methods to
monitor elusive PT steps, thorough characterization of the reaction mechanisms,
the studies are addressing major challenges in the PCET field. Site-specific
labeling techniques are enabling determination of redox-dependent pKa values of
HPs by NMR and explicit observation of both ET and PT steps in photoinduced
studies with electronic absorption and vibrational spectroscopic methods.
Isothermal titration calorimetry is being used as a novel label-free approach to
identify redox-dependent changes in HP protonation, examine a possibility of
intraprotein proton relay, and evaluate reactions with buffers. The detailed
studies of less understood HP-mediated reactions is expanding the mechanistic
database of PCET reactions, which is important for the development of predictive
tools. These studies are advancing the understanding of ubiquitous heme proteins
and are yielding valuable tools and tactics for mechanistic studies of other
redox centers, both biological and man-made.