* 1708828
* RUI: Mechanistic study of short N-acetylglutamate synthetases and incorporation into a course-based undergraduate research experience
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Emily Fogle, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 12/31/2022
* USD 137,298.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division funds this
work. Professors Emily Fogle and Eric Jones from California Polytechnic State
University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly) study enzyme catalyzed reactions of
compounds containing sulfur, thioesters. Thioesters are a class of reactive
molecules with important roles in both chemistry and biochemistry. Thioesters
are common intermediates in many biosynthetic reactions, including starting
materials for steroid production. The research examines enzymatic reactions of
thioesters with nitrogen-containing molecules and to studies of a common
bacterial form of the enzyme NAGS (N-acetylglutamate synthase). This research is
incorporated into a self-sustaining research experience that occurs in an upper
division undergraduate laboratory class. The work is incorporated into a
required, advanced biochemistry course that biochemistry majors take in their
junior year. The goal is for all biochemistry majors at Cal Poly to have an
authentic research experience and gain knowledge, skills and self-confidence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project studies the enzymatic reaction of
thioesters with nitrogen nucleophiles (aminolysis reactions) and characterizes a
common bacterial form of N-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS). Thioesters are a
very important class of reactive carboxylic acid derivatives in which a sulfur
atom replaces the typical oxygen or nitrogen atom in the leaving group position.
Thioesters are generally more highly reactive toward nucleophiles than the
equivalent oxoesters and this factor has resulted in important roles in both
organic chemistry and biochemistry. The specific scientific aims of this work
are to purify and kinetically characterize three bacterial NAGS enzymes and to
determine the nitrogen and sulfur kinetic isotope effects for the NAGS-catalyzed
reaction. This work is also incorporated into a self-sustaining research
experience that occurs in an upper division laboratory class.