* 1708120
* Collaborative Research: New Source and Test Masses and their Metrology  for Big-G Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* William Snow, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2021
* USD 141,819.00

The research supported by this award focuses on conducting high precision
measurements of G, Newton's gravitational constant. Despite a long history of
experiments, there are serious inconsistencies in our current knowledge of the
value of G. All previous measurements of G have used large masses made from high
density metals, which have some inherent limitations on how well one can find
tiny cavities inside them. These cavities, if present, cause small variations in
the density of the masses and introduce errors in the measurement of G. The work
in this project seeks to help mitigate this problem by developing high density
transparent materials, such as lead tungstate, for use in experiments that
measure G. These materials have much smaller variation in their density compared
to metals and, being transparent, one can map the tiny cavities without cutting
them open. These tiny cavities will be imaged by two different techniques that
can be compared against each other. One method will use a laser beam to
optically inspect the material and the second method will use a beam of neutrons
to scan the material. In addition to experiments measuring G, this research will
also benefit other scientific and technical areas. For example, since lead
tungstate is used to build detectors for nuclear and high energy physics, this
project could lead to improvements in the uniformity of lead tungstate and help
improve these large detector systems. Additionally, the methods for the
quantitative measurement of internal density variations could help establish
absolute standards applicable to the very wide variety of materials. One of the
most important impacts of this research will be education of young scientific
researchers. The project offers an intellectually stimulating environment for
the scientific and educational activities of undergraduates and graduate
students in the respective universities. This challenging project will provide
an excellent atmosphere for first-rate education in experimental
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;G is the only fundamental constant for which the
uncertainty has risen over time as more and more measurements are made. This
project has the potential to help resolve this rather puzzling situation by
helping eliminate one of the known limitations of all previous measurements, the
metrology of test and source masses. The group proposes to address these
limitations by developing high density transparent materials, such as lead
tungstate, for use as test and source masses in the next generation of
experiments. This choice of new materials is motivated by the fact that the
density variations in glass and single crystals are significantly smaller than
in metals and they can be measured non destructively. Consequently, the group
proposes to develop a laser interferometer for the non destructive measurement
of the internal density gradients in source and test masses constructed from
high density transparent materials, and to validate such measurements with
neutron interferometry. The team will measure the density gradients in the test
and source masses to better than 10 parts per million, thereby, reducing their
contribution to the systematic uncertainty in the measurement of G to less than
0.5 parts per million.