* 1708134
* Dynamics and Excitations of Spin-Orbit-Coupled Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yong Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum many-body interactions are responsible for material properties such as
magnetism and conductivity. Understanding how these properties depend on a
material's structure, its temperature, and the motion of electrons in the
material is important for developing new technologies, for example those using
superconductivity or "spintronics". This project will investigate many-body
interactions in model systems using ultracold atoms in synthetic potentials
generated by laser light. Lasers will couple the motion and "spin" of atoms, to
cause spin-orbit-coupling (SOC) analogous to the relativistic SOC effects that
are important in many electronic materials. This project will focus on the
experimental studies of how SOC affects quantum transport phenomena and
collective excitations in an atomic Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). A BEC is a
coherent superfluid phase that occurs at sufficiently low temperatures in a
quantum gas. Understanding how SOC affects spin transport in BEC will provide
helpful guidance for designing novel "spintronic" devices that aim to use spin
(quantum mechanical angular momenta) to carry and process information with much
higher efficiency and lower energy consumption than current charge-based
electronics. The study will lead to new insights that will help scientists
understand and discover new types of superfluids and superconductors in which
the interaction of particles of different spins are important. This project will
also enhance collaborations between this experimental group and several
theorists active in the field, and train students in physics and engineering to
participate in interdisciplinary research involving atomic physics, quantum
physics, condensed matter physics, and optics.

This experimental research program will study an atomic (Rb-87) Bose-Einstein
condensate (BEC) subject to optically (Raman) generated synthetic gauge fields
and spin-orbit coupling (SOC). The study will focus on quantum dynamics,
transport and excitations in spin-orbit-coupled (SOC) BEC. The study builds upon
the team's recent achievements including the demonstration of a tunable Landau-
Zener transition between the dressed bands in SOCBEC, and the realization of the
Landau-Zener- Stueckelberg interference (atom interferometry in quasi-momentum
space) and a new type of SOC with novel spin-momentum locking using "2nd
generation dressed bands" induced by modulated Raman coupling. The current
program will study in particular various spin-dependent transport and
excitations. One example is the "spin dipole mode" (alternating spin current)
that can be used to probe not only the spin transport but also collisions and
thermalization of SOCBEC in the presence of such collective excitations. Another
example is the so called scissors mode and spin-scissors mode that can be used
to probe superfluidity and how it may be modified by SOC and synthetic magnetic
fields. The later part of the program will also investigate low-dimensional
(especially 1D) SOC BEC by adding an optical lattice, where the SOC is expected
to have even more pronounced effects (such as to alter the ground state,
interactions and excitations). This work may provide insights to engineer new
states of matter (topological phases, novel superfluids) and to understand the
spin transport and dynamics in SOC systems, which are important in spintronics.