* 1708170
* U.S. Engagement in IAU, IUPAC, IUCr, IMU, ICO, IUPAP, and URSI
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lois Peterson-Kent, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,469,365.00

This award supports the U.S. National Committees (USNCs) within the Board on
International Scientific Organizations of the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine. The primary goal is to support effective U.S.
participation and strong leadership in international science. The U.S.
mathematical and physical sciences communities are represented by USNCs in seven
international scientific organizations: the International Astronomical Union
(IAU), the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP), the
International Commission for Optics (ICO), the International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the International Union of Crystallography (IUCr),
the International Mathematical Union (IMU), and the International Union for
Radio Science (URSI). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This three-year award will provide
dues payments to the seven international scientific unions (one year only for
IUCr) and provide support for the management of the USNCs at the National
Academies. USNC staff will coordinate U.S. activity within the unions;
coordinate committee preparations for union meetings; work with the committees
to identify research topics, issues, and programs of interest to their specific
disciplines; and identify and support U.S. scientists to participate in union
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
demonstrated through activities related to the utilization of knowledge for the
achievement of social goals, establishing nomenclature and standards,
participating in the governance of the seven international unions, and advancing
knowledge and understanding across the research community. Union activities
encourage cooperative research and education efforts that reach across
international boundaries and are designed to further develop and enhance each
discipline nationally and internationally. The broader impacts of this project
manifest themselves through union activities that promote teaching, training,
and learning, that promote the growth of and diversity in the national and
international workforce, and that help shape the international dialogue in the
respective disciplinary areas.