* 1708632
* RUI:  Thiol-ene/yne Poly(ionic liquid) Networks for Separation and Electroactive Technologies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Robert Johnson, Murray State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2021
* USD 233,931.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RUI award supports fundamental
research at Murray State University (MSU) in the area of electroactive materials
while enhancing the education and training of undergraduate and high school
students. The PIs will utilize a relatively novel, cost-effective, rapid-
processing approach to prepare a library of polymers containing electrical
charges with tunable thermal, mechanical, and conductive properties. Such
charge-containing polymers have been implemented in a number of societally
important applications, including batteries, fuel cells, power plant flue-gas
separations, and pharmaceutical materials. From the polymer-property
relationships established as a result of this work, the principal investigators
(PIs) will explore the applicability of these new materials in carbon dioxide
separation/capture, ion-sensing devices, and in the formation of electroactive
fibers. The challenging work proposed here will be performed primarily by a team
of undergraduate students from the rural counties of far-western Kentucky and
surrounding communities with participation also of local high school students.
Student participants will receive a rewarding, cutting-edge research experience
that will deepen their understanding of and appreciation for scientific
research, thus better preparing them for STEM-related majors, careers and/or
pre-professional school. In addition to the hands-on laboratory training and
education that these students will receive, the PIs will explore how the
techniques/data acquired from this proposal will be used to develop new
laboratory experiments to supplement current course offerings in organic,
analytical, and polymer chemistry,and will further enhance the new Polymer and
Materials Science degree track offered by the Department of Chemistry at MSU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RUI award focuses on the development of a new class
of poly(ionic liquid) (PIL) materials utilizing thiol-ene/yne click-
photopolymerization with a strong focus on how changes in monomer structure and
stoichiometry affect the thermal, mechanical, and conductive properties of the
resulting PIL networks. The underlying hypothesis of this project is that thiol-
ene/yne photopolymerization represents a significant advancement in the
formation of solventless, one-part, homogeneous PIL networks due to the rapid
and robust nature of the chemistry and the variability that exists with careful
modification and selection of monomers. Specifically, fundamental structure-
activity relationships will be established by varying the cation, anion, and
thiol structures of the starting ionic liquid monomers and analyzing material
properties such as glass transition temperature, thermal stability, crosslink
density and ionic conductivity. Additionally, FTIR experiments will be conducted
in order to explore how structural changes affect polymerization kinetics, as
well as dielectric relaxation spectroscopy to elucidate the roles that chain
dynamics and ion mobility play on the conductivities of the networks. Once
fundamental relationships and kinetics are established, the PIs will explore the
potential impact of these thiol-ene/yne PIL materials on a variety of important
applications, including carbon dioxide separation/capture, as microchip
electrophoresis devices for support of electro-osmotic flow, as membranes in
ion-selective electrodes,and as electroactive fibers from electrospinning. The
award will support a large number of undergraduate STEM students from the far-
western Kentucky region and several local high school students, thereby
expanding the educational impact and outreach of the university and department
while enhancing the ability of the participating students to pursue a STEM-
related career. Synthetic approaches, materials analyses and applications will
provide student participants with rewarding research experiences, all while
generating results that will be disseminated in internationally recognized,
peer-reviewed journals and presented at professional meetings.