* 1708526
* Supramolecular Control in Synthetic Enzyme-Mimetic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Yan Zhao, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Enzymes are catalysts involved in biological processes to speed up biological
reactions. They have extraordinary catalytic efficiency under mild conditions
and tend to be remarkably selective in a mixture of numerous compounds. These
features are highly desirable but have been difficult to achieve in non-
biological systems. The research group of Professor Yan Zhao at Iowa State
University develops novel approaches to prepare synthetic systems that mimic
enzymes in their dimension, water-solubility, and, more importantly, catalytic
behavior. The research is expected to greatly enhance the capabilities of
synthetic catalysts for reactions important to chemical industry and biomass
conversion. It trains student researchers into professional scientists by
exposing them to a wide range of skills in physical organic chemistry,
supramolecular chemistry, catalysis, and polymer chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes frequently perform chemical reactions with
efficiency and selectivity difficult from a pure synthetic perspective. Although
molecular recognition is an essential feature of enzymatic catalysts, chemists
have limited abilities to construct substrate-specific active sites. This
project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, supports Professor Yan Zhao of Iowa State University
to study novel methods to construct artificial enzymes for the hydrolysis of
esters and acetals, through molecular imprinting within cross-linked surfactant
micelles. These catalysts are anticipated to have key features of enzymes such
as selective binding of the substrate via non-covalent forces, correct
positioning of appropriate functional groups within the active site for optimal
reactivity, and preferential binding of the substrate over the product.
Catalytic efficiency and selectivity is maximized through systematic tuning of
the size and shape of the active sites, as well as the type and the position of
the catalytic groups in the active sites.