* 1708542
* Thermodynamic and Dynamic Behaviour in Polymer Melts, Glasses, and Mixtures: Links to Structure Using Theory and Simulation
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Jane Lipson, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* David Rabson
* 01/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on polymeric systems and related materials.
There are many applications for synthetic materials such as polymers, ranging
from coatings for electronics, to clothing, furniture, and airplane components.
Ideally, the material properties will be well matched to the intended use: e.g.
tough and abrasion-resistant for hard-shell suitcases, resistant to tear for
garbage bags. New synthetic strategies are yielding impressive ability to design
a large molecule down to the level of which atoms are incorporated and how they
are locally connected. In this project, the PI and her group will use theory and
simulation to develop new tools for predicting how molecular composition
controls bulk material properties. Because so many applications involve thin
films, the effects of interfaces will also be of strong interest. One of the
important themes that runs through much of the proposed research involves the
"unused" volume captured within a solid or liquid; this will change with
pressure and temperature. For example, a liquid will become more dense as
temperature is lowered; a solid glassy state has less "free" volume than the
liquid. Prior research in the PI's group shows that theoretical predictions for
free volume correlate with materials properties, e.g. its melting temperature,
how it absorbs energy, and its tendency to mix. This work will focus on linking
free volume and molecular structure. The aim is to complete the path connecting
the microscopic design of large molecules to their bulk and film properties. The
process will introduce new strategies to the scientific community for materials
design. Education and training of all undergraduate students and postdocs
involved in the research will be broad since a strong emphasis in the PI's
research is to hold simulation and theory directly accountable to experimental
results. The PI has a strong track record of involving women in research, and
also maintains an interest in public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education aimed at discovering links between structure, equilibrium properties,
and dynamic response in polymer melts, mixtures and glasses, in the bulk and
confined through interfaces. Synthesis experts are developing methods that allow
for increasing control of molecular content, and the ability to draw bright
lines between chemical constituency and behavior is crucial. Materials of
interest here include macromolecules in melt and solution, and glassy solids.
Both analytic theory as well as simulations will be brought to bear, and the two
routes will overlap for some of the studies of interest. The research will
generate testable predictions that will be held accountable to experimental
data. The result will be new strategies for choosing molecular constituents so
as to produce desired physical properties. The goals of research include:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Connections between thermodynamic characterization and
dynamic response. Preliminary evidence shows that the Locally Correlated Lattice
(LCL) model developed under prior NSF support yields a well-defined
thermodynamic quantification of free volume. Further, the free volume
predictions correlate with the glass transition, and suggest an explanation for
the temperature and volume dependence of dynamic relaxation in polymeric and
small molecule systems. The PI aims to extend these results to a large variety
of polymeric and other glassy systems, using relaxation data that spans many
decades, as well as a broad range of temperatures and pressures. Thermodynamic
scaling using the LCL free volume will collapse the entire data set for each
system to a single line, requiring only a single optimization parameter.
Application to many systems will allow correlation between local chemical
structure, which can be synthetically controlled, and the material dependent
scaling parameter. The result will be an ability to predict how a designed
structure will dynamically relax. The scaling analysis will also lead to
predictions about the pressure dependence of dynamic relaxation, given only
ambient pressure experimental data. Both bulk and thin film systems will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Free Volume and Cohesive Energy Density as
Orthogonal Controls on Miscibility. The cohesive energy density has a poor
history of predicting miscibility in polymer solutions and blends. Application
of the LCL model to study mixing behavior has shown the LCL free volume to be an
orthogonal metric to cohesive energy density; there is evidence that it can
serve as a predictive tool where the cohesive energy density fails. The LCL
theory can predict both quantities, which will allow this hypothesis to be
tested. Application to many systems will allow correlations with molecular
properties, a particular interest being chain stiffness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) A Coarse-grained Simulation Method for Studying the
Effects of Interfaces. Introduction and control of interfaces plays an
increasingly important role in material design. The PI's Limited Mobility
simulation approach can model a range of experimentally observed behavior. Key
features include decoupling between local density and local mobility, and
incorporating nearest-neighbor facilitation for local moves. Initial results
indicate that simulation parameter values connect closely with experimentally
measured characteristic molecular properties. In this work, the limited mobility
model will be applied to capture the disruptive influences of a wide variety of
interfaces, including anti/plasticizing additives and multilayer systems.