* 1708033
* RUI: Algebraic, Differential-Geometric, and Computational Aspects of Darboux Transformations in Classical and Super Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2020
* David Hobby, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2020
* USD 118,374.00

Mathematical symmetries are transformations of objects or structures that leave
unchanged some characteristics under study. Knowledge of symmetries, used
throughout the physical and engineering sciences, can aid understanding of a
complicated object by replacing it with a simpler one or can help to isolate
quantities that are preserved in physical processes, such as energy or momentum.
This research project is aimed at developing the theory of a particular class of
symmetry transformations that act on differential equations, which are
ubiquitous in models of natural systems. The project aims to develop a new
perspective on these Darboux transformations, combining a previously-developed
algebraic approach with a geometric viewpoint. This will be done, in particular,
in the "super" setting; this refers to the mathematical apparatus relevant for
supersymmetry, a theoretical notion introduced in connection with study of
elementary particles. The investigator will study algebraic aspects of Darboux
transformations, how different transformations can be combined with each other
or how they can be made from elementary blocks, with attention to properties of
quantities independent of a choice of a coordinate system. The project includes
plans to implement the results in practical tools such as computer software for
solving differential equations. Another broader impact of the project will arise
from providing opportunities for students to participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to classify
all Darboux transformations (DTs) for operators of general form using a
previously-developed algebraic framework instrumental in the proof of
factorization of DTs for two-dimensional Schr√∂dinger operators and in discovery
of a new large class of invertible DTs. The project aims to obtain more new
types of DTs and to develop exact solution algorithms (including their
computational implementation). The investigator intends to develop DTs in the
supergeometric setting, which arises in connection with the study of
supersymmetric partial differential equations, extending one-dimensional
classification results to higher dimensions. The work will consider DTs for
differential operators acting on geometric objects, including the algebra of
densities and differential forms. Preliminary investigations show that this will
require tackling new factorization problems for partial differential operators;
the project will explore a differential invariants approach using regularized
moving frames. One of the sub-goals is to analyze operators acting on forms on
vector bundles. The investigator also plans to construct and study a "universal
manifold" of DTs defined by the intertwining relation and to establish a
connection between DTs and a recent notion of "higher symmetries" of
differential operators. The project will extend a MAPLE-based package to allow
work with linear partial differential operators with parametric coefficients in
the supergeometric setting.