* 1708459
* Experimental and Simulation Study of Compositional and Atomic-Scale Ordering Effects on Passivation in Fe-Cr and Ni-Cr Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Karl Sieradzki, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stainless steels and iron-chromium
and nickel chromium alloys are well known for their excellent corrosion
resistance. This behavior stems from a protective atomic-scale protective oxide
layer that forms on the surface of stainless steels which if scratched or
otherwise breached in some manner reforms within seconds on the surface of the
alloy. This self-healing behavior serves as a model for the development modern
corrosion protection coating schemes for other families of important alloy
systems including aluminum and magnesium. The main objective of the work is to
develop simple physically based models for the behavior of stainless steels in
order to develop design schemes that can rationalize existing data and identify
alloy compositions and atomic-scale effects that can be used to engineer new
families of alloys with superior corrosion resistance. The scope of research,
which involves laboratory and computational work, affords both undergraduate and
graduate students the opportunity for fundamental training in materials
electrochemistry and corrosion science. Results of this research are expected to
contribute to important issues of national concern connected to both the well
being of our infrastructure as well as the development of light-weight metallic
alloys used in automotive applications for which corrosion is a major
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it
is well known that 10-13 at.% chromium is required for stainless-like behavior
of iron alloys, a long standing unanswered question in corrosion science is why?
Early work connected "critical" Cr compositions for stainless-like behavior to
long-ranged percolation thresholds for random structures but recent density
functional calculations that incorporate magnetic interactions have shown that
Fe-Cr alloys are unique owing to an inversion in the sign of the heat of mixing
occurring at approximately 10 at. % Cr within a solid solution. Importantly,
MÃ¶ssbauer and neutron scattering studies have confirmed the predictions of these
calculations for Fe-Cr alloys and revealed that atomic scale ordering can be
"tuned" by suitable heat treatment. In order to unravel this mystery the atomic
scale structure of Fe-Cr and Ni-Cr alloys is being examined as a function of
composition and short-range order. At fixed alloy composition, short-range order
is tuned by varying the heat treatment of the alloy. The work will characterize
short-range order by atomic-scale chemical imaging of well-prepared alloy
surfaces using scanning tunneling microscopy. Computer simulations are performed
in order to extract regular solution theory parameters that are then used in
Monte Carlo renormalization group calculations to determine how ordering
modifies standard percolation thresholds. Electrochemical methods are used to
measure how composition and heat treatment affect passivation behaviors in Fe-Cr
and Ni-Cr alloys.