* 1708248
* Influence of Cyclic Loading/Unloading on Segmental Dynamics of Polymer Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2021
* USD 455,000.00

Non-Technical Summary:

Polymer glasses (materials used in applications like automobile headlamp covers
and modern composite aircraft) are important in technology because they are
stiff, lightweight, and require little energy for manufacture. The response of
polymer glasses to external forces (stretching vs. breaking) determines what
materials can be used for particular applications but this response currently
cannot be predicted. Experiments will be used to measure the rate at which
polymer molecular motions occur when a force is applied to the polymer glass; in
particular, experiments in which the glass is periodically stressed and
unstressed will be utilized. Through comparison with models and computer
calculations, these experiments will lead to the development of more reliable
predictions of the mechanical properties of polymer glasses. Potentially this
will have a significant economic impact by allowing broader utilization of these
lightweight materials. Personnel supported by this project will work with the
University of Wisconsin-Madison's PEOPLE program to prepare high-school students
from under-represented groups for college. Two high-school science teachers will
participate in the research and use their experience to guide high-school
students in independent research projects. These teachers will also develop
modules for use in Wisconsin public high schools that target concepts which are
challenging for high-school students.



Technical Summary:

Polymer glasses are important in technology due to their low density, the low
energy input required for molding, and their useful mechanical properties. This
research aims to enhance the fundamental understanding of polymer glass
deformation and to test current theoretical approaches and computer simulations;
this should lead to the development of more reliable models for the prediction
of the mechanical properties of polymer glasses. Segmental mobility in
poly(methyl methacrylate) and poly(lactic acid) glasses will be measured before,
during, and after mechanical deformation. Segmental mobility will be measured
with an optical photobleaching method that provides access to the rotational
correlation function of an ensemble of dilute probe molecules. Enhanced mobility
is a key feature of the nonlinear response of polymer glasses to deformation.
These experiments will utilize cyclic tensile loading/unloading deformations and
more complex deformation protocols. These experiments will discriminate among
theoretical models that all qualitatively explain deformation at constant strain
rate. In addition, this work will advance the training of graduate students and
high-school students, through the integration of materials research and
education activities. Personnel supported by this project will work with the
University of Wisconsin-Madison's PEOPLE program to prepare high-school students
from under-represented groups for college. Two high-school science teachers will
participate in the research and use their experience to guide high-school
students in independent research projects. These teachers will also develop
modules for use in Wisconsin public high schools that target concepts which are
challenging for high-school students.