* 1708028
* Understanding Discoveries, Maximizing Science and Enabling the Best Data of Advanced LIGO During the Regular Detection Era
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Imre Bartos, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

At the vanguard of instrumental advances, gravitational wave (GW) detections
shall drive profound discoveries at nature's extremes, with the potential of
radically transforming the very concept of how we think of space, time, and
gravity, as they open new doors to study previously hidden cosmic phenomena. The
research program of the Columbia Experimental Gravity group (GECo) aims to
maximize the science reach of upcoming gravitational wave discoveries and expand
multimessenger science with gravitational waves. In particular, GECo will work
on studying the cross correlation between LIGO GWs and neutrino detections from
the IceCube observatory in the South Pole. Improved detectors are critical for
seeing more of the cosmos with higher fidelity while astrophysically informed
data analysis enable insight beyond the state of the art of Today. The aLIGO
detectors were built to provide insight on elusive cosmic objects from black-
holes to neutron-stars. Therefore GECo's program aims to improve the odds of
discovering neutron-star containing binary systems and enhance the value of each
discovery via enhanced detector and data analysis performance. In particular,
GECo will work on the characterization of the LIGO detector as well as improving
and maintaining the timing systems and developing new data analysis
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct detections of gravitational waves
provide an unprecedented opportunity born of new data to expose cosmic puzzles
using multiple astrophysical messengers. At the root of new discoveries, there
will be a multifaceted interplay between improved instruments, advanced
understanding of the data, and innovative data analysis approaches relying on a
comprehensive mesh of cosmic messengers. GECo will focus on the astrophysical,
observational and experimental foundations of synergetic multimessenger
campaigns, the firm base of new discoveries. GECo will utilize astrophysical as
well as data structure priors to enhance the fidelity of the detections and to
enable the confident detection of cosmic signals yet undetected. GECo aims to
investigate multimessenger information, with special attention to neutrino
counterparts and to enhance electromagnetic follow-up capabilities with low-
latency coincident neutrino information. Multimessenger approaches have the
potential to enhance the number of detectable sources as more distant, and
abundant, cosmic events can become accessible. GECo also aims to investigate
gravitational wave searches incorporating astrophysical priors on the properties
of binary systems that can potentially enhance search sensitivity. GECo aims to
contribute to the proper operation of advanced LIGO, to characterize the
performance of mission critical detector subsystems, and to prepare in-depth
reports to support exceptional gravitational wave candidates.