* 1708957
* Misfit Dislocation Dynamics at Heterovalent Semiconductor Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Tyler Grassman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 379,912.00

Non-Technical Description: As scientists and engineers seek to develop future
generations of functional electronic and optical semiconductor devices -
transistors, light emitting diodes, lasers, photodetectors, solar cells and
beyond - integration of dissimilar, but complementary materials is a crucial
step toward achieving new and desirable properties. However, these fundamental
dissimilarities, or incompatibilities, tend to result in the formation of
defects within the constituent semiconductor materials during the integration
process, which detrimentally impacts the operation of the devices produced using
these materials. Therefore, to enable the free and flexible application of
dissimilar materials integration toward new device concepts, the various
problems introduced by these incompatibilities must be understood and methods
for their mitigation must be developed. This project seeks to better understand
the impact and interplay between two common dissimilarities that exist in many
target materials integration systems: heterovalency (dissimilar chemical
bonding) and lattice mismatch (dissimilar atomic spacing). The results of this
work are expected to provide guidance to researchers with respect to the design
of fabrication processes that can avoid or minimize detrimental defect
formation, making possible the development of next generation semiconductor
devices with powerful new and beneficial properties. This project is also
training graduate and undergraduate students as future innovators within the
semiconductor research and development industry, while also establishing new
research techniques and methods are benefit a wide range of investigators and
enterprises within the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
proposed work tackles important questions regarding the physical, chemical, and
electronic structure of the heterovalent, lattice-mismatched interfaces and
their impact on the formation and evolution of misfit dislocations within
dissimilar materials integration systems. Understanding the specific
relationships between dislocation dynamics and the underlying materials
dissimilarities could enable bottom-up epitaxial and structural design
approaches that allow for the control and mitigation of detrimental defect
microstructure. The specific research objectives are: (1) to create a
methodology to decouple and independently analyze the effects of heterovalency
and lattice-mismatch at a contemporarily important model dissimilar
semiconductor interface; (2) to thoroughly characterize the
formation/nucleation, glide, and reaction dynamics of misfit dislocations at
this interface; (3) to identify any fine structure at the interface resulting
from the heterovalency; and (4) to determine the ultimate impact of
heterovalency on the dislocation dynamics at this interface. This is
accomplished by using a combination of novel sample design, epitaxial synthesis
and a multi-scale suite of powerful structural characterization methods,
emphasizing the holistic connection between heteroepitaxy, resultant interfacial
morphology and strain-induced microstructure. The fundamental knowledge and
scientific insight gained, and the novel methods developed within this effort,
are directly applicable to nominally any dissimilar crystalline materials
integration system.