* 1708146
* The Astrophysical Multimessenger Observatory Network
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Douglas Cowen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 06/30/2021
* USD 597,514.00

Astrophysical phenomena, and particularly the most energetic, may emit a range
of particles from photons to neutrinos and cosmic rays. They may also produce
gravitational radiation. These "messengers" carry details of the energetics and
physical conditions in these sources. The Astrophysical Multimessenger
Observatory Network (AMON) aims to discover and study new astrophysics phenomena
by merging the world's leading multimessenger observatories into a single data
system. AMON will link facilities that observe high-energy neutrinos (the
IceCube and ANTARES Neutrino Observatories), the sub-atomic particles observed
as cosmic rays (the Pierre Auger Cosmic Ray Observatory), gamma-ray photons (the
Swift and Fermi satellites, and the HAWC and VERITAS ground-based
observatories), and oscillations in the fabric of space-time manifested as
gravitational waves (the Advanced LIGO and VIRGO gravitational-wave detectors).
With this renewal award, the PIs will construct a production network focused on
discovering the first astrophysical sources jointly emitting high-energy
neutrinos, gamma rays and/or gravitational waves. The PIs will also continue to
run "AstroTxt," a project that engages central Pennsylvania middle and high
school students with AMON data and operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMON
consists of a multimessenger database and tools for data exchange and analysis
for interoperability between participating facilities. AMON will enable real-
time analysis of data that are below a detection threshold in an individual
observatory but may achieve a high level of significance in joint-coincidence
analyses with data from other observatories. The AMON cyberinfrastructure
enables time-critical analyses, with each candidate astrophysical signal
packaged as an AMON Alert and distributed to a network of follow-up facilities
for counterpart search and characterization. Furthermore, AMON has deployed
software and database interfaces to enable partner collaborations to carry out
joint analyses on the AMON archive, including searches for persistent
multimessenger sources.