* 1708139
* Black Holes and Matter:  Atomic Condensates, Information, Magnetospheres, and Axions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Theodore Jacobson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 669,000.00

The proposed work involves theoretical studies, aiming to shed light on
questions related to 1) laboratory analogs of Hawking radiation from black
holes, 2) quantum mechanics applied to gravity and black holes, 3) magnetic
fields and charged particles around astrophysical black holes and in other
systems, 4) a possible source of dark matter from spinning, magnetized neutron
stars. Each of these four topics represents a critical area that probes into the
fundamental nature of the formation and structure of the universe. The results
of the proposed research will be disseminated through written articles, as well
as seminars, conference talks, and colloquia. The PI will provide instruction
and mentoring to a postdoctoral scholar, as well as to graduate and
undergraduate students, regarding scientific research, writing, and verbal
communication. The PI will also continue to teach physics courses at all levels,
and the graduate students will gain teaching experience as assistants. The PI
will seek out opportunities to speak to the general public on topics in physics.
All these activities will contribute to training, scientific literacy, and
appreciation of the insights of physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more
technical level, research under item 1) will use the Gross-Pitaevskii equation
to model the atomic condensate, and will study the density-density correlation
function while averaging over variations in the number of atoms, in addition to
averaging over realizations of the quantum noise using the truncated Wigner
approximation. Item 2) will focus on the possibility that the black hole
information paradox can be resolved by a proper accounting of the structure of
the state space of quantum gravity, specifically, the redundant encoding of
information into the wave function satisfying the quantum Einstein equation,
i.e.\ the Wheeler-de Witt equation. A related study will investigate whether the
notion of the turnover time of the thermal vacuum atmosphere of a black hole has
a Lorentz invariant meaning, and whether it is related to the much discussed
scrambling time for black hole information processing. Item 3) includes work
aimed at a sharp formulation of magnetic helicity in a general relativistic
setting, and in the presence of boundaries such as the surface of a neutron star
or the horizon of a black hole. A key mathematical tool for this work will be
the use of differential forms. Also, an effective field sheet theory will be
developed, and applied to characterize the impact of cyclotron motion on the
stagnation surface around black holes and neutron stars. This surface defines
the boundary between the charges that are gravitationally pulled to the body and
those that are flung outward by magnetocentrifugal force. The work under item 4)
will investigate the axion field sourced by electric fields parallel to magnetic
fields, in static and in time dependent settings, first without, and then with,
gravitation taken into account. The findings will then be used to constrain
axion mass and coupling strength, and to determine whether observable effects
could be produced.