* 1708982
* Collaborative Research: Novel Terahertz Generators Based on Magnetic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Andrei Slavin, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 210,829.00

Generators of electromagnetic waves with frequencies near one terahertz are
needed for several types of practically useful applications such as new bio-
medical imaging techniques, highly sensitive chemical sensors and energy-
efficient wireless computer chips. Existing generators of terahertz radiation
have significant deficiencies that severely limit their usefulness. These
generators either work at temperatures below room temperature or are based on
expensive and bulky laser systems. The goal of this project is to create a new
type of terahertz generator that is compact, inexpensive and works at room
temperature. These generators are based on readily available magnetic materials
such as iron oxide and nickel oxide and will operate via conversion of magnetic
oscillations in these materials into terahertz electromagnetic waves. The goal
of the proposed research program will be achieved via a collaborative effort of
a synergistic team of experts in magnetic device fabrication (University of
California, Irvine) and leading theorists in the field of magnetic devices
(Oakland University). The results of the proposed research program will impact
society in multiple ways. The new method of terahertz signal generation will
help maintain the US leadership in terahertz technology. A number of
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in modern device fabrication
techniques, which will enhance the US nanotechnology workforce. The outreach
activities, including demonstrations on magnetism and superconductivity, will
target middle school students from underrepresented groups, and will help
attract minorities to science and engineering.

The proposed research program is based on a substantial preliminary
experimental and theoretical work of the proposers, who experimentally
demonstrated spin pumping in Pt/hematite bi-layers, and theoretically predicted
that a bi-layer of a heavy metal (Pt) and an antiferromagnetic material with
strong easy-plane and weak easy-axis magnetic anisotropies can function as a
source of coherent THz radiation when direct current is applied to the Pt layer.
In such antiferromagnet-based auto-oscillators, an electric current in the Pt
layer injects pure spin Hall current into the antiferromagnet and drives its
order parameter into a state of persistent precession. This precession excited
by the component of spin current perpendicular to the easy plane anisotropy of
the antiferromagnet is non-uniform in time due to the weak easy-axis magnetic
anisotropy present within the easy plane anisotropy. The frequency of the
antiferromagnetic order parameter oscillations is proportional to the injected
spin current, and increases from approximately 0.1 THz to 2.0 THz with
increasing current density in the Pt layer. The order parameter oscillations are
converted into a THz electromagnetic signal with electric field amplitude
exceeding 1 V/cm via spin pumping and the inverse spin-Hall effect in the Pt
layer. The dynamics of the THz-frequency room-temperature antiferromagnetic
auto-oscillator is mathematically equivalent to that of a Josephson junction
auto-oscillator, with the energy of the weak uniaxial magnetic anisotropy of the
antiferromagnet playing the role of the Josephson energy. The demonstration of
these compact, tunable and structurally simple antiferromagnet-based sources of
THz radiation will enable the development of compact and inexpensive solid state
THz devices for imaging, chemical detection, wireless chip-to-chip communication
and THz spectroscopy/microscopy.