* 1708275
* GOALI: Transparent Beam Steering Antennas Enabled by Graphene Quantum Capacitance Varactors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* James Schaffner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

The project intends to create a revolutionary transparent beam-steering antenna
technology for use in self-driving vehicles. The project utilizes the artificial
impedance surface antenna which is ideally suited for integration into
automobile window glass due to its low cost and simple design. The key
innovation is to utilize the nanomaterial graphene to create a variable
capacitance tuning element that can be integrated directly onto the antenna to
enable beam steering while maintaining high performance and transparency. This
work will lead to a new fundamental understanding of both the performance limits
of graphene varactors as well as the novel antenna design and operation. It will
provide new understanding of the frequency limits of graphene devices, and could
open the door to new design concepts for transparent, steerable antennas. The
project will also advance a technology of vital national importance that has the
potential to minimize traffic-related deaths, reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
enable unprecedented mobility for vision-impaired individuals, reduce traffic
congestion, and improve business productivity. The project will also provide an
ideal platform for outreach activities, with the industrial interaction
providing a natural means to educate graduate students on the automotive
applications of millimeter-wave components. This program will also aid in the
incorporation of graphene into the undergraduate electrical engineering
curriculum at Minnesota, and provides an excellent example of a cross-
disciplinary problem, incorporating aspects of solid-state devices and
electromagnetism. In addition, K-12 educational programs will be developed that
include graphene-based hands-on activities as well as information about self-
driving vehicles and automobile safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the creation of a transformative technology where graphene variable
capacitors (varactors) are directly integrated onto artificial impedance
surfaces to enable beam steering antennas operating at millimeter-wave
frequencies. The project integrates two technologies that, to date, had not been
previously combined: (1) artificial impedance surface antennas which have great
potential for low cost and beam steering capabilities due to their simple design
and (2) graphene varactors, which provide an elegant method to incorporate
tuning elements for beam steering and are also transparent. The research scope
and methods include the following aspects. A new fabrication process for short-
channel-length graphene varactors will be developed to enable high-speed
operation at millimeter-wave frequencies. A process will also be developed to
monolithically integrate graphene varactors with artificial impedance surface
antennas to create steerable antennas. Finally, transparent antennas will be
fabricated and characterized using a metal meshing strategy and their
performance will be compared to opaque antennas. The intellectual significance
of this project is that it will lead to a fundamental understanding of high-
speed graphene device and antenna technology. It will explore the performance
limits of graphene varactors at millimeter-wave frequencies, and advance the
technology with wider tuning range, higher quality factor, and improved
uniformity. A new integrated platform for beam steering antennas at millimeter-
wave frequencies will be created, with the potential for enhanced performance
compared to conventional approaches and a path toward practical implementation
in autonomous vehicles.