* 1708254
* Solid State Chemistry of Complex Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

PART 1:   NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Research in discovering new solid
state materials addresses the grand challenge of moving towards rational
materials synthesis that transforms our understanding of materials properties
and advances new technologies. This project, which is funded by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, focuses
on discovering and characterizing new types of metal chalcogenide compounds
using molten metal salts as solvents. Chalcogenides are used in a broad variety
of scientific investigations and technologies. This project studies how
important physical properties change as a function of composition and crystal
structure of the metal chalcogenide. This leads to exciting new materials, which
are expected to spark new applications or enhance the effectiveness of existing
technological applications. Thereby new materials impact both the physical
sciences as well as economic growth. Furthermore, this project contributes
significantly to the training and teaching of graduate students in the field of
solid state and materials chemistry and helps to create a future workforce that
understands the importance of new materials as drivers for new phenomena and
technologies. The project provides important opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to learn research investigative skills that are needed
for successful contemporary scientific research, which in turn has a positive
impact on our national competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
2:   TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project, funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, investigates
the class of metal chalcogenides which occupies a vital place in chemistry,
physics and materials science. These compounds exhibit remarkably diverse
compositions, structures and physical properties which are at the core of many
fundamental studies. Specifically, the project investigates (a) study the
synthesis of Li containing chalcogenide phases to meet the challenge of
incorporating this light alkali ion in a variety of structures; (b) the
synthesis of complex alkali chalcophosphates with low-valent phosphorus to
observe new bonding motifs and (c) the study of how metal chalcogenide ion-
exchangers bind heavy metals. The fields of science and technology impacted by
chalcogenides are important and continue to expand. Examples include nonlinear
optics, energy conversion, information storage, batteries, topological
insulators, catalysis, and superconductivity. The project focuses on ternary and
quaternary chalcogenides because they promise very attractive or even unique
chemical and physical properties. The main objective of this program is to
further develop the ability to control chemical reaction systems by developing
the general synthetic strategies that lead to new chalcogenide materials. New
horizons in chalcogenide chemistry that pose great challenges are being
explored.