* 1708749
* Design of Ceramics with Isotropic Superionic Conductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Peter Khalifah, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Within a Li-ion battery, the electrolyte
facilitates the conduction of Li ions between the two electrodes (cathode and
anode) that store energy. Better solid state electrolytes will enable the
development of safer batteries with improved lifetimes, and have the potential
to completely eliminate the flammability and toxicity associated with current
organic electrolyte technologies for Li-ion batteries. This project will lead to
the discovery of better solid state electrolytes both by evaluating new
candidate compounds and by carrying out fundamental studies to better understand
how Li ions diffuse through solid electrolytes. This work will be supported by
diffraction studies at national user facilities that will allow the accurate
determination of the crystal structure of solid electrolytes at the atomic
scale, allowing the mechanism of ionic motion to be understood. This project
will additionally support the training of young researchers in advanced
structural characterization methods through a national summer school on
structural analysis to be offered every year. The integration of solid state
electrolytes into next-generation Li-ion batteries has the potential to
completely eliminate battery fires, to extend the range and reduce the cost of
electric vehicles, and to facilitate the integration of renewable energy sources
into the electrical grid by providing low-cost load
leveling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In the last 50
years, only about half a dozen structural families of superionic conductors for
Li and Na ions have been discovered. A major goal of this proposal is the
identification of new superionic conductors, an aim which will be supported by
fundamental studies to identify and control the structural features that most
directly influence the ionic conductivity. The development of improved solid
state superionic conductors that can replace the organic liquid electrolytes
(which are responsible for major flammability, toxicity, and lifetime issues) in
current Li-ion battery systems will lead to safer batteries with improved
lifetimes. Fundamental studies will be carried out to understand and optimize
the conductivity of ions at room temperature within a special CUBICON ceramic
host whose cubic symmetry allows ions to be transported equally well in all
directions, unlike most other alternative systems. First, chemical syntheses
(solid state and ion exchange) will be carried out to prepare a variety of
single-phase CUBICON materials of known and novel compositions. Next, X-ray and
neutron diffraction studies will be carried out to accurately locate the
positions of atoms (enabling both qualitative estimates and quantitative
calculations of the strength of bonding and mobility of ions). New in situ
methods will be applied to determine ion exchange mechanisms relevant to their
synthesis. Finally, physical properties measurements will be done to assess the
ionic and electronic conductivity of these materials, and to identify design
rules than can be used to prepare CUBICON materials with optimal properties.