* 1708310
* Topology, Geometry, and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Clifford Taubes, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2020
* USD 307,902.00

Award: DMS 1708310, Principal Investigator: Clifford H. Taubes

The immediate goal for the project is to develop new tools and methods to study
the structure of three and four dimensional spaces. Questions about these spaces
are central to much of current research in both geometry and topology (not to
mention physics and astrophysics/cosmology - four dimensions is relevant because
space with time is four dimensional). There exist powerful mathematical tools
for studying these spaces, but more tools are needed. This is especially true
for four dimensional spaces because the ignorance here is broad and deep. This
lack of information motivates the project to develop new tools and sharpen the
old ones while keeping in mind the long term goal of understanding more about
the spaces involved. The research to be carried out could construct bridges
between the fields of topology, differential geometry, symplectic geometry and
mathematical physics. Concepts from the mathematical fields of the project are
now used extensively (and centrally) in condensed matter physics, high energy
physics, and theories of gravity and cosmology.

The long term goal of this project is to understand the structure of smooth, low
dimensional manifolds through the following primary areas of study: (1) The
behavior of sequences of solutions to certain generalizations of Seiberg-Witten
equations will be studied on four dimensional manifolds. The ultimate goal in
this regard is to determine whether non-convergent sequences have pathologies
that obstruct solution counting definitions of invariants that can distinguish
different 4-manifolds or, when the four dimensional manifold has a boundary,
distinguish different knots or links on the boundary. (2) The structure and
topological significance of the zero locus of a harmonic section of a spin
bundle that is defined only where the section is not zero will be investigated.
This second research focus has implications for the first because harmonic
sections of the sort described arise in the study of sequences of solutions to
certain equations of interest. (3) The third research focus will look for
invariants that could distinguish path components of the space of Riemannian
metrics on a 4-manifold with anti-self dual Weyl curvature. Of particular
interest would be an invariant that distinguishes the products of a circle with
hyperbolic three-dimensional manifolds because an invariant that does this might
distinguish certain pairs of homeomorphic, but not necessarily diffeomorphic,
four dimensional manifolds that can not be separated with existing tools for
smooth structures. All of these topics use methods from differential geometry
and analysis to construct new tools for studying the differential topology of
low dimensional manifolds.