* 1708317
* Sequence-Specific Placement of Defects in Pi-Conjugated Semiconducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Christine Luscombe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2021
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The materials class, "pi-conjugated
semiconducting polymers", that are being studied in this proposal are electronic
polymers that have the potential to address needs ranging from energy usage,
harvesting, and storage. Specifically, the polymers have applications in organic
light emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic photovoltaics (OPVs), bioelectronics,
sensors, and electronic skin. However, for these polymers to be used in a wide
range of electronic applications, it is important to understand how the long
polymer molecular chains fold in the solid state of the material and how this
folding affects its electronic properties. To this end, the PI and her group at
the University of Washington will develop, synthesize, and study a new class of
pi-conjugated semiconducting polymers that can fold at specific locations along
a polymer chain, and establish new ways to affect the optoelectronic properties
of these polymers. The relevance of the project to a number of applications
provides us with an opportunity to communicate the importance of science and
engineering to the community. Specifically, an exhibition about polymers will be
created in collaboration with the Pacific Science Center (a science museum in
Seattle). Additionally, the PI will work with a group known as Diversity in
Clean Energy (DICE) at the University of Washington to support women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Within the field of pi-conjugated semiconducting
polymers, there is a growing realization that defects such as homocoupling and
end-groups can adversely affect the properties and thus the performance of these
polymers in actual applications. However, what is not clearly understood is why
these defects affect the properties in the way that they do. In this proposal,
the PI and her group aim to shed light on how point defects can affect
microstructure and thus their properties. The research entails the following:
(i) synthesizing pi-conjugated semiconducting homopolymers with precisely spaced
defects; (ii) assessing how the size of and spacing between defects affect the
microstructure of the homopolymers; and (iii) expanding the design rules
established in parts (i) and (ii) to alternating copolymers. The research is
envisioned to provide means to design the microstructure of pi-conjugated
semiconducting polymers with an unprecedented level of control instead of
relying only on optimization methods as is typically done.