* 1708259
* In Situ Growth and Placement of Nanostructures by Solution-Based Processing
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Amy Walker, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 431,165.00

Nanostructures are characterized by their tiny size - they are measured in
nanometers, which are millionths of a millimeter. These tiny dimensions give
them enhanced properties, which have applications in many technologies, from
computers to cell phones to solar cells. One of the biggest challenges in the
development of nanotechnology is the low-cost integration of nanostructures into
commercial devices. Dr. Amy Walker (University of Texas at Dallas) addresses
this problem by developing new methods to grow "in place" (in situ) nanowires,
nanopores, nanorings, nanosheets and nanochannels made from transition metal
chalcogenides, metal compounds containing sulfur or selenium. These materials
are very promising for faster electronics, more efficient solar cells, new kinds
of sensors and improved fuel cells. Her group specializes in solution-based
methods which are cheaper and more environmentally friendly than conventional
techniques. Dr. Walker uses a variety of experimental tools to study the growth
and properties of nanostructures, in particular imaging mass spectrometry. This
research is attractive to students at many levels. Both graduate and
undergraduate students gain valuable expertise in her lab, going on to careers
in the semiconductor, chemical and high-tech manufacturing industries. Dr.
Walker involves students in electrochemistry, device design, nanoscience,
surface and materials characterization, spectroscopy and mass spectrometry
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, Dr. Amy Walker (University of Texas
at Dallas) is funded by the Macromolecular, Supermolecular and Nanochemistry
(MSN) Program to develop new and scalable techniques used to synthesize metal
chalcogenide nanostructures. Semiconductor nanowire deposition on micropatterned
substrates (SENDOM) can create nanowires, nanopores, nanochannels and nanorings,
which enables the fabrication of complex functional structures such as nanowire-
based transistors. In SENDOM, a multifunctional micropatterned surface is used
to direct the growth of nanostructures by chemical bath deposition (CBD). SENDOM
is an in situ method that does not use complex lithography - these are
significant advantages over other methods for nanostructures synthesis and
placement. SENDOM relies on control of the interaction of CBD precursors and
additives with organic thin films. Detailed mechanistic information about these
interactions is also being leveraged to develop in situ solution-based
techniques to selectively deposit and form free-standing transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDs) nanofilms. This research program substantially advances
the state-of-the-art in nanotechnology by enabling the integration of
nanostructures in practical devices. Finally, solution-based methods such as
those used in this work are becoming increasingly important in "high-tech"
industries, and Dr. Walker is developing educational modules to train students
at all levels in this area.