* 1708287
* Spin Pumping in Ferromagnet-Semiconductor Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Paul Crowell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 432,753.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials such as iron form the basis
of storage technologies such as computer hard disks, while semiconductors such
as silicon are the foundation of a vast array of microelectronic devices. This
project addresses the fundamental question of how these two very different types
of materials can be combined to create electronic devices with new capabilities,
including the integration of memory and processing functions on a single chip.
To help accomplish this, the principal investigator and his team investigate a
process in which information is transferred from the magnetic material to the
semiconductor using microwaves, which are the types of waves used in
applications such as cellphones. The microwaves are used as a "pump" to generate
a flow of spin (the carrier of information) from the magnetic material into the
semiconductor. The project determines how efficient this process is and how the
flow of spin can be detected inside the semiconductor. By using microwaves
instead of an ordinary current generated by a battery, the speed of these
devices operate can be enhanced. New magnetic materials for transferring spin
into the semiconductor are explored, also allowing for more efficient operation
at higher temperatures. In addition to advancing a technology that can be used
in information processing, the project trains undergraduate and graduate
students in techniques for fabricating and measuring this new class of
electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductors provide a unique environment for controlling
spin-polarized carriers using electric and magnetic fields, but the transfer of
spin from ferromagnetic materials into semiconductors is a significant
challenge. This project develops a means to transfer spins directly from a
metallic ferromagnet into a semiconductor at microwave frequencies. This
approach, known as spin pumping, has been applied effectively to metals, but it
has not yet been tested quantitatively in the case of semiconductors. The effort
exploits recent advances in the generation and detection of spin-polarized
carriers in devices integrating highly-polarized Heusler alloy ferromagnets with
III-V semiconductors. These heterostructures are optimized for operation at
microwave frequencies, and the spin pumping approach is then compared
quantitatively with established spin transport techniques, including non-local
spin valve and spin Hall effect measurements. The important parameters governing
the spin-pumping mechanism, including the interfacial mixing conductance and
spin Hall angle, are to be measured independently. The spin pumping efficiency
is enhanced by modifying the ferromagnet-semiconductor interface, allowing for
spin injection into systems with strong spin-orbit interaction. The ultimate
goal of the program is to demonstrate the conversion of a spin current to a
charge current in a two-dimensional electron system that is driven by spin
pumping from a ferromagnet. This requires a progression of devices starting in
GaAs-based heterostructures and moving towards InAs quantum wells.