* 1708376
* Operando imaging of solid state electrochemical interfaces using scanning thermo-ionic microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Stuart Adler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2022
* USD 444,430.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Adler and Li at the University of Washington (UW) are
developing a new and powerful imaging method, scanning thermo-ionic microscopy,
to help better understanding how rechargeable batteries or fuel cells work and
to improve the design of the next generation of batteries with longer lives.
This technique provides unique information about how charges and ions move at a
liquid and surface interface and how their movement is decided by variations in
the composition of materials. In terms of broader impacts, Professors Adler and
Li offer a new hands-on laboratory course to UW students on using new theory and
software tools for electrochemical imaging. Both faculty members and their
students continuously participate in the "Hands-On, Minds-On" program at
Seattle's Bryant Elementary School, which introduces hypothesis-based research
approaches to 4th and 5th graders, as well as to local high school students.
Professors Adler and Li also participate in the Washington Clean-Energy
Institute (CEI) by offering a broad audience-based course on advanced materials
for energy through the CEI curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
Professors Adler and Li develop a real time scanning thermionic microscopy
(STIM) imaging tool to improve the design of fuel cells or rechargeable
batteries for more effective and efficient energy storage media. The imaging
method can gain insight about materials at time scales relevant to
electrochemical reactions (10^(-6) ~ 1s). It offers a unique capability to
extract temporal-spatial information quantitatively in terms of local reaction
and transport rates, which is essential in understanding how charges flow across
an interface and how an active interface responds under dynamic strain. The
information leads to better quantitative understanding of how local variations
in structure and composition result in overall system behavior observed in
electrochemical materials. Both groups' are actively engaged in student training
and outreach activities to local elementary and high schools, and through
participation in the Washington Clean-Energy Institute
(CEI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.