* 1708279
* Negative Curvature in Fiber Bundles and Counting Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,06/30/2017
* Samuel Taylor, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2017
* USD 128,945.00

Among the many techniques available for exploring complicated geometric systems,
often two of the most fruitful are (1) decomposing related structures into their
basic building blocks and (2) sampling from those systems to determine their
typical behavior. For example, to understand a high dimensional geometric
object, one can study the various ways that object fibers (i.e., can be build
out of simpler, lower dimensional pieces which are arranged in a predictable
way). Even if a complete understanding of the object may be out of reach, one
can attempt to comprehend its properties "on average." In this project, the PI
seeks to apply similar principles to the study of geometrically significant
groups via their action on naturally associated spaces. This pursuit brings to
bear methods from geometry, topology, dynamics, and group theory, and seeks to
not only understand these objects in an abstract sense, but to produce tractable
models which allow for quantitative understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, the PI will carry out projects that investigate the geometry and
topology of hyperbolic bundles as well as study geometrically motivated counting
problems in finitely generated groups. In the classical setting of a hyperbolic
3-manifold fibering over the circle, this project builds on a program to study
the extent to which the veering triangulation (a certain combinatorial
construction) effectively encodes the manifold's geometry and topology. Inspired
by the elegant nature of these triangulations, the PI will construct a canonical
ideal simplicial complex in the setting of free-by-cyclic groups; a setting
where a single topological object controlling the group's algebraic
decompositions is currently lacking. Finally, the PI will study the "typical"
geometry of fibered manifolds, free-by-cyclic groups, and representations of
hyperbolic groups. A common thread throughout these investigations will be to
demonstrate the extent to which negative curvature features are persistent and,
in the appropriate sense, generic.