* 1708320
* Floer Theories for 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Ciprian Manolescu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2020
* USD 350,003.00

This NSF funded research project is in topology, a central field in modern
mathematics. The main goal is to use ideas from theoretical particle physics
(gauge theory)to develop new tools for studying three-dimensional geometric
shapes. The principal investigator also plans to apply these tools to study the
problem of which high dimensional shapes can be triangulated, that is,
decomposed into simple pieces (similar to a decomposition of a surface into
triangles). Triangulations have applications beyond pure mathematics, for
example in computer graphics. The project also aims to support graduate
education and to disseminate mathematical ideas to the general public.

In more technical terms, the project concerns Floer theories associated to
three-manifolds, and their topological applications. In particular, the
principal investigator will investigate Seiberg-Witten Floer stable homotopy
types, the associated Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology, and
involutive Heegaard Floer homology. These theories can be used to get
information about the homology cobordism group in three dimensions. In turn,
homology cobordism gives insight into the classification of triangulations for
manifolds of dimension at least five. The principal investigator also proposes
to understand the behavior of Heegaard Floer homology for coverings of
3-manifolds, and to develop 3-manifold invariants from the moduli spaces of
SL(2,C) flat connections.