* 1708972
* Probing Charge, Spin and Thermoelectric Transport in Atomically Thin Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jun Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 432,203.00

Non-technical abstract: The silicon transistor is the fundamental building block
of modern electronics, the continued shrinking of which propelled the
exponential growth of computing power over the past several decades. This trend
cannot continue as the size of a transistor approaches that of an atom. New
electronics beyond silicon calls for new operational principles that are
drastically different from that of a conventional transistor, which controls the
current flow by controlling the charge of the carriers. Equally important to
today's society is the development of energy-harvesting materials and devices
that could convert heat to electricity efficiently. Atomically thin layered
materials, which consist of layers of atoms strongly bonded within each layer
but weakly bonded between layers, offer excellent opportunities to tackle both
challenges. The first objective of this project is to understand how a quantum
mechanical property of an electron called 'spin' propagates in atomically thin
materials and to develop a new type of valve that controls an electric current
flow by controlling the spin of the carriers. The second objective of this
project is to understand how electric current transports and dissipates in
atomically thin materials and how to engineer the surface chemistry of the
materials to make them efficient heat-to-electricity converters. Knowledge
gained in this research is expected to have significant impact on the
development of next-generation nanoelectronics and energy-harvesting devices.
The research activities train students of all levels with necessary skills to
advance nanoscience and nanotechnology and promote the participation of under-
represented groups.

Technical abstract: This project seeks to significantly advance the fundamental
understandings of charge, spin and thermoelectric transport in atomically thin
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and explore their unique application
potentials. One distinguishing property of TMDs that may lead to low-power
electronic applications is the interlocking of the spin, valley and layer
degrees of freedom in these materials. The first thrust of the project aims to
systematically study spin and valley relaxation pathways in few-layer TMDs using
magneto-transport measurements. The knowledge acquired is used to design and
implement a novel spin-valley-layer valve in bilayer TMDs, leveraging the
extensive device fabrication expertise of the PI?' lab. Measurements seek to
understand its operation principles and evaluate its performances. The second
thrust of the project focuses on understanding and controlling the charge and
thermoelectric transport in TMD materials towards thermoelectric applications.
One activity of this thrust aims to establish a much-needed quantitative
understanding of the electron-phonon interactions in TMD materials by studying
the temperature-dependent sheet resistance of the materials in the high-carrier
density regime. A second activity exploits their band structures and surface
nature to engineer desired thermoelectric responses. Experiments seek to enhance
the thermopower of TMD materials using surface covalent functionalization.
Measurements are supported by computations. Research carried out in this project
is expected to produce timely and critical knowledge to stimulate and underpin
the development of potential electronic, spintronic and thermoelectric
applications of TMD materials. The research activities equip students with
necessary STEM skills while summer camp activities promote science leadership
and aim to broaden the reach of science to under-represented groups.