* 1708620
* Engineering Biomimetic Glucose-Responsive Vesicles for Self-Regulated Insulin Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Zhen Gu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 03/31/2019
* USD 198,540.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;Diabetes is a disorder in glucose regulation, and is
characterized by increase in blood glucose. Globally, an estimated 422 million
people had diabetes. In the United States, about 8.3% of the population
currently has diabetes and that number is projected to grow to 1 in 3 adults by
2050. The current treatment for high blood sugar is frequent self-administration
of insulin injections and monitoring of blood sugar levels throughout the day is
necessary to sustain life for patients with type 1 or advanced type 2 diabetes.
Lack of tight control of blood sugar levels accounts for many chronic
complications of diabetes, such as limb amputation, blindness and kidney
failure; while low blood sugar levels result in life disruption and the risk of
seizures, unconsciousness, brain damage, or possible death. Current insulin
infusion approaches, however, cannot mimic normal physiological conditions in
which the pancreatic cells quickly releases insulin in response to increase in
blood sugar levels, and insulin levels are shut down once the blood sugar is
normal. This proposal is to develop the next-generation blood glucose-responsive
insulin delivery systems that are based on synthetic vesicles in a biomimetic
manner, inspired by the vesicles (or granules) of pancreatic celIs. The planned
insulin delivery system will be able to automatically regulate insulin release
continuously and repeatedly according to blood sugar levels. Towards this goal,
the PI proposes to develop transformative glucose-responsive insulin
nanoparticles (GRINs) for intelligently regulating blood sugar levels with fast
and repeatable responsiveness. The activation of GRINs and subsequent release of
insulin are expected to be triggered at a high blood sugar level, and the
release is inhibited with a normal blood sugar range, thereby mimicking
pancreatic cells to "secrete" insulin in response to fluctuating blood sugar
levels. The GRINs prepared will be further loaded into a painless microneedle
array-based patch on the skin to achieve easy administration and enhanced
biocompatibility. This project will develop novel materials, formulations and
devices that may be of broad use for development of other bio-responsive smart
drug delivery systems. In addition, the proposed research will create dynamic
and sustainable education activities, including a K-12 based outreach module
'Engineering Our Way to Stop Diabetes', an interdisciplinary curriculum
targeting undergraduates and graduates, together with hands-on lab research.
Such activities are expected to inspire students to pursue careers in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Diabetes is a
major public health problem currently affecting about 422 million people across
the world, and this number is expected to reach over 450 million by 2030.
Current treatment for Type 1 and advanced Type 2 diabetic patients requires
continuous monitoring of blood glucose (BG) levels and periodical insulin
injections to maintain normal blood glucose levels. An artificial pancreas-like
closed-loop insulin delivery system that continuously and intelligently releases
insulin in response to changing blood glucose levels holds great promise for
enhancing heath and improving quality of life for patients with type 1 and
advanced type 2 diabetes. To date, mimicking the function of pancreatic cells,
chemically-controlled closed-loop delivery strategy utilizing synthetic
materials and/or modified insulin have been widely explored. This typically
consisted of polymeric formulations that swell, shrink or dissociate to adjust
the insulin release rate according to ambient glucose levels. However,
challenges remain to demonstrate a system which would combine; i) fast response;
ii) repeatable activation; iii) ease of administration; and iv) excellent
biocompatibility. The proposed project aims to develop the next-generation
glucose-responsive insulin delivery systems, inspired by the "natural" granules
of pancreatic cells. The PI will explore 'artificial' glucose-responsive insulin
nano-granules (GRINs) and their relevant devices. The activation of GRINs and
subsequent release of insulin are expected to be rapidly triggered at high blood
sugar state, and inhibited within a normal blood sugar levels in a repeatable
manner. The GRINs developed will be further integrated into a painless
microneedle array-based device for application on skin, and thus achieving easy
administration and enhanced biocompatibility. This project will also guide the
development of novel materials, formulations and devices for engineering other
delivery systems which can be intelligently activated by the variation of
physiological signals. Moreover, the proposed research program will be closely
integrated with dynamic and sustainable educational activities, through
development of a K-12 outreach module- 'Engineering Our Way to Stop Diabetes', a
new interdisciplinary curriculum targeting undergraduates and graduates, as well
as hands-on lab research. Students will be exposed to biomaterials, devices and
micro-nanotechnology, inspiring them to pursue careers in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.