* 1708892
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Density Functionals for Predictive Excited-State Calculations of Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Jeffrey Neaton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2020
* USD 301,921.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and
the United States -- Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
this collaboration between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher.
The NSF Division of Materials Research funds this award, which supports research
and education on the development of advanced computational methods for the
simulation and prediction of materials properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
discovery and development of new materials for converting sunlight into
electricity is significantly limited by not having detailed understanding of how
materials harvest light, transduce energy, and transport electric charge. All
these phenomena are a challenge to model computationally as they involve excited
electronic states. There exist computational methods with predictive power for
such processes, but they come at significant computational cost. Developing more
computationally efficient alternative approaches that offer similar accuracy
would enable predictions for increasingly complex materials and would facilitate
adapting such methods for materials discovery and design. This research project
lays important groundwork toward the development of such efficient predictive
approaches for real materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the proposed
effort is outreach to and mentoring of next-generation computational materials
theorists at all age levels, augmented by targeted recruitment of women and
other underrepresented-minority undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will
also organize tours of local research facilities for undergraduate, elementary,
and middle-school students - as well as educators - in the Bay area and beyond.
The US-based graduate students will travel to Israel to carry out research at
the Israeli PI's group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and the United
States -- Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this
collaboration between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The
NSF Division of Materials Research funds this award, which supports research and
education on the development of advanced computational methods for the
simulation and prediction of materials properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
materials and condensed matter physics, the formalism of choice for quantitative
determination of the band structure has long been many-body perturbation theory.
This formalism has yielded excellent electronic structure predictions for many
different classes of metals, semiconductors, and insulators. However, these
predictions come at significant computational cost; extracting band structures
from density functional theory (DFT), based on the single-electron energies and
orbitals obtained from the solution of the Kohn-Sham equation, could alleviate
this cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a binational theoretical
and computational collaboration to develop a new class of density functionals -
optimally tuned range-separated hybrid (OTRSH) functionals - capable of
predicting accurate quasiparticle band gaps and band structures, and optical
spectra, including electron-hole interactions, for a range of complex solid-
state materials, with greater computational efficiency than existing approaches.
Using a benchmark set of well-studied materials, the team will: i) determine
range-separation parameters that lead to the best match between OTRSH and the
leading-edge excited-state method for each of these compounds; ii) develop the
physics of the range-separation parameters; and iii) advance the OTRSH approach.
The research team will then apply the OTRSH approach to a range of complex
systems of contemporary interest, including transition metal oxides, Dirac
materials, halide perovskites, and two-dimensional materials. The research
activity will also address several open questions systematically, and ultimately
develop an efficient DFT approach for understanding existing and predicting new
excited-state phenomena in complex materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to
the proposed effort is outreach to and mentoring of next-generation
computational materials theorists at all age levels, augmented by targeted
recruitment of women and other underrepresented-minority undergraduate and
graduate students. The PI will also organize tours of local research facilities
for undergraduate, elementary, and middle-school students - as well as educators
- in the Bay area and beyond. The US-based graduate students will travel to
Israel to carry out research at the Israeli PI's group.