* 1708180
* Theory and Modelling for Antiferromagnetric Materials-based Spintronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Shufeng Zhang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Spin-based electronic devices for information storage and memory rely on the
efficient control of the spin up and spin down states. Conventionally, the
direction of magnetization of a small magnet dictates these spin states and thus
ferromagnetic materials are essential for spintronic devices. However, there are
a few obstacles for further advancing the spin devices based on the
ferromagnetic materials: the electric current density for switching the
magnetization direction remains too large and the size reduction of memory
elements is fundamentally difficult due to a strong magnetic interaction among
nanometer-sized magnetic elements in close vicinity. The present proposal is to
explore alternative magnetic materials known as antiferromagnets for spin-based
devices. Antiferromagnetic materials are made of two or more sub-lattices in
which the spins of each sub-lattice are oriented in one direction, but the total
or net magnetization is zero. In spite of many intriguing and superior electric
and magnetic properties, the antiferromagnetic materials have not been used as
magnetically active elements for spin device applications. If one is able to
manipulate spin states in antiferromagnetic materials, one would create a
disruption spin-based technology which is faster, denser, and more energy
efficient, compared to ferromagnetic based devices. The proposal calls for a
comprehensive theoretical investigation on how devices made of the
antiferromagnetic materials and their multilayers respond to the time-dependent
external electric and magnetic fields. The goal is to evaluate the feasibility
of antiferromagnetic based spin devices and to find optimal materials parameters
in various structure. The educational components of the proposal include strong
graduate student participations in research, training, and visiting industrial
research laboratories, as well as for PI to develop a spintronics course related
to this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In today's spintronics, spins of
conduction electrons play a pivotal role in carrying angular momentum
information and manipulating the magnetization dynamics of magnetic
nanostructures. Antiferromagnetic materials have no net spin or magnetization,
but they have two distinct magnetic characteristics: a staggered magnetic moment
and a quasi-particle excitation known as antiferromagnetic magnons. Both
staggered moment and magnons could carry angular momentum and serve as spin
information propagators. This proposal aims at a comprehensive study on the
roles of these carriers. In metallic systems, a theory of coupled electron-
magnon conduction, which is capable of predicting new magnetotransport
properties, will be developed. In insulating materials, the mutual dependence of
the direction of staggered moments and the non-equilibrium number of magnons is
the main focus of research. The proposal further explores the following novel
spin-dependent properties of antiferromagnetic-based multilayered structures: 1)
Quantitatively determining spin current from the flow of the electron spins, the
staggered magnetic moments, and magnons, as well as their conversion rates
across interfaces in various multilayered systems. 2) Investigating the
interplay between the staggered moments and magnons for magnetic control. 3)
Exploring possible spintronics device concepts based on the antiferromagnetic
materials. If successful, the present research could reveal knowledge for
staggered magnetic momentum and magnons which may have superior capabilities for
enhanced spin information propagation in spintronic applications.