* 1708049
* Grassmann Matrix Product States as a Tool for Ultracold-atom Model Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Carlos Bolech, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 179,999.00

This project involves basic research in computational physics at the interface
between theoretical ultracold-atom physics and quantum-information theory. These
are two very active areas of study, widely regarded as enablers for future
quantum-based technologies, including quantum computation. The principal aim of
the project is to further the development of variational algorithms for
describing non-relativistic continuous model systems. These algorithms can be
used to describe model systems of interacting cold-atom gases with mass-
imbalance, including in the presence of optical lattices, and/or with mixtures
of fermions and bosons. The research will be conducted in close collaboration
with students and in an open manner. Broad dissemination is planned by including
research-developed computational tools in graduate courses and by disseminating
results in multiple venues, including to the general public. The latter will be
done in collaboration with Cincinnati's Museum of Natural History and Science
and involving students as part of their formative experience in science
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new continuum Matrix-Product States
(cMPS) ansatz will be the main focus of attention in the proposed research. It
constitutes the meeting of ideas coming from the theory of integrable systems
and the tensor-network methods of quantum-information theory. Furthermore, cMPS
brings in a new alternative to look at one-dimensional quantum field theories
(QFTs) from a variational perspective. They provide valuable non-perturbative
insights into the structure of strongly-coupled QFTs, whose fundamental nature
permeates many different branches of physics. Developing these new theoretical
and computational ideas in the context of quantum simulations using cold atoms
will bring in an extra dimension of merit and add to the growing synergies
between cold-atom experiments and many-body theories. In terms of computational
infrastructure, the project will leverage the resources of the Ohio
Supercomputing Center.