* 1708500
* Development of unimolecular antibacterial nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jianfeng Cai, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Division of Materials Research to
University of South Florida is to develop novel antibacterial nanomaterials. Due
to the emerging resistance in the treatment of microbial diseases, development
of new antimicrobial materials is of vital importance. Low-cost polymer-based
materials are attractive. However, antimicrobial activity of currently available
polymers is at best moderate. This project is to design a new class of
unimolecular antibacterial nanomaterials with improved broad-spectrum activity.
Through novel design, synthesis and mechanistic studies, more potent
antimicrobial agents are expected with the proposed studies. These novel
materials can be used for a variety of antimicrobial applications under
different conditions. This project is highly interdisciplinary, and embraces
cutting-edge chemistry, microbiology, and biomaterials. Both graduate and
undergraduate students working in this research are expected to gain diverse
expertise and experience. The successful outcome of this project is expected to
advance the national interest because it will promote the scientific progress,
advance the health and welfare of the U.S. citizens, and potentially improve the
national biodefense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
emerging antibiotic resistance among patients with different diseases,
development of novel, potent and broad-spectrum, and low-cost antimicrobial
biomaterials with less probability to develop drug-resistance is critical. To
this end, this award will design dendrimer-based cationic nanomaterials with
diverse functional groups, and controlled charge densities and distributions.
The aims of this project are: 1) design and synthesis of nano-micelles with
diverse functional groups, and controlled charge densities and distributions; 2)
evaluation of the antibacterial activity and selectivity of the nanomaterials
being developed against a panel of significant Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria; and 3) investigation of the mechanism for antimicrobial activity of
these novel materials being developed with a focus on bacterial membrane
disruption and bactericidal properties of the novel nano-micelles being studied.
The project is highly interdisciplinary and embraces cutting-edge synthetic
chemistry, microbiology, biomaterials, biophysics, and biochemistry. Both
graduate and undergraduate students, with diverse scientific interests and
backgrounds, will gain excellent learning experience with the studies carried
out with this award.