* 1708450
* Quasi-2D n-Type Semiconducting Polymers: Novel Monomers, Synthesis, and Enhanced Electron Transport and Photovoltaic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Samson Jenekhe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel semiconductor materials
and devices that could potentially revolutionize energy conversion and storage
technologies are needed to address society's grand challenge of supplying low
cost and pollution-free clean energy for a growing world population. Such
materials are also needed to create new generations of electronic devices and
information technologies. This project aims to develop the basic knowledge
needed for creating new plastic-based electron-transporting semiconducting
materials that combine enhanced charge transport and light-absorbing properties
with ease of processing into mechanically rugged flexible thin films. Results
from the project may lead to new generations of high performance semiconducting
plastics suitable for applications in diverse energy conversion and storage
technologies. The project is also relevant to sustainability in that electron
transporting semiconducting polymers show promise to be low-cost, sustainable,
and scalable-manufactured materials with improved properties compared to
inorganic oxides now widely used in photoanodes for photoelectrochemical cells
for efficient production of fuels (e.g. hydrogen in aqueous cells). In
photovoltaic applications, electron transporting polymers could enable rugged
all-polymer devices which could be manufactured cheaply on a large scale
compared to current more expensive inorganic devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
journal publications and conference presentations. The project provides
extensive opportunities for training scientists and engineers, including women
and minorities, in the highly interdisciplinary fields of semiconductor
materials and energy science and technologies, which require knowledge of
chemistry, physics, materials science, mathematics, and engineering. The project
will also enable curriculum improvements by integration of research findings
into the graduate and undergraduate courses taught by the principal investigator
(PI). The PI has many research collaborations with scientists in Japan, South
Korea, UK, and France in the general areas of semiconductor materials,
electronic devices, and energy conversion devices and has hosted visits by
senior scientists and students from these countries. This project will
strengthen those international collaborations and provide a global training
perspective for the students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scarcity of suitable n-type
semiconducting polymers has limited the fundamental understanding of electron
transport in this class of materials and the development of p-n complementary
logic circuits for plastic electronics, highly efficient all-polymer solar
cells, photoanodes for photoelectrochemical cells for efficient hydrogen
production, electrodes for high energy/power density storage in rechargeable
batteries, and p-n thermoelectric devices. The proposed research will address
the basic scientific challenges in the field of n-type semiconducting polymers.
The overall goal of the project is to create and investigate a novel class of
n-type semiconducting polymers with quasi-2D electronic delocalization and
enhanced electron transport properties suitable for electronic devices and
energy conversion and storage applications. The planned research will: (1)
design, synthesize, and develop arylene bisbenzimidazoles as novel electron-
deficient building block monomers suitable for the design of conjugated
polymers; (2) design, synthesize, and characterize arylene bisbenzimidazole-
based quasi-2D n-type semiconducting polymers; (3) investigate the self-assembly
and bulk morphology, electronic structure and optical and electron transport
properties of the novel arylene bisbenzimidazole polymers; and (4) explore the
most promising new n-type conducting polymers as acceptor materials in all-
polymer solar cells and investigate the blend morphology, photovoltaic
properties, and underlying structure-property relationships. Results of the
proposed study could transform the basic understanding, development and
applications of n-type semiconducting polymers in diverse electronic devices as
well as energy conversion and storage devices, and contribute to sustainability.