* 1708844
* SusChEM: Sustainable Chemistry from Combined Inorganic and Organic Waste Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Rhett Smith, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 315,000.00

Agricultural and petroleum companies produce a tremendous amount of byproducts
that is both costly to dispose of and potentially environmentally damaging. This
NSF award supports research to develop new chemistry to combine waste from these
key American industries and to turn these waste materials into polymers/plastics
that are useful for consumer products. By developing novel approaches to
recyclable polymers/plastics that are affordable and sustainable, this project
aims to benefit society by significantly (1) reducing the environmental damage
caused by using non-sustainable plastics, (2) reducing the cost of consumer
products in many different markets, and (3) decreasing the amount of waste for
which agricultural companies and petroleum refineries pay for disposal. K-12
teachers are offered opportunities to learn about sustainable chemistry to use
in lessons in K-12 science classes. To increase participation in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics fields, this project provides research
opportunities to technical and predominantly undergraduate college students and
educational activities to engage underrepresented and economically disadvantaged
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric organic and inorganic wastes (POIWs)
generated by agricultural and petroleum refining processes have been explored as
additives for conventional construction materials, but such products are merely
physically blended materials, which are inherently prone to multiple,
inescapable environmental deterioration pathways, including fragmentation,
leaching, corrosion, and biological degradation. This research is developing
chemistry to form covalent bonds between these POIWs and the components of
traditional macromolecular compounds to confer upon them significantly greater
strength and environmental durability. The objective is being pursued by
covalently crosslinking agricultural waste-derived polymeric materials (such as
lignocellulosic materials) with petroleum refining waste-derived materials
(e.g., sulfur).