* 1708308
* Collaborative Research: Three-dimensional structure of Arctic tides and near-inertial oscillations, and their role in changing the Arctic Ocean and ice pack
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Rui Ponte, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 74,059.00

The Arctic Ocean is undergoing rapid change. Implications are significant for
strategic and tactical military planning; regional, and perhaps global, climate;
northern ecosystems and cultures; and economic interests. Climate models
qualitatively agree that these changes will persist. Projections of when
specific benchmarks, such as an ice-free summer Arctic Ocean, will be reached
vary by several decades. Reducing uncertainty in Arctic change projections is an
important task. This project identifies tides and near-inertial (NI) waves, with
periods of approximately 12 hours, as the major components of Arctic ocean
velocity fields, mixing rates and ice dynamics that are not presently
represented in global coupled climate models. The project will provide the
Arctic community with a database of time-dependent tidal and NI energy in select
current meter records. Also, it will provide a carefully-validated, high-
resolution, fully-forced Arctic coupled ocean/sea-ice model (OIM) for
quantifying the effects of high-frequency (HF) processes on seasonal and longer-
term variability of the Arctic Ocean and its ice pack. The project will
contribute to STEM workforce development through support for the training of a
post-doctoral associate and a graduate student, and through support for two
early-career scientists. K-12 outreach will be enabled through in-person and
webinar programs at schools in AK, TX, WA and OR. A public-friendly video with
visualization of model results will be prepared and distributed to schools and
other communities including coastal Alaskan villages, and highlighted on the
project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by observations of strong HF
ocean currents and ice drift velocities that are very sensitive
to&lt;br/&gt;changes in sea-ice state, sparse measurements of HF time series of
ocean mixing and ice deformation,&lt;br/&gt;and coarse-grid models with
parameterized tide forcing, this project tests the following hypothesis:
"Energetic, HF processes, including tides and wind-generated NI waves, are
critical contributors to the seasonal cycle and longer-term trends of the
Arctic's 3-D hydrography and circulation, sea-ice characteristics, and exchanges
of heat, freshwater and momentum between the atmosphere, ocean and sea-ice." The
program's specific goals are to map the time-dependent distribution of HF energy
in the ocean and ice throughout the Arctic; assess the role of HF processes in
the Arctic ice and upper ocean; develop understanding of the HF processes
coupling the sea ice, ocean, and atmosphere; and quantify the effect of HF
processes on seasonal cycles and longer-term trends. Taking advantage of rapidly
growing databases for ocean and sea-ice velocities, and improvements in
resolution and physical realism of OIMs, it integrates analyses of tidal and NI
signals in select Arctic ocean moorings and sea-ice drift data, validation of a
high resolution (~2 km x 106 vertical levels) pan-Arctic OIM with full
atmospheric and tidal forcing, and comparison of a suite of model simulations
with different forcing to identify dominant HF processes. Simulations with
simplified forcing (e.g., removing tides and low-pass filtering the winds to
reduce NI forcing) will identify key factors involved in HF influence on ocean
and sea-ice state on seasonal and longer time scales. Focus areas include the
effect of HF processes on ice formation and dispersion of river freshwater and
heat fluxes in shelf seas, on mixing of Atlantic- and Pacific-sourced waters
along the Arctic continental slopes, on feedbacks between ocean and sea-ice HF
processes, and on the seasonal cycle of atmospheric heat exchange with the ocean
and sea ice.