* 1708700
* Atomic control of ionic processes in resistive memory devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2020
* USD 345,000.00

Large amounts of data are being generated constantly in every aspect of today's
society, from manufacturing to social networks, from large organizations to
individual consumers, and this trend is continuing at an accelerated pace.
Better and faster memory technologies are needed to store and analyze the data
quickly and efficiently. At the same time, traditional memory technologies are
facing fundamental scaling limits and major practical constraints that make it
ever more challenging to keep up with the demand. This project aims to develop a
fundamentally new memory technology that can store data by changing the
material's internal configuration at the atomic scale, leading to significantly
improved device performance. The proposed program will significantly advance
fundamental scientific research and enhance the understanding of interface
control, ionic and electronic transport and hybrid device integration at the
nanoscale. Results obtained from this NSF-funded program will also likely lead
to successful technology transfers that can result in industry-leading memory
products, and have a transformative impact on the crucial semiconductor industry
sector. The tools, methods and techniques developed in the program can be
applied to a wide range of nanoscale devices and systems to stimulate research
in a broad range of areas. The project will in turn provide interdisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students, and draw broad participation of
students of different levels and backgrounds in collaborative research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed device is based on the concept of
resistive random-access memory (RRAM), which has shown excellent scalability and
several other performance metrics. However, the technology still faces
fundamental challenges, including large device variations, high programming
current and small on/off ratio, which prevent the device from practical
applications. The proposed project aims to achieve atomic-level control of the
fundamental ionic processes underlying the resistance changes in RRAM, and
produce devices with significant performance improvements and new device
functions. Specifically, the proposed device exploits atomically-thin graphene
as an ion-blocking layer to regulate oxygen vacancy (VO) generation and
migration through nanoscale openings in the graphene film. The filament
formation will further be confined inside the switching layer to localized
channels that are favorable for VO transport and storage through controlled
doping. The experimental studies will be supported by theoretical calculations
and modeling, including first-principles calculations that predict the VO
formation energy and O-O distance, as well as numerical modeling that predicts
the VO distribution and dynamic migration processes. The proposed approaches
will eliminate excessive VOs in the switching layer and will significantly
improve the on/off ratio, programming current, and device variability of RRAM
devices. In the meantime, by leveraging unique properties of emerging materials
with emerging devices, the proposed project advances the frontier of nanoscale
device research and naturally promotes a tight integration with physics,
materials research and device engineering.