* 1708025
* SusChEM: Organic Linkages to Control and Enhance Titanium Dioxide Nanocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Melissa Hines, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is an inexpensive crystalline material that has long
been used as white coloring in applications ranging from paint to powdered
doughnuts. When the titanium dioxide particle size is on the order of 0.00000005
inches, TiO2 exhibits enhanced catalytic activity, a chemical phenomenon in
which the TiO2 increases the efficiency and selectivity of chemical processes by
providing alternative reaction pathways. In recent years, the low cost and non-
toxic properties of titanium dioxide nanocatalysts have led to their
commercialization for solar water purification in third-world countries, for
flexible solar cells fabricated by roll-to-roll printing, and for self-cleaning
building materials. While chemists have long known that the reactivity of these
nanocrystals depends critically on their shape and structure, there is little
fundamental understanding of these dependencies and thus no rational means for
improving their performance. In this research project, Prof. Melissa Hines and
her graduate students at Cornell University are using atomic-scale microscopy to
study the structure and reactivity of a variety of small molecules during their
interaction with titanium dioxide surfaces. Using insights gained from these
experiments, she and her students are developing new methods to improve the
performance of these crystals, including the growth of surface-supported,
nanoscale networks. The fundamental understanding gained from these experiments
will help future applications, such as new types of batteries or solar cells
with improved performance. To share their enthusiasm about science with school
children, she and her group are developing hands-on science lessons for middle
school students, visiting schools to perform these experiments, and contributing
these lessons to an online lending library of science experiments for teachers
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof.
Melissa A. Hines of Cornell University and her students are using solution-based
chemical reactions and surface science techniques to produce the fundamental
understanding necessary for the development of sustainable, non-toxic, earth-
abundant nanocatalysts, photocatalysts, photovoltaic devices, and energy-storage
materials. The research uses solution-deposited, self-assembled monolayers of
molecular exemplars to study the atomic-scale structure of seven of the most
commonly used organic linkages to metal oxide surfaces. These monolayers are
deposited on the surfaces of well-controlled rutile (110) single crystals and
epitaxial anatase (001) films and studied with a combination of experimental and
computational techniques, including scanning tunneling microscopy, infrared and
x-ray photoemission spectroscopies, and first-principles modeling. This research
is producing the understanding necessary for the rational development of high
strength and/or high conductivity organic coatings on metal oxide nanocatalysts
and thin films, while also developing the high quality self-assembled monolayers
necessary for electronic characterization of molecule-titanium dioxide linkages.
The organic linkage chemistries are being explored for use in a new class of
surface-supported, highly porous, conducting nanoscale networks. Coupled with
this research, Hines and her group are developing new hands-on science
experiments that are aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards and
suitable for the middle school classroom. The group field tests these activities
in K-12 classrooms and through teacher development programs. The finished
experiments are made available to any teacher in the nation through an online
lending library.