* 1708823
* A Bio-orthogonal Approach for Identifying Direct Kinase Substrates and their phosphorylation sites
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kavita Shah, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Kavita Shah from Purdue University. The investigator is
developing a high-throughput chemical tool to identify and validate the direct
targets of a class of enzymes called kinases. Kinases are key cell regulators
that perform phosphorylation reactions with proteins in the cell. They have an
important role in biological outcomes that support each tissue's unique
physiology. It is estimated that ~33,000 proteins are phosphorylated by kinases
in a cell. At present, it is a formidable endeavor to identify each of the 518
human kinases. This project is developing special probes, with exquisite
sensitivity for specifically tagging and isolating kinase targets. This method
is widely applicable and could be used to identify and validate the targets of
any desired kinase in cells. This project allows graduate students,
undergraduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to acquire highly
interdisciplinary training. The scientific areas of training include chemical
synthesis, protein engineering, and enzymatic assays. This project is integrated
into an outreach program which consists of an interdisciplinary Chemical Biology
course. This course is designed for Chemistry majors and graduate students. It
also comprises part of a research training program for under-represented
undergraduates recruited through specific programs at Purdue University. The
Chemical Biology course is also used as a professional development opportunity
for high school teachers. The overall goal is to increase STEM education and
retention for high school students, under-represented minorities, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to develop a high-
throughput bio-orthogonal chemical approach that enables rapid identification of
low abundance kinase substrates and their phosphorylation sites on a proteome-
wide scale. A "catch and release" strategy, in combination with an innovative
chemical genetic approach, is used to specifically label with a unique phospho-
tag, the substrates of any desired kinase of interest. The exquisite sensitivity
of this approach stems from the phospho-tag, which will be used to selectively
isolate substrates from the whole proteome, without the need for any other
separation techniques. These substrates are validated in a high throughput
screen using CRISPR-engineered cell lines and orthogonal inhibitors. A few
chosen substrates are used as cues to uncover the mechanisms by which these
kinases regulate various cellular processes, potentially leading to the
discovery of novel pathways and networks. A rapid and comprehensive analysis of
a desired kinase's substrates and their phosphorylation sites is crucial for
dissecting the contribution of the kinase in activating distinct signaling
cascades.