* 1708090
* Disaster Stress Impacts Cognition across the Adult Lifespan
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Katie Cherry, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 11/30/2018
* USD 98,845.00

Natural disasters are stressful events with cognitive consequences that are
poorly understood. In August of 2016, historic flooding in the greater Baton
Rouge, LA area resulted in 13 deaths and an estimated 8.7 billion in damages.
While this flooding occurred in one region of the country, natural disasters
take many forms and can occur in all parts of the United States and around the
world. A clear understanding of the consequences of natural disasters on
cognition, especially for older adults, has important scientific and societal
impacts. The research supported by this award will examine functioning in
multiple cognitive domains following a disaster to assess the consequences of
stress on cognition and the impact on everyday functioning in a number of real-
world situations. The study will measure these cognitive domains at two time
points to allow for consideration of how individuals recover following such
events. Tracking the relationships among cognitive domains across time has
implications for basic understanding of the architecture of cognition as well as
how it is influenced by disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this Rapid Response
Research Grant (RAPID), Dr. Katie Cherry (Louisiana State University) and her
research team will explore several key elements of cognition that relate to
functioning "in the moment." They will obtain measures of immediate memory, or
working memory, sustained attentional resources, long-term memory, and
intelligence in a longitudinal design with data collection at two points
following disaster exposure. By examining working memory, and its relationship
to other key constructs of cognitive functioning, the research team will gain
valuable knowledge regarding the consequences of natural disasters on the
moment-to-moment cognition that is critical when responding to a disaster. Prior
research studies have noted the relationship between working memory and long-
term memory as predictors of fluid intelligence, or the ability to detect
patterns and solve new problems in the moment, with working memory accounting
for unique variance in fluid intelligence. In the current study, the
longitudinal association of working memory, sustained attention, long-term
memory, and fluid intelligence will provide further evidence of the critical
role that working memory plays in fluid intelligence, and will significantly
extend prior research by assessing the relationship between these objective
measures of cognition and self-appraisals of functioning and sleep disruption in
daily life. Additionally, the research team will measure these variables in
three groups of participants that vary in degree of flood-related impact and
prior losses from previous hurricanes in the South Louisiana region. The
research will further consider how adults across the lifespan may show different
effects of such disaster-related stress on cognitive functioning. With respect
to broader societal impacts, the proposed research will yield critical new
evidence to inform understanding of the time course of cognitive vulnerability
and recovery after single and multiple disaster exposures.