* 1708818
* Investigating the Nature of Excitations in Superfluid 3He Using MEMS Oscillators
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Yoonseok Lee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 03/31/2023
* USD 520,953.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;More than 50 years ago, a distinguished
theoretical physicist and a science writer George Gamow said that only number
theory and topology had no application to physics. Nonetheless, physicists
started to understand the significant role of topology in physics since 1980's,
and new types of materials called topological quantum matter are being
discovered. These materials possess unexpected properties which not only expand
our knowledge but also functionality of the materials. In general, these
topological materials are composed of multiple elements with complex structures.
However, a form of helium, called helium-three isotope, becomes a topological
matter when it is cooled down to a liquid form at extremely low temperature
close to absolute zero. At such conditions it forms a new state of matter called
a superfluid that exhibits fascinating quantum phenomena. In this project, the
PI's research group investigates the nature of superfluid helium-three using a
unique experimental technique employing small mechanical oscillators. This
project will expand our understanding on these unique properties of helium-
three. The research group is composed of graduate and undergraduate students
working as a team. They will be trained not only in the field of low-temperature
physics but also in silicon nanofabrication technology from design to
fabrication of specialized devices that have proliferated our modern world
through their widespread use as sensors and
actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Growing
interest in the surface Andreev bound states in p-wave superfluid 3He arises
from the fact that it is arguably the most complete platform available to
investigate the nature of topological excitations. The PI's group has developed
a versatile and powerful experimental probe based on Micro-Electro-Mechanical
System (MEMS) technology to study the surface Andreev bound states in this
system. The major activities are: (i) Investigation of the topological surface
states on a specular boundary for comprehensive understanding of the nature such
as experimental evidence for Dirac fermions and a possible field-driven
topological transition. (ii) Investigation of the interactions between two
surface states in close proximity. (iii) Development of a sensitive
quasiparticle flux sensor with a spatially resolved detection capability in the
form of MEMS arrays. This project, in close collaboration with theorists, will
certainly expand our understanding of these unique excitations in a pristine
topological superfluid. Confirmation of the theoretically predicted topological
transition induced by a small magnetic field would be one of the most convincing
manifestation of a symmetry-protected topological superfluid and Majorana
fermions in this system. The successful development of MEMS arrays will provide
unprecedented opportunities to achieve spatially-resolved detection in 3He and
4He with many foreseeable applications: visualization of vortices and angle-
resolved detection of quasiparticles in 3He, and momentum resolved roton-phonon
detection and quantum turbulence study in He-II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.