* 1708378
* Photophysics of Intraband Transitions in n-type Colloidal Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Philippe Guyot-Sionnest, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical description: This project addresses the preparation and
investigation of new materials made of semiconductor nanocrystals that can
detect heat emitted by warm objects. Examples of potential applications of
thermal infrared technologies are rapid avoidance sensors of people for self-
driving vehicles, sensing of specific greenhouse gas emissions, and eye-safe
high-bandwidth optical communications through the atmosphere. However, the
widespread use of infrared devices in these types of applications is limited by
the very high cost of the current technologies. The focus of the project is on
semiconductor quantum dots. The new material approach may completely transform
the accessibility of mid-infrared technologies in our daily life for safety,
surveillance, communication, health and pollution monitoring. The project
supports research on the synthesis of novel quantum dots and the testing of
their properties. In addition, the research offers advanced training
opportunities for graduate students in physics and chemistry, while also
supporting related outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: It has been recently shown that electron-doped colloidal quantum
dots exhibit strong optical response in the mid-infrared from 3-12 microns and
function as mid-infrared photodetectors and emitters. The infrared response
arises from the intraband optical transition between the two lowest electron
states, while the wavelength is tunable by the size of the particle. The project
expands the range of electron-doped quantum dot materials with tunable and
stable doping, including oxides and chalcogenides. In parallel, laser studies in
the mid-infrared enable the measurements of the photophysical properties of the
different materials. Studies of the quantum yield as a function of wavelength,
materials, ligands, temperature and surrounding matrix are performed to
understand and reduce non-radiative processes. Pump-probe studies address the
Auger recombination kinetics. Time-resolved spectroscopy allows measuring the
coupling to phonons and the homogeneous linewidths. This project defines the
physical boundaries for the possible properties of these n-doped colloidal
quantum dots, and therefore informs the degree to which these new infrared
chromophores could transform infrared technologies.