* 1708330
* Collaborative Research:   Impact of Surface Chemistry for Black Carbon Cloud Droplet Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Howard Fairbrother, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 273,592.00

This award is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry. Professors Howard Fairbrother of Johns Hopkins University
and Akua A. Asa-Awuku of the University of Maryland College Park are supported
to develop a molecular level understanding of how the chemical composition of
the surface of soot (black carbon, BC) influences its ability to act as Cloud
Condensation Nuclei (CCN) and form rain droplets. Black carbon particles are
released into the Earth's atmosphere from forest fires, biomass burning, and
coal and diesel engines. Experimental evidence provides strong support for the
idea that the ability of black carbon particles to uptake water depends on the
presence of water-attracting functional groups on the black carbon particle
surface. However, atmospheric black carbon is considered water-repellant in
scientific models and thus not aptly addressed in aerosol-cloud climate
interactions, contributing to the largest source of uncertainty in climate
predictions. The surface chemistry of black carbon particles is complex and
varies considerably due to differences in the carbon source, combustion
conditions and subsequent oxidation (aging) in air. This project seeks a better
understanding of how surface reactivity influences black carbon's ability to act
as cloud condensation nuclei. Establishing relationships between the surface
chemistry and CCN properties of BC particles in the atmosphere improves the
predictive capabilities of global climate models and enhances our scientific
understanding of air quality and climate, two important societal concerns. While
conducting the project, the students benefit from acquiring skills in surface
chemistry and atmospheric science. A plan that targets the participation of
female undergraduate students in science majors at the Notre Dame University of
Maryland, a local, primarily teaching, institution is initiated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a molecular level
understanding of how the chemical composition of the surface of black carbon
influences its ability to act as Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN). The goal is
accomplished by measuring and analyzing the CCN properties of a suite of black
carbon particles whose surface chemistry has been systematically varied via
exposure to different oxidizing conditions. The specific tasks are to develop
experimental methods to modify and characterize the chemistry and surface
properties of atmospherically-relevant aerosol, and to address unknown
contributions of BC to atmospheric CCN and the subsequent aerosol-indirect
effect. Detailed information on the surface composition and distribution of
surface oxides is obtained with various analytical techniques, including X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy, augmented by chemical derivatization and infrared
spectroscopies. The effect of other heteroatoms on CCN properties is also
explored as well as the relationship between CCN activation and more fundamental
BC surface properties, such as water adsorption energies.