* 1708887
* Fully-integrated Isolators for Silicon Photonics using WAMO (Wrap Around Magneto-Optics)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Title: Fully-integrated Isolators for Silicon Photonics using WAMO (Wrap Around
Magneto-Optics)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Imagine
an integrated circuit where light carries the signal rather than electrons. This
promises to allow many signals to transmit faster, simultaneously, and without
heat. The major missing link in achieving impactful applications of such
"photonic integrated circuits" with high densities is an integrated isolator.
Isolators use magneto-optical garnets to control the direction of light, similar
to diodes in electronics. Although several integrated isolators have been
proposed, they do not work for all light polarizations, and in fact the large
majority only work for the polarization that is the opposite of all silicon-
integrated lasers. Here, novel isolators are proposed starting with a uniquely
simple design that has a high probability of success with today's lasers, and
escalating to a final design that includes an integrated magnet and offers
polarization diversity (meaning all polarizations can be isolated with one
device). The technical novelty of this project are three-fold. First, materials
challenges will be overcome to integrate magneto-optical garnets onto silicon.
Second, new silicon photonic designs will initially enable the isolation of the
laser-matched polarization and later the isolation of all polarizations. Third,
magnetic design will be used to incorporate closed flux structures to magnetize
the garnets while minimizing the magnetic cross-talk between
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Photonic systems keep society connected
with optical fibers and inside computers with optical interconnects. Photonics
also impacts medicine, chemistry, and many other fields. An integrated isolator
is the missing link that needs to be solved before photonic systems with fully-
integrated laser sources can be a reality, and this means the results here will
have very broad impact. The only passive (zero-power) way to produce a
nonreciprocal device, such as an isolator, is to include a nonreciprocal
(magneto-optic) material. Magneto-optic garnets (e.g., Cerium-doped Yttrium Iron
Garnet) yield orders of magnitude better performance than any other material.
However, these garnets are difficult to integrate with silicon as single phase
films, and multiple phases cause loss. Also, isolator designs proposed to date
are too large for practical implementation, and they mostly use non-reciprocal
phase shift in a geometry that only applies to transverse magnetic polarizations
while integrated lasers output only transverse electric light. Here, the
combination of proven high-gyrotropy, low-loss, and silicon-integrated garnet
films (Stadler) with novel silicon photonic designs (Li) will ensure all-passive
silicon isolators with polarization diverse functionality. Three layers of
innovation will be explored. First, a transverse electric isolator is proposed
where garnet is deposited between the branches of an interferometer to provide a
simple asymmetry such that, with one applied magnetic field, a "push-pull" non-
reciprocal transverse electric phase shift will occur. The next layer of
innovation will apply the fundamental photonic results from above and will
extend the design to include an integrated magnetostatically-engineered magnetic
bias. Specifically, a closed flux loop structure (similar to a closed horseshoe
magnet) will be used to magnetize the garnet claddings without requiring an
external field and without producing fringing fields in the circuit. The final
step towards polarization diversity is a nearly closed flux design that will
yield the first device to provide polarization diversity in an all-passive,
fully-integrated isolator with wrap around magneto-optics.