* 1708729
* Designer Soft Microparticles for a Changing Environment
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* David Weitz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric particles and capsules with diameters
of tens to hundreds of micrometers, similar to the size of a human hair, are
extensively used for the encapsulation and protection of chemically or
environmentally sensitive active molecules or nanoparticles, with uses, for
example, for food and detergent additives, for cosmetics, as well as for drug
delivery. During storage and delivery, the encapsulant protects the cargo, and
releases it at the desired location, often through some external stimulus that
breaks or degrades the encapsulant. Microcapsules, particles with thin shells
and large hollow cores, are particularly valuable because only small amounts of
encapsulant is needed to protect large amounts of the desired payload. In this
project, novel microcapsules are developed with shells that release the capsule
content reversibly in response to different external stimuli without shell
destruction, leaving the capsule intact for reuse or repeated on-off switching
of the release. These capsules are ideal for applications such as waste removal
in water, where they can be opened to collect the waste, closed to remove it,
and reopened to release the waste in appropriate storage containment. These
capsules are obtained from complex emulsions, such as water-cored oil drops,
that are fabricated using microfluidic devices with channel architectures of
comparable size to the drops. This technology enables precise manufacturing of
capsules with control over size, shell thickness, and composition with very low
dispersity. The students involved in this project, both undergraduates and
graduates, are trained in functional polymer synthesis, microfluidic technology,
and materials characterization, giving them a broad set of tools that is
indispensable for modern multidisciplinary research in materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Encapsulation of
chemically or environmentally sensitive active molecules or nanoparticles is
crucial in numerous applications, from food additives, to detergents and drug
delivery; traditionally sacrificial encapsulants are used in a one-time, one-way
encapsulate-and-release design. A primary aim of this project is to develop and
fabricate a new class of dynamic encapsulant systems based on functional polymer
microcapsules that exhibit active and reversible interactions with their
environment. Microfluidic devices are used to create well-defined multiple
emulsion drops of immiscible fluids that form templates for soft encapsulation
materials. The physics of the assembly of functional materials in complex
emulsions, and the dynamic functionalities of the materials themselves, are
investigated, as is the influence of liquid confinement on these processes and
properties. An additional aim of the project is to investigate the interactions
of these functional polymeric microcapsules with solutes, the environment, and
external stimuli for responsive and selective permeability in and out of the
capsule. Encapsulation systems with such responsive permeability enable the
reversible, on-demand release of actives, and allow the replenishment of actives
inside the capsules through triggered uptake and trapping of cargo. This
research extends the application of such encapsulants from one-way delivery
systems to utilization in purification and separation. An additional objective
of this project is the development of designer porous media with controlled
mechanical properties to study fundamental mechanisms of the behavior of porous
media and multiphase flow within it. These model systems provide insight into
processes that are widely practiced but not well understood, including the
fracturing of porous media due to pressure shocks, and the effects of polymer
solutions on multiphase fluid flow in porous media.