* 1708968
* Understanding Surface Wetting and Vapor Adsorption Induced Degradation Pathways of Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Perovskites through Predictive Atomistic Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Eric Hellstrom, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 227,972.00

Hybrid perovskites, a class of materials that have organic and inorganic
components, have emerged as promising light absorbers for photovoltaic cells and
emitters for light-emitting diodes. These new materials feature the integration
of useful organic and inorganic material characteristics, thereby enabling
unique electronic, magnetic, and/or optical properties. The surface properties
of hybrid perovskites are key for practical applications yet have been largely
unexplored. The instability of hybrid perovskites also remains a technological
bottleneck for their commercialization. This research project involves
computational and data-enabled research and aims to understand the surface
stability and interfacial, or surface-to-surface, compatibility of hybrid
perovskites with water and vapor under different ambient humidity levels. Such
understanding will further enable the design and use of stable hybrid
perovskites systems for practical applications in solar energy harvesting and
energy-efficient lighting. This project supports the training and education of
undergraduate and graduate students as well as broader educational efforts for
the research community. The researchers on this project are developing an
Integrated Computational Materials Engineering-related curriculum for the new
Materials Science &amp; Engineering program at Florida State University (FSU).
They are also hosting the FSU Young Scholars Program to encourage Florida high
school students to pursue careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves theoretical and computational research to shed light on
experimental observations and to predict materials properties at the hybrid
perovskite-water interface that are difficult to access experimentally. Density
functional theory-based quantum mechanical simulations have been used
extensively to model hybrid perovskites. However, the time scales associated
with dynamic processes are comparable to, or much longer than, the typical 100
picosecond time scale accessible using ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.
In addition, the length scales that can be modeled using quantum mechanical
simulations is still limited to a few nm, which does not allow for direct
prediction of the formation of material structures that are larger than 10
nanometers, such as polycrystalline grain-boundaries. Therefore, quantum
mechanics-informed classical molecular dynamics simulations would be an ideal
technique to bridge this gap. The development of a predictive molecular dynamics
force field to capture the structural, surface, and interfacial properties of
hybrid perovskites inevitably involves parameterization based on reproducing
relevant experimental data or quantum mechanical information. To evaluate the
fidelity and sensitivity of the developed force-field parameters, uncertainty
quantification methods, such as Bayesian statistics, are being used, and Markov
chain Monte Carlo sampling of the various force-field parameters against target
material properties are being conducted. The synergistic combination of
potential of mean force calculations with surface wetting, vapor adsorption, and
reaction kinetic theories can lead to accurate perovskite lifetime predictions.
The development of the new force fields will be a major contribution to the
field, because the new force fields can then be transferrable to model the
thermal, ionic transport, and interfacial properties of single and
polycrystalline perovskites. With this fundamental understanding in hand, are
designing chemically-stable hybrid perovskites passivated by water- and vapor-
resistive ligands.