* 1708443
* Electronic Structure in Single Molecule Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Oliver Monti, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 507,463.00

Nontechnical Description: As consumer electronics rapidly decrease in size,
there is a need to fabricate ever smaller electronic components, with devices
based on single molecules as the ultimate miniaturization limit. Despite
impressive progress, targeted materials design for molecular-scale electronics
is at present still challenging. In order to overcome this barrier, the research
team investigates current flow and electronic properties probed in the single
molecule limit and through newly developed organic molecules. The molecules and
new experimental approaches are designed to elucidate ways in which the function
and properties of devices operating at the single molecule limit, such as
transistors, diodes and sensors, can be tailored and optimized. The project
establishes design rules for developing next-generation electronics that far
exceed current miniaturization approaches. The research program trains graduate
and undergraduate scholars, including women and those from underrepresented
minorities, in interdisciplinary areas of materials science. Additionally,
community college students from rural Arizona are integrated in the cutting-edge
research by creating a publically available database and graphical poster
displays of emerging molecular design rules for molecular-scale
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: There is an urgent need
to miniaturize electronic circuits to the molecule-scale limit, and to develop
functionalities beyond Si-based electronics. Molecular electronics aims to
tackle this challenge by harnessing the synthetic richness of organic molecules
and integrating them into molecular-sized devices. Currently missing however is
a detailed understanding of the electronic structure of molecules attached to
electrodes, at the nanoscale, under bias and out of equilibrium. Using single
molecule breakjunction measurements, the research team addresses this issue by
first developing new molecular designs that create highly defined junctions. It
then systematically varies molecular properties to tailor changes to the energy
levels and wavefunction of the combined contact-molecule-contact system.
Finally, it advances new approaches to spectroscopically access the electronic
structure in the single molecule junction. The principal investigators
synergistically combine synthesis of new materials, highly sensitive
measurements of transport in single molecules, and advanced statistical analysis
methods. The project establishes the molecular-level understanding needed to
push new electronic technologies to the ultimate size-limit. By training the
next generation of materials scientists, including women and students from
underrepresented minorities, and by integrating community college students from
rural Arizona in cutting-edge research, the research team develops the next
generation of leaders in materials science.