* 1708419
* Exploring van der Waals Ferromagnetic Semiconductor Chromium Triiodide
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Xiaodong Xu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 05/31/2021
* USD 384,746.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Despite nearly two millennia of recorded
study, magnetic materials continue to generate new fundamental discoveries and
drive crucial progress in technologies such as sensing and information storage.
Equally as intriguing is the recent emergence of a family of atomically-thin
"two-dimensional" materials. It has grown rapidly to encompass materials with a
broad range of technologically relevant properties, at the thickness of one
thousandth of a human hair. However, a key component for the nano-nanotechnology
tool box, an atomically thin magnet, is lacking. Our goal is to investigate a
promising candidate, the magnetic semiconductor CrI3. Employing optical methods
sensitive to magnetic properties, we will study its behavior as a function of
thickness, from several tens of nanometers down to a single atomic layer. In
addition, we will combine atomically-thin CrI3 with existing two-dimensional
semiconductors to form atomically-thin heterostructures. This will enable us to
explore emerging effects and functionalities occurring at the interface between
the two materials. The proposed multidisciplinary research program provides an
excellent platform for undergraduate and graduate students to explore new
magnetic materials for potential impact in future computing platforms, data
storage and consumer electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The isolation of graphene has opened a new frontier in the
physical sciences at the limit of a single atomic layer. Since this discovery,
many 2D materials including semimetals, semiconductors and superconductors have
been realized, but a 2D crystal displaying intrinsic ferromagetism has yet to be
reported. Our goal is to investigate a promising candidate, the layered
ferromagnetic semiconductor CrI3. Employing magneto-optical spectroscopy
(photoluminescence, Raman, and optical Kerr rotation), we seek to understand its
fundamental magnetic properties as a function of layer number, including Curie
temperature, magnetic ground states, domain dynamics, and the possibility of
electrically-tunable magnetism. Using this fundamental knowledge, we will
engineer heterostructures formed by monolayer semiconductor WSe2 and ultra-thin
CrI3. Spin sensitive optical techniques will enable us to investigate emerging
spin/pseudospin phenomena in monolayer WSe2 caused by magnetic proximity
effects, and develop new optically-driven spintronic devices such as spin-
photovoltaics. In addition to breaking new ground in the experimental
investigation of magnetism in the 2D limit, the proposed work may impact future
computing platforms, data storage, and consumer electronics by enabling compact,
energy efficient devices.