* 1708788
* Isotope labeling for quantitative determination of defect sink strength and fundamentals studies on defect-sink interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Lin Shao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 385,003.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear power is one solution to meet
the ever-increasing demand for energy. One key issue in the so called "nuclear
renaissance" is materials development towards longer life time under harsh
environments. In order to withstand neutron damage at high temperatures, various
nanostructured materials have been developed by introducing defect sinks to
absorb/remove defects. However, quantitative determination of defect sink
strength is still a technological bottleneck. This project uses an isotope
labeling technique to quantitatively measure the sink strength in ion irradiated
stainless steels as a key approach for a full scope investigation on defect-sink
interactions. Such capability is critical to develop radiation tolerant
materials. Even for the same type of defect sinks, fine tuning of their
microstructures to maximize sink strength requires knowledge of one-to-one
correlation between structures and sink strength. The study will contribute to
the general understanding of defects in metals. The project offers students
unique opportunities to combine training and research in nuclear engineering,
nanomaterials, atomic scale characterization and atomic scale modeling, for
solving issues of real-world importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For Fe
based stainless steels of nature Fe abundance, implantation of 57Fe isotope
atoms will introduce 57Fe interstitials. Upon annealing, the amount of 57Fe
enrichments at defect sinks directly reflects the sink strength for defect
trapping. Hence the defect sink strength under different
irradiation/annealing/stress conditions can be systematically studied. Three-
dimensional atom probe tomography (APT) will be used to map 57Fe isotope
distributions. APT is coupled with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and
3-D TEM tomography to establish one-to-one correlation between defect sink
structure and sink strength. The project will study two defect sink types: (1)
grain boundaries in grain-engineered stainless steels in order to understand
effects of boundary misorientation angles on sink strength and (2) oxide
particles in oxide-dispersion-strengthened alloys (ODS) in order to understand
the effects of oxide-matrix interfaces on sink strength. The project further
integrates molecular dynamics simulations to shed light onto fundamentals. The
defect sink strength will be used as inputs in kinetic Monte Carlo simulations
for obtaining structural evolutions which can be linked to and compared with
experimental observations. In conjunction with materials synthesis, modeling,
and atomic scale characterization, the project will obtain the fundamental
understanding needed to maximize radiation tolerance of reactor core components.
The project offers students unique opportunities to combine training and
research in nuclear engineering, nanomaterials, atomic scale characterization
and atomic scale modeling, for solving issues of real-world importance.