* 1708212
* Maximizing Science Output of LIGO: Improved Detectors and Data Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

This is a research project in support of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
wave Observatory (LIGO), aimed at maximizing its scientific output, by the
formulation of strategies for improving LIGO detectors and the development and
implementation of new ways to analyze LIGO data. This project will: (i)
contribute to the advancement of precision measurement technology, (ii) allow
LIGO to deepen our understanding of general relativity, and (iii) push the
frontier of experimental physics at the interface between gravitational and
quantum physics. This project will be carried out by the Caltech Relativity
Theory (CaRT) group and will serve as a training ground for young physicists and
astrophysicists, by teaching them a wide variety of research techniques. Members
of the CaRT will also pursue a wide range of activities that reach out to the
broader scientific community and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project will consists of four directions. (A) It will
formulate and evaluate innovative approaches to improving LIGO's sensitivity, by
studying how Advanced LIGO detectors should be upgraded, and by inventing new
quantum metrology techniques for use in future detectors. The program will also
explore new approaches to gravitational wave (GW) detection, and explore the
quantum behavior of human-sized objects, and search for new physics for
macroscopic objects in the quantum regime. (B) Numerical relativity binary black
hole simulations from the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC) will be used for LIGO
data analysis: (i) Simulations following up on LIGO detections will be used to
verify the accuracy of phenomenological waveform models, to explore parameter
biases of these models, and to perform alternative parameter estimation
strategies as needed; and (ii) Surrogate waveform models, which interpolate
between numerical relativity waveforms to produce a waveform at requested
parameters to high accuracy, will be implemented into LAL and be used in
parameter estimation studies on GW150914, GW151226, and future events. (C) More
efficient search algorithms will be designed for LIGO searches for continuous
gravitational waves, in part by appropriately synthesizing several recent
developments in this area. (D) Aspects of general relativity will be tested and
demonstrated using LIGO data, including: reconstructing the dispersion relation
of gravitational waves, probing the structure of black holes via measuring tidal
coupling, detecting the memory effect, and search for general deviations from
general relativity, from an ensemble of detected events.