* 1708673
* Supramolecular Approaches to Control Reactivity in the Organic Solid State
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Leonard MacGillivray, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 594,518.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The general goal of this project is to increase
the value of chemical reactions conducted in the organic solid state. Synthetic
chemistry is an underpinning in chemical science that enables advancements in
society as related to developing new medicines (e.g. active pharmaceutics) and
technologically-important materials (e.g. strong and lightweight). This project
will develop strategies to synthesize molecules in which chemical reactions are
conducted in the solid state. Whereas synthetic chemistry is typically performed
in the liquid phase or solution, the solvent-free and "frozen" environment of
the solid state provides opportunities to synthesize molecules with unique
structures and properties. Strategies to conduct reactions in organic solids
can, thereby, accelerate progress of how synthetic chemistry defines and is
applied to developments in society and technology. The project will integrate
underrepresented groups, develop undergraduate laboratory experiments, and
maintain active collaborations with undergraduate colleges. The project will
also introduce middle-school students to careers in chemical science (e.g. X-ray
crystallography).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
project will increase the value of reactions conducted in solids by developing
solid-state reactions that generate products with synthetically-valuable organic
functional groups and/or are based on reduced symmetries. The research will
apply multi-component solids in the form of cocrystals and/or metal-organic
materials to direct the solid-state reactions. Specifically, (i) metal-organic
solids will direct photodimerizations of imines that form cyclobutanes lined
exclusively with aldehyde groups, (ii) cocrystals will direct photodimerizations
that generate unsymmetrical ladderanes, and (iii) cocrystals will support cross-
photocycloadditions. The research is motivated by the fact that although multi-
component solids are rapidly emerging as media to reliably control reactivity in
solids relative to the liquid phase, important avenues of needed investigation
based on forming products decorated with challenging organic functional groups
and of reduced symmetry remain unaddressed. When the proposed research is
completed, it will be possible to more broadly apply reactions in solids to
problems of organic synthesis (e.g. complex molecules), green chemistry (e.g.
solvent-free preparation), inorganic chemistry (e.g. metal-organic reactivity),
and materials science (e.g. single-crystal reactions).