* 1708916
* Connections between Symplectic and Low Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Katrin Wehrheim, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2023
* USD 277,532.00

This project addresses fundamental questions in the geometry and topology of
three and four dimensional shapes as well as those that represent phase spaces
of classical mechanics systems. It broadens access the foundational mathematical
technologies through expository research, training, and mentoring, and generally
promotes diversity and a supportive climate in mathematics. These community-
serving research efforts are moreover embedded in a variety of educational,
training, and mentoring components. Promoting women in mathematics, diversity
and supportive climate in general, is another main goal of this proposal.
Besides increasing advocacy and administrative service on such issues, this goal
is pursued by means of weekly community building and career development
meetings, an annual mentoring retreat, and the development of equity training
modules for faculty.  &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The symplectic category and
pseudoholomorphic quilt invariants introduced by the PI provide a general
framework for studying questions relating the symplectic category to others,
e.g. categories of sheaves involved in mirror symmetry (thus encoding relations
between symplectic and algebraic geometry), or cobordism categories involved in
topological field theories (thus in particular constructing invariants of 3- and
4-manifolds). One core goal of the research is to extend the categorical
structures to general symplectic manifolds with the help of analysis for
singular quilts and more refined algebraic structures - both motivated by
capturing obstructions arising from novel figure eight bubbles. This extension
can be summarized in a notion of A-infinity-2-category which in particular
contains all Fukaya A-infinity-categories of symplectic manifolds. The
proposal's aim is a fully rigorous and accessible construction of this category.
Another goal is to establish an abstract construction principle for topological
invariants via the symplectic category and algebraic tools for relating them to
each other as well as gauge theoretic invariants. This provides a unified
understanding for both Ozsvath-Szabo's Heegard-Floer theory and its relation to
Seiberg-Witten invariants, as well as conjectural symplectic versions of
Donaldson invariants and instanton Floer homology. In addition, it can help
systematize future constructions and proofs of relationships between such
invariants. The proposal also aims to apply this conceptual framework in some
concrete situations. In particular, it addresses Atiyah-Floer type conjectures
in dimension 3 - solidifying a guiding vision for the field - and extends them
to dimension 4 - providing a vision for future developments.  More concretely,
this last part aims at establishing symplectic analogues of both Donaldson and
Seiberg-Witten 4-manifold invariants, which are expected to be more amenable to
calculations. Finally, the project aims to solidify and provide accessible
expositions of the differential-topological foundations for regularizations of
moduli spaces of elliptic PDEs. After finalizing the blueprint for rigorous
Kuranishi-type regularizations, the focus will lie on increasing access to the
polyfold technology. In particular, a group of junior researchers is being
involved in efforts to build a toolbox (such as fiber products and equivariant
transversality) and sample applications from equivariant Gromov-Witten
invariants via the Arnold conjecture to Fukaya categories.