* 1708546
* RUI: The Role of Trehalose-Based Oligosaccharides and Glycomacromolecules on Protein Stability
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Nicole Snyder, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 294,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division funds this
research. Professor Nicole L. Snyder of Davidson College investigates a unique
carbohydrate, a disaccharide known as trehalose. This research provides a better
understanding of the roles of trehalose and trehalose-based analogs in helping
organisms survive environmental stresses such as extreme lack of moisture. The
experiments use a combination of advanced synthetic and biochemical techniques
to systematically study how the structure of trehalose and trehalose-based
analogs influence their protective function. The undergraduate students
supported by this work receive valuable training in advanced organic synthesis
with an emphasis on carbohydrate chemistry, molecular spectroscopy, and
biochemical and biophysical techniques that enhances their education and
prepares them for a competitive workforce. In addition, this project supports
the development of a new course on the emerging subject of Glycomics at Davidson
College. An integral part of the project is also a dynamic outreach program that
engages the wider community, including local teachers of the Charlotte Teachers
Institute, in appreciating the broad role that carbohydrates play in life
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique properties of trehalose and its
ability to preserve a wide array of biomolecules under extreme stress (e.g.
desiccation, thermal stress, and oxidation) have captured the attention of
scientists for over one hundred years. Recently, several novel trehalose-based
oligosaccharides (TOS) with unique structures and preservation properties have
been identified, but their specific role in molecular preservation is unknown.
The fundamental research in this work uses a multifaceted, systematic approach
that combines chemical synthesis, molecular spectroscopy and biochemistry to
synthesize and analyze a series of novel trehalose-based oligosaccharides (TOS)
and trehalose-based precision glycomacromolecules (TPG) to determine how the
unique structure of these compounds correlates to their function. Chemical
synthesis is used to provide control over the structure of each compound. Once
synthesized, each compound is analyzed by NMR spectroscopy to provide detailed
structural information. A combination of biophysical studies, including
saturation transfer difference (STD)-NMR, differential scanning calorimetry
(DSC), and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), is used to study the solution
and solid state associations between TOS/TPG analogs and several proteins
selected based on their various stabilities towards desiccation. Finally, enzyme
kinetics studies measure the function of enzymes stabilized with TOS/TPG to
ensure secondary structure integrity as well as function after desiccation. The
results from this research may provide a first look at the factors that govern
the structure-function relationships of TOS/TPG and how these unique compounds
help organisms survive extreme environmental stress.