* 1708870
* RUI: Self-Organization and Memory in Disordered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Nathan Keim, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2023
* USD 348,357.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Many materials and systems are driven
repeatedly: buildings and bridges are repeatedly loaded and unloaded,
temperatures change between day and night, and many skills are learned only
through recurring practice. After many such repetitions, a system may have
formed a specific "memory" of the driving that will directly influence its
future behavior. The principal investigator and students perform experiments on
two physical systems that are very likely to form memories in this way: a two-
dimensional version of a solid material, and the boundary between wet and dry
regions on a rough, flat surface. The goal of this project is to develop new
ideas about memory formation generally, both as a way to program the behavior of
matter, and as a way to compare and contrast materials at a fundamental level.
The project involves undergraduate students who carry out most of the
experiments and the computer analysis of the resulting large data sets,
developing in-demand skills and gaining experience working at the research
frontier. This project also creates additional laboratory experiences, public
outreach opportunities, and professional development opportunities for a broader
array of Cal Poly students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how disordered systems and materials self-
organize and evolve under repeated cyclic driving, and may form memories of that
driving. The project involves experiments on two systems: a sheared 2D
disordered solid formed by colloidal particles adsorbed at an oil-water
interface; and the interface between two fluids (e.g. water and air) inside a
roughened channel, in which the pinned contact line evolves as fluid is injected
and withdrawn. In both experiments the PI and students apply many cycles of
driving, making microscopic and mechanical observations to test how these
systems are changed and programmed by the driving. The main goal is to test and
develop the idea that there exist generic classes of memory behavior.
Specifically, the two experimental systems feature comparable yielding and
depinning transitions, and so are an opportunity to connect common physics to a
common class of memory. The PI's main goal is a deeper understanding of how
processing and environment can program the structure and behavior of matter.
Undergraduate students play an integral role in experiments and analysis, and as
part of this project the PI creates additional laboratory experiences, public
outreach opportunities, and professional development opportunities for a broader
array of Cal Poly students.