* 1708448
* Emergent Electronic Behavior of Van der Waals Heterostructures from Enforced Interlayer Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Junqiao Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical description: Water solidifies into ice when it is cooled below
zero degree centigrade; but what is less known is that even at room temperature,
application of a pressure of one GigaPascal (GPa, = 10,000 atmosphere) would
drive water into ice! Now, imagine applying pressures up to a hundred times
higher than that to solid materials: a rich collection of new phenomena and
effects would emerge, which would shed light on our understanding of basic
physics and development of useful new functionalities of these materials. This
project does this on a special class of materials, layered transition metal
dichalcogenides, where the interactions between neighboring layers are
intrinsically weak, hence allowing an even wider range of modulation of the
structure and properties by the high pressure. Integrated with the research
effort, the principal investigator also runs an educational activity to create a
series of hands-on exhibits and experiments for visits of middle-high school
students in partnership with the local Techbridge Girls
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: In van der Waals (vdW)
materials such as transition metal dichalcogenides, physical properties such as
band structures are sensitive to interlayer coupling between neighboring
monolayers across the vdW gap. If the interlayer coupling of vdW materials can
be artificially enhanced, one can effectively modulate the electronic
dimensionality, and study scientific problems of emergent physical behavior of
the system under the dimensionality modulation that would not arise otherwise.
The goals of this project are to enable, discover and understand emergent
electronic behavior of vdW heterostructures by maximally modulating their
interlayer coupling with high pressures. These goals are achieved by utilizing
diamond anvil cells to apply hydrostatic pressures up to 60 GPa onto vdW
heterostructures, and probing their vibrational, optical and transport
properties. Exotic new phenomena have been predicted to emerge at such extreme
conditions, but have not been experimentally tested or were tested only at very
low temperatures where the thermal energy is insufficient to destroy the
interlayer coupling. In this project, the principal investigator and his team
test and probe these predictions by drastically enhancing the interlayer
coupling energy in the vdW structures such that these effects could be
stabilized even at room temperature. The research is expected to bring new
knowledge on vdW materials behaviour under unprecedented conditions and to push
the boundary of layered materials functionality beyond current establishments.