* 1708048
* GOALI: Resolving Outstanding Questions in Spin-Exchange Optical Pumping of 129Xe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Brian Saam, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 465,599.00

Magnetic resonance imaging of gas inside the lungs or other similar spaces where
gases can be admitted utilizes as the active medium noble gases that have had
their magnetic nuclei aligned to point in the same direction, a process known as
noble-gas MRI. Effective use of the process today is only possible if the
sensitivity is enhanced by spin-exchange optical pumping (SEOP) for preparing
the spin-polarized noble gas samples (helium-3 or xenon-129) to be used in the
imaging procedure. This research focuses on the SEOP process itself, in which
angular momentum is transferred first from light to alkali-metal atoms that
absorb the light and then transfer the momentum to the noble-gas atoms through
collisions. The collisions align (or polarize) the magnetic nuclei, bringing
their north and south magnetic poles in mutual alignment, thereby rendering them
useful for MRI studies. This project will address some open questions relating
to how the efficiency of SEOP depends on the laser power, the laser bandwidth,
the choice of alkali-metal atoms, and the pressure of the buffer gas in the gas
mixtures. SEOP of xenon-129 (129Xe) is of particular interest because it is less
well understood, and because it may supersede helium-3 as the atom of choice for
noble-gas MRI. The industrial partner for this GOALI project, Polarean, Inc., is
at the forefront of 129Xe-MRI technological development. This project will
enable university researchers to collaborate with Polarean, Inc. to study
physics issues related to SEOP of 129Xe, and to use the resulting knowledge to
improve a commercial polarization device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three main
research aims are: (1) Pushing Rubidium-129Xe SEOP toward ultra-fast rates: The
goal is to demonstrate and implement quantitative gains in the spin-exchange
efficiency in the less-studied low-buffer-gas-density regime (~ 0.1 amagat). The
ultra-narrow OptiGrate laser allows significant light deposition even for the
much narrower rubidium D1 absorption line in this regime. (We note that
Optigrate is a second industrial collaborator in this project.) (2) Direct
comparison of rubidium to cesium for use in SEOP: The goal is to make
quantitative measurements of Rb-129Xe and Cs-129Xe SEOP parameters using the
common platform of the dual-head high-power Rb/Cs diode laser, in order to
determine whether and to what degree Cs is advantageous. (3) The role of alkali-
metal clusters in limiting SEOP efficiency: The goal is to obtain direct
evidence for these potentially deleterious nanoclusters in a SEOP polarizer and
incorporate their effects into the "standard model" for 129Xe SEOP. Meeting each
of these goals has a direct impact on the efficiency of 129Xe SEOP, elucidating
some interesting (and heretofore elusive) physics while also leading to improved
production of HP 129Xe for applications such as lung MRI.