* 1708091
* Understanding the Deformation Behavior of Alumina-Forming Austenitic Stainless Steels
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 526,087.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Even with the increasing use of renewable
energy, the primary energy sources for the foreseeable future for power
generation are likely to be fossil fuels. Thus, for economic reasons, it is
critical to use these resources as efficiently as possible. Increasing a power
plant's operating temperature increases its efficiency. The limiting factor for
higher temperature is materials that can operate at higher temperatures, and are
economically viable. The aim of this project is to elucidate the deformation
mechanisms in alumina-forming austenitic (AFA) stainless steels that are being
considered for this application. The work will train both a Ph.D. student and
several undergraduates in state of the art
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The project will
ascertain the deformation mechanisms associated with grain boundary (GB)
precipitation strengthening, and attempt to understand the fundamental
deformation behavior in alloys containing both a precipitate free zone (PFZ) and
multiple types of precipitates in both the GBs and the matrix each of which can
contribute differently to the deformation behavior. The work will be performed
on the model AFA stainless steel Fe-20Cr-30Ni-2Nb-5Al. Detailed microstructural
and defect characterization by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) wlll be performed before and after mechanical
testing. TEM in-situ straining and SEM in-situ straining studies performed at
both room temperature and 750C will examine both dislocation/precipitate and
dislocation/GB interactions, including understanding the role of the PFZ along
the GBs. The work will train both a Ph.D. student and several undergraduates in
state of the art techniques.