* 1708457
* Controlling the Band Structure of 2D Semiconductors by their Dielectric Environment
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Tony Heinz, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 405,000.00

Non-technical description: The field of atomically thin two-dimensional (2D)
materials started ten years ago with the discovery of graphene. The range of
such materials that are only one or a few atoms thick has now expanded to
encompass 2D semiconductors, metals, and insulators. The unique combination of
electrical, optical, and mechanical properties of these materials has opened up
many new scientific frontiers and led to the development of a variety of
nanoscale devices - from transistors to light emitting diodes and sensors.
Critical to the further development of the field is the ability to manipulate
the way electrons behave in these materials, particularly by controlling their
available energy levels. The electronic properties of a material are normally
altered by modifying the material itself, for example, by changing the
material's chemical composition. This project explores a new approach to
controlling the behavior of electrons in 2D materials. Rather than changing the
material itself, the energy levels in the 2D material are modified by changing
the surrounding media. For 2D materials that are only one or a few atoms thick,
the external environment actually modifies the forces acting between electrons
within the layer and, hence, changes the available energy levels for electrons.
The research examines both uniform and nanostructured environments as a means of
developing building blocks for a new class of nanoscale electronic and optical
devices. Graduate students and undergraduate interns involved in the project
learn to prepare, characterize, and analyze 2D materials and devices. Important
professional development activities include frequent presentations of their own
research and other technical topics within the group and in departmental forums
at Stanford University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: A critical
factor for the development of the field of atomically thin two-dimensional 2D
materials is the control of their band gap on the nanoscale. This is essential
to explore the fundamental physical properties of the materials and to realize
many technological applications, ranging from tuning the photon energy of light
emission to the control of the transport characteristics by lateral junctions.
Traditional approaches, like alloying, are, however, difficult to implement on
the nanoscale. This project takes advantage of the pronounced influence of non-
local dielectric screening in the limit of atomically thin materials to tune
externally many-body Coulomb interactions in 2D semiconductors. This allows
tuning of the band structure and band gap of the 2D material simply by tailoring
its dielectric environment. The research involves three distinct components: (1)
Systematic assembly of 2D heterostructures with varying band gaps and
environmental screening; (2) real-space profiling of the band gap at abrupt
discontinuities and study of localization for 0D and 1D structures; and (3)
determination of conduction and valence band offsets across dielectrically
engineered junctions. Characterization tools for these investigations include
optical spectroscopy, electron energy-loss spectroscopy and cathodoluminescence,
and scanning tunneling spectroscopy.