* 1708589
* Collaborative Research: Creating Assessments for Student Understanding of Core Chemistry Ideas in Introductory Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sonia Underwood, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 08/31/2020
* USD 150,495.00

To address biological problems, students must apply and integrate chemistry
principles with biology principles, yet existing science assessments in
introductory biology courses often encourage rote memorization and assess
factual recall. The recently published Framework for K-12 Science Education
report from the National Research Council offers a way of thinking about science
education aimed at positively affecting students' abilities to use their
knowledge and make connections across disciplines. This vision integrates three
dimensions: 1) disciplinary core ideas (what students really need to know); 2)
crosscutting concepts (themes across science disciplines); and 3) scientific
practices (how students should use their knowledge). The integration of these
dimensions is referred to as "three-dimensional learning". Instead of assessing
factual recall, assessments should probe students' abilities to use scientific
practices (e.g., analyzing and interpreting data) in the context of disciplinary
core ideas (e.g., using the structure of a compound to predict how the substance
behaves) and crosscutting concepts (e.g., conservation of energy and matter) to
make sense of phenomena, but writing such assessments is difficult. There is a
need for assessments that emphasize three-dimensional learning in introductory
biology courses to support students in developing an integrated understanding of
science. To address this need, the objective of this two-year collaborative
project between Michigan State University (MSU) and Florida International
University (FIU) will be to develop, test, and evaluate the effectiveness of
assessment items that integrate chemistry and biology disciplinary core ideas,
crosscutting concepts, and scientific practices, and focus on making sense of
phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence-centered design will be used to
develop constructed-response assessment items of three-dimensional learning for
undergraduate introductory biology courses at both MSU and FIU in the context of
the following research question: In what ways do students use their chemistry
knowledge to explain biological phenomena? Three-dimensional assessments will be
designed that incorporate scientific practices, crosscutting concepts, and
chemistry and biology disciplinary core ideas. Follow-up student interviews and
administration of the items in introductory biology courses will serve to
validate the items, explore student learning, and inform revisions to the items.
The following three outcomes are expected for this study: a set of reliable and
validated items including scoring rubrics that probe three-dimensional learning
at the interface of chemistry and biology, knowledge of how these items impact
students' abilities to learn, and documentation of a process for creating three-
dimensional items about interdisciplinary ideas. By developing the items and
rubrics in collaboration with both MSU and FIU, the unique student populations
will be leveraged at each institution in service of making the assessments
applicable to a broad audience. This research is significant because the
developed items will serve as tools to better help researchers and instructors
understand how students do or do not connect their chemistry and biology
knowledge, which is imperative for explaining scientific phenomena and
addressing multidisciplinary challenges, such as improving human health and
environmental sustainability.