* 1708081
* From First Detections to Gravitational-Wave Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Daniel Holz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 449,974.00

On September 14, 2015, LIGO detected gravitational waves for the very first time
ever. These waves are ripples in the fabric of spacetime, and were first
predicted by Einstein a century ago. The waves that LIGO detected were the
result of a cataclysmic collision of two black holes, each 30 times more massive
than our own Sun, crashing into each other at half the speed of light. This
detection of gravitational waves has opened up an entirely new way for us to
explore our Universe. We will learn about the very first stars in the Universe,
how elements such as gold were made in the Universe, and we will also test
Einstein's theory of gravity (a fundamental pillar of physics). This project is
to help develop this entirely new field of gravitational-wave astrophysics, and
to explore what LIGO will teach us about astrophysics and
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first major theme of this project is LIGO
Astrophysics. In the near future interesting LIGO constraints will arise from
statistical analyses rather than individual events. For example, we can
anticipate three general astrophysical quantities of interest: 1. the rate of
mergers of compact binary systems, 2. the mass and mass ratio distributions of
these mergers, and 3. the spin distributions of the component systems. The PI
will help produce these distributions and the attendant science. This work is at
the heart of the field of gravitational-wave astrophysics. In addition to this
core work, the PI will engage in a number of related projects, including the
modeling of spins in hierarchical formation channels, the use of Gaussian
Process Emulators to model waveforms from compact binary coalescence, the role
of systematic errors in LIGO astrophysics, and LIGO's ability to constrain
electromagnetically charged black holes. The second major theme of the project
is Multi-Messenger Astronomy, which focuses on the next gravitational-wave
revolution: identifying electromagnetic counterparts to gravitational-wave
sources. This will shed light on the underlying astrophysical processes and
elucidate the formation channels of these gravitational-wave events. In
addition, multi-messenger astronomy offers the potential to use gravitational-
wave sources as standard candles to constrain cosmology. The PI plans the
development of tools and pipelines to hasten the arrival of gravitational-wave
multi-messenger astronomy, including facilitating electromagnetic follow-up
efforts through the continuing refinement and implementation of low-latency 3D
localization algorithms and the optimization of follow-up resource allocation.
This project will help LIGO reach its tremendous potential as an astronomical
observatory.