* 1708352
* CAREER: Towards Broadband and UAV-Assisted Heterogeneous Networks for Public Safety Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Ismail Guvenc, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2021
* USD 457,323.00

Public safety communication (PSC) can help save lives, property, and national
infrastructure in case of incidents such as fires, terrorist attacks or natural
disasters. Until recently, such communication has been mostly handled by
wireless technologies operating in narrow spectrum bands. However, such
technologies fall short of addressing public safety requirements, such as deep
situational awareness features that necessitate video streaming capabilities.
This research proposes the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) along with
cellular technologies within a novel and transformative framework that will
serve as the pillar of next generation PSC systems. Reaping the benefits of the
proposed architecture requires addressing several technical challenges
including: 1) potentially damaged network infrastructure, as in the aftermath of
an earthquake, causing severe connectivity problems; 2) dynamically varying
interference between aerial and ground base stations as well as user equipment,
hindering broadband throughput; 3) seamless connectivity problems, in the form
of handover failures, exacerbated by dynamic interference and infrastructure
mobility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For addressing these challenges, the proposed
research will lay down an interdisciplinary research agenda that combines
broadband wireless networks, UAV communications, software defined radios,
reinforcement learning, and stochastic geometry, into an integrated and
synergistic framework. The project will introduce several innovations that
involve self organizing interference and mobility management techniques to
achieve ubiquitous broadband connectivity for PSC networks. A comprehensive
hardware/software PSC testbed with powerful UAV and radio equipment will be
developed to validate, evaluate, and improve the proposed solutions. The
theoretical and experimental outcomes will break new ground in PSC systems by
enabling real-time wireless multimedia and deep situational awareness
capabilities in mission-critical PSC scenarios. Close industrial collaboration
will reinforce the proposed testbed, prototyping, and educational efforts, and
allow training of undergraduate/graduate students in industrial labs. Outreach
activities to local high-schools will attract underrepresented minorities,
particularly Hispanics, into STEM areas and the field of wireless networks.