* 1708941
* NPGI NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017:  Identifying the Genetic Determinants of Photosynthetic Pathways in Portulaca: Development of Germplasm and Genetic Resources
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Eric Goolsby, Goolsby                 Eric           W
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2018
* USD 78,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The host institution for the fellowship is
Brown University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Erika Edwards.

All plants perform one of three types of photosynthesis. Two of these confer
substantial stress tolerance, particularly under heat or drought stress. Most
crops possess the third, less stress tolerant type of photosynthesis, and it is
a goal of many breeding programs to give these crops more stress tolerance by
changing the type of photosynthesis they perform. A major roadblock to doing
this is a lack of knowledge of the complex genetic control that differentiates
the three photosynthesis types. This work uses the unique genus Portulaca, a
group of species whose members variously perform all three types of
photosynthesis (and even shift among them), to better understand the genetic
control of the anatomy and biochemistry underpinning the three types. PI Goolsby
will be trained in modern approaches in plant genomics and physiology, and this
work will provide tools for further research on improving crop photosynthetic
efficiency and stress tolerance.

This work will map the genetic architecture that differentiates C3, C4, and CAM
photosynthesis in the diverse genus Portulaca. A mapping panel of recombinant
inbred lines will be developed using a multiparent advanced generation
intercross (MAGIC) approach from 8 founder lines spanning anatomical and
biochemical extremes of C3, C4, and CAM photosynthesis within the genus. This
panel will be sequenced to create a genetic map and phenotyped for key
photosynthetic traits, which will allow association mapping and the
identification of key candidate genes differentiating photosynthetic pathways.
Germplasm and genetic data for the mapping panel will be deposited with the USDA
and NCBI, respectively, providing open access to the scientific community and
broader public and facilitating future basic and applied research efforts.