* 1708543
* EAGER: Efficient coding and the evolution of animal signals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Tamra Mendelson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 12/31/2022
* USD 333,000.00

An outstanding question in evolutionary biology is why many animals use complex
and exaggerated colors and sounds during courtship. These signals are intriguing
not only because they may attract the attention of predators, but also because
they come in many forms, with closely-related species differing in important
ways. The efficient coding hypothesis (EC) is a new explanation that states that
the human visual system is very good at making sense of the world around us, and
when something is easy to understand, it is preferred. EC therefore predicts
that male courtship signals will evolve to match their surroundings so that they
are easily understood by female receivers. This prediction is in stark contrast
to other current theories which predict that courtship signals should stand out
from their backgrounds so that they are more easily detected. Here the
researchers develop statistical and computational methods to test EC, and apply
them to a group of colorful fish found in the eastern United States. Their main
objectives are to develop the toolkit to apply EC with many animals and to
gather the information they need to design manipulative experiments that will
test EC directly. Along the way, they will also provide international training
opportunities for student researchers and after-school activities for school
children in Baltimore. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
the role of efficient coding in the diversification of complex animal signals.
Efficient coding is grounded in information theory and describes how sensory
systems maximize information from the environment while minimizing redundancies,
thus limiting the number of neurons required to encode relevant information. The
efficient coding hypothesis (EC) is applied here to animal signal design to ask
whether visual systems adapted to distinct habitats can contribute to the
diversification of complex mating signals. EC goes beyond the current signal-
detection framework of sensory drive, which predicts that animal signals
maximize attractiveness by maximizing detectability. EC predicts that attractive
signals also should match statistical parameters of the environment that sensory
systems have evolved to decode. The main objectives are to establish the
validity of EC in non-humans and to adapt methods developed for humans in
terrestrial environments into a toolkit for understanding complex visual signal
evolution across animals. The focal study system is the North American
freshwater fish genus Etheostoma, called darters. Male darters are characterized
by a diversity of vivid, complex, species-specific nuptial color patterns.
Although closely-related darter species occupy similar habitats, more distantly-
related species have distinct habitat preferences. The central hypothesis is
that the adaptation of darter visual systems to encode the statistical
regularities of species-specific habitats has contributed to the diversification
of complex color patterns across the genus. Three predictions of that hypothesis
are tested.