* 1708793
* Interactions of Biomolecules and Bacteria with Titanium at the Mineral Microbe Frontier
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ann Valentine, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry. Professor Ann M. Valentine of Temple University is
supported to explore the interaction of titanium oxide surfaces with metal-
scavenging biomolecules and/or microorganisms. Titanium is very abundant both in
the environment and in organisms, and increasingly used in consumer products and
industrial applications. Titanium is not widely appreciated as a bioactive
element as it has a reputation for extreme inertness and insolubility in water.
This research examines the ability of titanium dioxide to stick to (adhere) and
release from well-characterized biomolecules and from a bacterium. Iron-
scavenging biomolecules bind titanium especially tightly and keep it soluble and
stable. They can also cause the release of large quantities of titanium ions
into solution. This research sheds light on the impact of microorganisms on the
environmental chemistry of titanium and reveals the biological role of titanium.
The research is integrated with a new outreach program for rising high school
juniors called Philadelphia Environmental Chemistry Explorations (PECE).
Environmental bioinorganic chemistry is used as a platform to broaden
participation in science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
interactions of iron-scavenging siderophores and bacteria with titanium dioxide
(TiO2) surfaces. This inquiry sits at the intersection of inorganic and
bioinorganic chemistry, biogeochemistry, and materials and environmental
chemistry. Siderophores bind strongly to TiO2, and some siderophores dissolve
titanium ions from the metal oxide surface, significantly remodeling the mineral
in the process. Electronic spectroscopy, elemental analysis, and mass
spectrometry reveal metal ion concentrations and speciation in solution. The
oxide surface and properties before, during, and after dissolution are being
probed using Attenuated Total Reflectance-Fourier Transfer Infrared (ATR-FTIR)
as well as microscopy and related techniques. The mutual interference of
titanium and iron is a special focus. Microbe/oxide and biomolecule/oxide
interactions are being studied using the bacterium Rhodococcus ruber GIN-1,
which adheres to titanium dioxide and incorporates significant quantities of
titanium into its biomass. Titanium dioxide surface binding proteins are being
identified and characterized. Their abundance and properties are correlate to
whole-organism phenomena. Titanium uptake is being quantified and intracellular
titanium-binding molecules isolated. A research program is maintained that
educates and trains undergraduates and graduate students at the interface of
inorganic chemistry and biochemistry. Research activities are integrated with
chemistry outreach and with a new program for rising high school juniors. This
program uses environmental bioinorganic chemistry as a platform to broaden
participation in science.