* 1708199
* From Single Ion to Correlation: Probing the Physics of Kondo Topological Insulator with Lattice Constant Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jing Xia, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wonder what happens to the
electronic properties of a material when you stretch it? In an electronic
material, the valence of an atom tells us the strength of its combining power
with other atoms, and does not usually change with time. In some very special
materials, called 'mixed valence compounds', the valence rapidly fluctuates
between more than one value. It is recently discovered by the principle
investigator that stretching some of these mixed valence compounds could slow
down or speed up the valence fluctuation. As a result, the electronic properties
are effectively tuned to meet the requirements of device applications. In this
project, the research team investigates the effect of stretching on mixed
valence in several so-called 'strongly correlated materials'. Cousins of these
materials have already found technological importance: high temperature
superconductors for MRI diagnosis, giant magneto-resistance materials inside
iPads, just to name two. This project pursues crystal growth, measurements and
device fabrication on several mixed valence materials to unveil the nature of
mixed valence physics and by extension explore their unusual electronic and
thermal properties for technological applications such as ultra-high frequency
oscillator and quantum metrology. Several educational components are integrated
into this project, consisting of course development, K-12 outreach and
scientific training for students. Internships for high school volunteers from
disadvantaged regions in Santa Ana, as well as undergraduate researcher from UC
Irvine's California Alliance for Minority Participation program are enabled by
this project to generate interest and prepare for careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
normally well localized and magnetic 4f-electrons in rare earth compounds can in
some materials become itinerant electrons with effective electron mass orders of
magnitude larger than that of free electrons, leading variously to unusual
'strongly correlated' superconducting, magnetic and semiconducting states, these
last known as Kondo insulators. Theory suggests that the Kondo insulator SmB6
belongs to the exotic class of so-called topological insulators possessing a
surface conducting state with interesting technological potential. SmB6 is at
present the only such strongly correlated f-band semiconductor for which
experiment finds good evidence for this. The semiconducting energy gap scale in
SmB6 is approximately 40K with the surface conducting state developing only
below 4K. The principal investigators find that uniaxial strain strongly
increases the gap energy and moves the development of the surface conducting
state to 200K, approaching a range useful for application.&lt;br/&gt; The goals
of this project are to discover what sets the energy gap scale and accompanying
development of the surface state, how this scale can be controlled and where
other strongly correlated topological insulators can be found. This will be
pursued in single crystal alloys of SmB6 and other Kondo insulators via
transport, magnetic and thermodynamic measurements at ambient pressure and under
strain. There is no reason to suppose that SmB6 is a unique material and
understanding what sets the energy gap scale can present the rationale for
discovery of other strongly correlated semiconductors in its exotic class with
potential for application.