* 1708790
* Collaborative research: The effects of Dzyaloshinskii Moriya interactions on magnetization dynamics in layered thin films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Xuemei Cheng, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,850.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the study of the
interactions that can arise at the boundary between ferromagnetic and non-
magnetic materials. This interaction is key to the formation of magnetic
structures that have potential as a new means to store and transmit information,
and it also leads to unusual modifications of the properties of magnetic
materials, important for future devices. The research teams at Bryn Mawr College
and Colorado State University are taking a collaborative approach to study
magnetic interactions and magnetization dynamics in order to gain new insight
into the underlying physics of the interaction effects. Education for the young
generation is an important component of this project. The PIs strive to involve
and train students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, especially
women and students from underrepresented minority groups. The students working
on this project also have the opportunity to collaborate with scientists at
Argonne National Laboratory and gain hands on imaging experience. The PIs
incorporate research examples from this project into teaching and outreach
activities at both institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI) that lead to
anisotropic exchange effects are rapidly gaining attention in magnetism and
spintronics-related research. DMI, which arise from broken inversion symmetry
and spin-orbit coupling, can occur in bulk chiral crystals and at non-
magnetic/magnetic interfaces if the non-magnetic layer exhibits high spin orbit
coupling. DMI promote the formation of stable chiral magnetic spin
configurations such as skyrmions, and significantly modify dynamic processes in
thin film systems. It has been shown that DMI can influence skyrmion and domain
wall motion and that DMI lead to a nonreciprocity for surface spin waves in
extended thin films. DMI should also significantly modify the dynamics in
patterned magnetic nanostructures where the wavelengths of the spin dynamics are
inherently short due to geometric confinement effects. In this collaborative
research project, the research teams are investigating the effects of
interfacial DMI on skyrmion formation and on spin dynamics in both extended and
patterned multilayered films. Multilayers provide a means to stabilize
submicron-sized skyrmions at room temperature by tuning not only DMI and surface
anisotropies through the choice of the materials, but also the magnetostatic
interactions through varying the number of repeats. The results of this project
lead to new information on interfacial DMI and the effects of DMI on skyrmion
formation and spin dynamics in confined geometries.