* 1708562
* Controlling Valley Polarization in 2D Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* John Schaibley, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 424,000.00

Electronic information processing devices are currently based on controlling
electron charge. However, traditional electronic device architectures are
reaching fundamental energy loss and miniaturization limits, which motivate the
investigation of transformative nanoscale devices. Electrons in a class of
atomically thin two-dimensional semiconductors offer an electronic valley degree
of freedom that can be used to encode and potentially process information.
Electrons in these materials, specifically monolayer transition metal
dichalcogenides, can occupy one of two different electronic valleys, which can
be understood as distinguishable pockets in the electronic band structure.
Because there are two valleys, they can be used to encode digital information as
1's and 0's. Importantly, excitation of these valleys creates neutral particle
species that inherently incur lower energy losses than charged particles. In
this project, the PIs will develop optical and electronic devices with the goal
of controlling the valley degree of freedom for computing. They will design and
fabricate novel electronic devices, which comprise disparate layers of ultra-
thin materials, i.e. inorganic and hybrid inorganic-organic devices, which will
allow for new valley dependent functionalities. Specifically, they will explore
how electronic, magnetic and chemical interactions can be used to engineer
spatial transport of charge neutral electronic states carrying valley
information. The goal of the project is to understand how to control electronic
valley information and to demonstrate valley-based logic gates. The project will
advance the field of nanotechnology by demonstrating how valleys can be used in
information processing technologies. The project develops new knowledge and
trains a new generation of scientists in ultra-small optical and electronic
devices that realize the fundamental small-sized limit (atomically thin), and
could potentially enable low energy consumption devices that utilize valley
instead of charge to encode information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the development of valley-based devices composed of two-dimensional
heterostructures. Electrons in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD)
semiconductors (i.e. WSe2, MoSe2, etc.) can occupy one of two momentum space
valleys (+K and +K), which can be used as a binary degree of freedom to encode
and potentially process information. In analogy with spintronics, this project
seeks to explore device architectures that will leverage the control of valley
polarizations for applications to low energy consumption valleytronic
information processing. Specifically, heterostructures that host charge-neutral
interlayer excitons and can enable micron-scale spatial transport of valley
polarized carriers will be explored. These structures will be developed into
prototype and transformative valleytronic logic gates that are based on
nonlinear valley-dependent interaction effects, and rely on optical injection
and readout. The project has three specific aims: 1) controlling pure valley
currents in MoSe2/WSe2 devices with interlayer excitons and field-effect
structures; 2) controlling valley and ferromagnetic polarizations in
ferromagnetic/TMD heterostructures using interfacial exchange-interactions; and
3) developing interlayer valley excitons in TMD/organic semiconductor
heterostructures to enable a tunable interlayer exciton system, optical spin-
injection, and chemically breaking of the TMD valley degeneracy. The PI and co-
PI will utilize a combination of 2D material fabrication, organic semiconductor
deposition and electron beam lithography techniques to fabricate the proposed
devices. TMD/TMD and ferromagnetic/TMD devices will be investigated using
spatially resolved micro-photoluminescence and nonlinear Kerr spectroscopies to
probe the exciton energies and valley polarizations. The TMD/organic
heterostructures will be characterized by angle-resolved photoemission and
advanced x-ray spectroscopies. Valley polarized spatial transport effects will
be read out optically, and will be controlled by applying gate voltages in field
effect heterostructure devices, applying external magnetic fields, and
patterning organic adsorbates. The project will develop novel inorganic and
hybrid organic/inorganic devices that have potential to enable transformative
technologies based on the electronic valley degree of freedom.