* 1708341
* Nanoconfinement, nanofluidics, new phases and their transitions for superfluid 3He
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jeevak Parpia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2021
* USD 575,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The pace of research and development is
accelerating. Our everyday devices are ever more capable, cheaper, and faster.
Most of these consumer items' inbuilt technology exists because of fundamental
advances in condensed matter research. Future advances will happen because of
curiosity driven exploration of new regimes presently accessible only in a
laboratory environment. The research to be conducted in this program will
examine the special properties of superfluid 3He when confined in precisely
defined structures less than a thousandth of a millimeter tall, marking the
transition from bulk three-dimensional behavior to a new two-dimensional regime.
Undergraduate students and Ph.D students will design and fabricate these
structures opening up a new area of quantum nano-fluidics. The surfaces will
have to have a well-defined smoothness - and the surface coating (with pure
helium 4 or helium 3 under a magnetic field) should alter the types of
superfluid states ("phases") that emerge. These phases should show a property
"chirality" that should have properties like a spinning top. Further, the
conversion from one state to another ("phase transition") should reveal whether
models of the early universe (important for our understanding of the evolution
of the universe) can be tested in the laboratory. Past graduate students and
undergraduates working with this research group have gone on to productive
careers in academia, high-technology industries and the financial sector, and
the planned research will prepare a new generation of students for challenging
careers. The size range where the system transforms from a nearly three-
dimensional material to a more two-dimensional system will be revealed by new
phases. These new phases should exhibit novel characteristics such as highly
conducting "edge states" that are scientifically "exciting" and that could, in
the future form the basis of new types of devices for metrology and computation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superfluid 3He can inform
research activity that extends across many fields in Physics. The project
combines nanofluidics (intricate and precisely fabricated cavities with sizes
tuned to the scale of the superfluid's coherence length) with low temperature
physics, to expose new size effects. The experimental activity will probe
excitations using transport (superfluid density and heat conductivity) as well
as a novel nanoscale ultra-fine wire to act as a local thermometer or
spectrometer. Researchers expect that entirely new p-wave superfluid states can
be stabilized by such confinement and the balance between the superfluid ground
state that preserves (3He-B) or breaks (3He-A) time reversal symmetry will also
be affected by confinement. By measuring the phase diagram of confined 3He both
with and without an applied magnetic field, details of the pressure and
temperature dependence of the strong coupling strength will be mapped out
allowing for more reliable prediction of the phase diagrams of 3He under
confinement. Confinement will also provide the means to study the surface/edge
excitations emerging as a result of bulk/edge correspondence. Furthermore this
research activity will provide a new example of "cosmology in the laboratory".
Studies of the first-order transition between the confined A and B phases,
radically different from nucleation in bulk, will potentially provide a model of
processes during the inflationary epoch of the early universe. New geometries
will explore the physics of quantum transport across single and multiple
interfaces. By combining low temperatures and nano fabrication, graduate
students and undergraduates will be exposed to the exciting training ground that
has prepared scientists for lead roles in academia and high-technology
industries. Eventually, the new superfluids that emerge under confinement might
be of interest in quantum computation.