* 1708314
* Thermodynamics of Interfaces: Theory to Atomistic Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Yuri Mishin, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 11/30/2020
* USD 340,758.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on the properties of materials interfaces.
Interfaces are ubiquitous and important in many natural phenomena, e.g. in how
materials break and deform, and consequently play important roles in many areas
of science and technology. The goal of this project is to advance fundamental
understanding of the effects of temperature, chemical composition, interface
shape and other factors on interface properties. The main approach to achieving
this goal is close integration of general theoretical analysis with computer
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide a theoretical
framework for the development of new models for interface properties and
interface-controlled processes, and will provide new capabilities for their
computational prediction. This improved understanding will enhance our ability
to control materials properties for many classes of technologically important
materials, including many varieties of alloys and nanowires. Furthermore, it
will strengthen the theoretical foundations for the design of new nanostructured
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to have impact on
several areas of materials science, physics, chemistry, and biology. The PI will
incorporate some of the research results into courses and student projects at
George Mason University, and in presentations given to students of local high-
schools as part of his outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on the thermodynamic properties of materials interfaces.
Interfaces are ubiquitous and important in many natural phenomena, such as
materials fracture and deformation, and consequently play important roles in
many areas of science and technology. The goal of this project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of interface thermodynamics and investigate the
effects of temperature, chemical composition, interface curvature and other
factors on interface properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four research directions
will be pursued in this project: (1) investigation of structural phase
transformations in metallic grain boundaries (GBs), including the construction
of GB phase diagrams; (2) investigation of structure and properties of alloy GBs
at high temperatures approaching the melting point; (3) analysis of equilibrium
thermal fluctuations of interface properties and development of efficient
methods for computational prediction of such properties; and (4) development of
thermodynamics of strongly curved interfaces, including extensions of the
existing theory to non-spherical interfaces and incorporation of quadratic and
higher-order effects in curvature. The atomistic simulations will utilize
molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, and other techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide a theoretical framework for the development of new models
of phase and interface stability, phase nucleation, and other interface-
controlled processes. The project will lead to a better fundamental
understanding of interface thermodynamics and will provide new capabilities for
its computational prediction. The improved understanding of interface
thermodynamics will enhance our ability to control precipitation and coarsening
in structural materials such as superalloys, solidification microstructures in
cast alloys, nanowire growth, and reactive wetting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is expected to have impact on several areas of materials science,
physics, chemistry, and biology. The PI will incorporate some of the research
results into courses and student projects at George Mason University, and in
presentations given to students of local high-schools as part of his outreach
efforts.