* 1708769
* Negative Capacitance Phosphorene Tunneling Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Steven Koester, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 370,000.00

The project intends to study the problem of how to create a transistor that can
be switched between its "on" and "off" states with less energy than a
conventional transistor. It attempts to break through a fundamental problem in
semiconductor chip technology called the "thermionic" limit by combining two
mechanisms, tunneling and ferroelectricity, with the emerging field of two-
dimensional materials. Such a technology would be a breakthrough in the
semiconductor industry leading to smaller computer chips that could perform more
functions, and be more easily integrated into mobile and internet-of-things
applications. The project will be an ideal training ground for graduate
students, as they will simultaneously be able to work on a problem of vital
importance to the semiconductor industry, while at the same time, explore many
fundamental aspects of quantum mechanics, material science and device physics.
Aspects of this work will also be utilized in an undergraduate semiconductor
device class, where the results provide an ideal example of a device that
combines several "end-of-the-roadmap" concepts. Finally, the results from this
project will be incorporated into a summer school outreach program at the
University of Minnesota and be utilized for K-12 outreach activities such as in-
class demonstrations and interactive activities that can generate excitement
about engineering and scientific careers in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to design, fabricate, characterize and analyze
the properties of a novel steep-subthreshold slope negative capacitance
tunneling field-effect transistor made using the two-dimensional nanomaterial,
phosphorene. The device combines two mechanisms: Fermi-function filtering and
negative capacitance gate dielectrics to create a device capable of extremely
sharp turn-off behavior that is well below the thermionic limit of 60 millivolts
per decade. The device further utilizes phosphorene as the channel material,
which is an ideal material for tunneling transistors due to its narrow band gap
and anisotropic effective mass. The research scope and methods include the
development of techniques to create controlled heterostructures in phosphorene
with monolayer precision, study of the orientation-dependence of band-to-band
tunneling in phosphorene pn junctions, investigation of ferroelectric material
deposition and interface quality with phosphorene, fabrication of
characterization of the novel steep-subthreshold slope device, and development
of a predictive model of the device performance. The intellectual significance
of the proposed work is that it addresses key technical challenges associated
with two-dimensional semiconductors and ferroelectric materials and answers
fundamental questions about the ultimate limits of low-energy transistor
operation, thereby tackling one of the most pressing challenges facing the
semiconductor device community.