* 1708852
* Electrically-Tunable Surface Energy and Reactivity of Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* SungWoo Nam, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 406,743.00

Non-technical Description: Typically the surface characteristics of conventional
materials cannot be changed without disturbing materials' intrinsic properties.
For example, chemical treatments are used to alter the surface characteristics
of semiconductors, and a continuous flow of electrical currents is used to
change the surface characteristics of metals. In contrast, the surface
characteristics of graphene, a material which consists of a single atomic layer
of hexagonally bonded carbon atoms, can be dynamically tuned while preserving
the superb properties of graphene. This is due to the atomically-thin nature and
unique properties of graphene. This project studies tunable surface
characteristics of graphene to enable a novel and multi-functional coating
material. The capacity to dynamically tune the surface characteristics of
graphene can be used to advance corrosion and oxidation resistant coating,
sensing, condensation heat transfer, battery and supercapacitator efficiency,
and microfluidics. These improvements increase productivity and reduce costs in
the energy, manufacturing, and health sectors. In addition, the new knowledge
and broader implications realized in this project offer an excellent educational
opportunity to enhance community engagement and outreach in the exciting and
growing field of nanotechnology. Specific avenues for dissemination include
online learning platforms, summer research experiences for students, and field
trips and summer science camps for high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Graphene, which consists
of fully saturated and chemically inert sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, senses and
interacts with external molecules in close vicinity via delocalized pi
electrons. Unlike conventional bulk materials, external molecules can modulate
the doping levels of graphene by interacting with these delocalized, massless
Dirac fermions. Likewise, the modulation of doping levels can in turn affect the
way graphene reacts with external molecules. The objective of this project is to
establish a fundamental understanding of electrical doping-induced tunable
surface energy and reactivity of graphene to address the knowledge gap
concerning the coupling between graphene's electronic states and its surface
energy/reactivity. The principal investigators' hypothesis is that the
modulation of graphene's electron state by doping contributes to the tunable
electrostatic force which graphene exerts on external molecules, and in turn
impacts the tunable surface energy and reactivity of graphene. The research
combines in situ experimental investigations with quantum and atomistic
theoretical modeling. In situ microscopy, such as atomic force microscopy and
electron microscopy, as well as spectroscopic characterizations, including Raman
spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, are performed to
experimentally investigate how doping influences the surface energy and
reactivity of graphene. Furthermore, theoretical investigations, including
detailed quantum, atomistic and reactive molecular dynamics calculations, are
performed to complement and explain experimental finding of doping-induced
surface energy/reactivity, while the experimentally obtained parameters are used
to develop a comprehensive theory for the prediction and development of new
surface phenomena. This project advances the scientific knowledge of how
modulation of doping levels affect graphene's reaction to external molecules as
well as improves the technical capability of tunable surface characteristics of
graphene.