* 1708906
* Distributionally Robust Control and Incentives with Safety and Risk Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Mihailo Jovanovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 318,910.00

Massive data collected from the Internet-of-Things and cyber-physical systems
can have transformative impacts on our society, spanning from personalized
medicine to urban infrastructure systems. However, several concerns related to
robustness, safety, risk, and reliability have been raised centered on how to
incorporate such large-scale data into solving critical decision-making
problems, as the data and the estimated statistical models are often inaccurate.
Thus, the proposed research will establish a control-theoretic foundation to
resolve this issue by allowing distributional errors in the statistical models
and by developing control strategies that are robust against the errors. The
potential application domains of the proposed distributionally robust control
tools include battery management systems, power grids, food supply chains,
manufacturing systems and personalized medicine. With the successful
implementations of the proposed control tools in such domains, we will be able
to improve individual safety and quality of life, and the reliability of data-
driven control systems, which would build high confidence in society. The
research outcomes in this project will also be used for (i) the USC Chevron
Frontiers in Energy Research Summer Camp which is one of our K-12 STEM outreach
efforts; (ii) USC Women in Science and Engineering programs that provide hands-
on research experiences to undergraduate and (iii) open house and workshops in
Viterbi Center for Engineering Diversity to train and recruit educationally-
disadvantaged underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of our proposed research is to develop theoretical foundations and
computational methods for distributionally robust control problems associated
with safety-critical and/or non-cooperative systems that operate with limited
information. The proposed tools can contribute to the following three
fundamental areas: &lt;br/&gt;1. Stochastic control theory: The proposed
research aims to establish a game theoretical and algorithmic foundation of
distributionally robust control methods for nonlinear stochastic systems when
faced with ambiguous distributional information about uncertain variables. In
particular, we will investigate a duality-based dynamic programming solution to
alleviate the infinite-dimensionality issue in the control problem and combine
it with (deep) neural network- and occupation measure based methods to
systematically adjust computational complexity and solution
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;2. Safety and risk aware control theory: We will extend
stochastic reachability analysis methods to cases with imperfect information
about the probability distribution of disturbances. This distributionally robust
reachability tool will be used to specify the worst-case probability that the
system fails to stay in the safe range and the worst-case risk of system loss.
Based on the safety and risk specifications, we will then propose a systematic
approach to synthesize a safety preserving and risk-aware control law that is
robust against disturbance distributional ambiguity. &lt;br/&gt;3. Incentive
contract theory: Incentive contracts under moral hazard can be used to
coordinate noncooperative sub-systems controlled by local agents in which local
control actions and uncertain variables cannot be monitored by a central
coordinator. To broaden the applicability of the contracts to engineering and
socio-technical problems, we will generalize the theory in two directions: (i)
integrating engineering systems with nontrivial dynamics into contracts, and
(ii) constructing incentive contracts in a distributionally robust fashion.