* 1708837
* Hierarchical assemblies in supramolecular comb polymers and discotic mesophases with mixed ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2021
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry. Professors Chinedum Osuji and Corey O'Hern
of Yale University are supported to conduct a combined theoretical and
experimental research project. The objective is to shed light on how different
chemical species (atoms, molecules, ions) assemble into supramolecular
functional structures. In addition to advancing fundamental knowledge, this
research also provides a way to design and create new materials with useful
properties. Specifically, the research aims to develop new semiconducting
molecular assemblies that can be used in organic electronic devices.
Supramolecular assembly is responsible for the highly optimized structures and
functions of many biological macromolecules in nature. A broad variety of useful
man-made materials can also be produced using supramolecular assembly, ranging
from semiconductors for photovoltaics to chemical sensors and self-healing
polymers. This project is supporting interdisciplinary training of graduate
students and is focused on broadening participation in science through outreach
to elementary, middle and high school students, and the implementation of a
specially designed summer research program for high school science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on supramolecular assembly in
systems in which a single species displays multiple binding sites at each of
which the species can interact non-covalently with a single ligand, and in which
there is more than one type of ligand present. The overarching goal of this work
is to systematically elucidate self-assembly in such mixed-ligand supramolecular
systems, specifically in comb polymers and discotic mesophases. The research
involves a tight integration of experimental and computational efforts to
understand assembly and to design novel mesophases. The specific objectives are:
1) Quantitative assessment of binding energetics and thermophysical properties;
2) Systematic experimental exploration of the structure of supramolecular
assemblies in comb polymers and discotic mesophases with mixed ligands; 3)
Development of coarse-grained potentials and systematic computational
exploration of the structure of supramolecular assemblies in comb polymers and
discotic mesophases with mixed ligands; 4) Computationally informed rational
design and characterization of donor-acceptor discotic mesophases. The impact of
this project originates in its development of new fundamental knowledge
regarding the role of mixed ligands on supramolecular assembly, and the coherent
combination of experimental and computational efforts to enable the design of
new supramolecular materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.