* 1708776
* Multidimensional Materials Assembled by DNA Based Information
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Nadrian Seeman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 465,000.00

This award is funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry. Professors Nadrian C. Seeman, and James W.
Canary of New York University are supported to develop novel self-assembly
approaches for controlling the orientation of polymer strands in confined
spaces. The polymeric material will be directed to assemble based on information
contained in pre-programmed branched-DNA scaffolds. The polymer strands are
incorporated within the scaffolds with specified orientation and spacing to
generate specific optical and electronic properties. Polymer-based organic
materials have a wide range of practical applications, including in optical,
electronic and solar energy conversion devices. Their properties depend not only
on the chemical structure of the polymer, but also on the orientation of the
polymer strands. Graduate and undergraduate students are trained in an
interdisciplinary area of research. In addition, technical and educational
activities are directed towards high school and college science students
especially from underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to develop a general strategy to organize conjugated oligomers and polymers
by combining organic synthesis with pre-programmed DNA self-assembly.
Specifically, this research investigates the incorporation of two types of
semiconducting conjugated molecules -- oligopolyaniline (PANI) and poly-
(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) -- in cage-like DNA nanoscale scaffolds and studies
their elecrto-optical properties. The key experimental features are to control
the length of the oligomers through stepwise organic synthesis and to covalently
attached the oligomers to DNA strands. The general strategy is not limited to
PANI and PPV; it can be applied to other oligomers with different electro-
optical properties, as well as to fluorescent dyes, nanoparticles, and
functional peptides. Study of how DNA scaffolds can be used to direct the
assembly of these conjugated molecules is expected to provide insightful
fundamental information about their structure/function relationships, which
could eventually lead to new types of functional materials.