* 1708732
* Non-classical Zinc Finger Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Sarah Michel, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 11/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Sarah Michel from the University of Maryland Baltimore
to investigate how the trace metal zinc is involved in the important biological
process of RNA regulation. All living systems require RNA to be processed into
different molecular forms. Genome sequencing has identified a family of proteins
called 'non-classical' zinc finger (ZF) proteins that play key roles in
regulating RNA. Two proteins from this family, TTP and CPS30, are investigated
in vitro and in cells to determine how zinc binding affects RNA processing.
These studies help define general principles of metal directed protein RNA
regulation in living systems and identify how toxic metals disrupt these
fundamental biological processes. Graduate student participants receive training
at the interface of chemistry and biology using cutting edge experimental
techniques. A successful outreach program called SIMSI developed by the PI with
a women's college in Baltimore, which provides mini-graduate school experiences
and mentoring continues. In addition, a new outreach workshop called "Minding
Your Metals" that draws inspiration form the Flint, MI drinking water crisis is
developed for underrepresented minority (URM) students from three Baltimore City
urban public middle schools. Graduate students are involved in all outreach
efforts, and will be trained in communicating findings and conveying scientific
principles to audiences with different levels of science knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is focused on the CCCH class of non-
classical zinc finger (ZF) proteins. Two CCCH ZFs, tristetraprolin (TTP) and
cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor 30 (CPSF30) are investigated.
TTP is a key player in the regulation of inflammation, when reactive oxygen
species are elevated, and outstanding questions include the roles of metal ions
(native and toxic), and the participation of reactive oxygen species and
reactive sulfur species in the structure and function of TTP. CPSF30 is involved
in pre- mRNA processing, and contains a 2Fe-2S cluster, in addition to zinc
sites. The PI (1) determines how metal ions, reactive oxygen species and
reactive sulfur species modulate TTP function in vitro and in cells and (2)
determines the mechanism of RNA recognition for CPSF30 by deciphering the
functional roles of the 2Fe-2S cluster, the CCCH domains and the CCHC domain.
Biochemical, biophysical, structural and cell based approaches are taken,
including fluorescence anisotropy to measure protein/RNA binding, native ESI-MS
and ICP-MS to determine stoichiometry, cryo-ESI-MS to elucidate reactivity with
reactive oxygen and sulfur species, HDX/MS and crosslinking/ESI-MS to identify
structural changes upon RNA binding, and cellular reporter assays to translate
in vitro findings to cells.