* 1708283
* Detecting the Casimir Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Bishop, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 370,000.00

Title: Detecting the Casimir Energy: A Quantum Mechanical Effect with
Significant Real-World
Implications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: In the
classical world, a vacuum consists of nothing. No fields, forces or particles
exist. However, the world we live in is not classical but controlled at the
atomic scale by the rules of quantum mechanics (QM). Quantum mechanics has a
number of rules and effects that defy our normal, real-world intuition. An
example is the quantum mechanical vacuum. In such a vacuum, electrical and
magnetic fields can and do exist albeit for short periods of time and over small
length scales. One can think of the vacuum as the surface of a pond. The
classical vacuum is a still pond with no waves or ripples. A boat floating on
this pond never moves. However, the QM pond has waves that propagate for a short
distance and then die out. These waves can move a boat on the surface. The
Casimir effect is seen when one creates a set of conditions where these waves
exert measurable forces on small, nanoscale objects (our boat). In classical
physics, these forces should not exist but quantum mechanically they do exist
and can be detected. These QM effects manifest themselves at the nanoscale and
building devices and systems at this size requires that we understand them and
learn how to work with them. Specifically, theoretical predictions suggest that
these QM waves will change the transition temperature of a superconductor and we
aim to observe this effect. Beyond interesting physics, such an effect may have
implications for the existence of wormholes in space. While it is not fair to
say we are looking for these, we will be doing experiments in a regime where
theories by some of the world?s most eminent scientists say they may occur. We
do plan to keep our eyes open.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: We propose
research that will create MEMS devices for detecting the Casimir Energy. The
Casimir effect is a result of the appearance of quantum fluctuations in the
electromagnetic vacuum. A previous set of experiments done by a number of
researchers have used MEMS parallel plate capacitors to detect the Casimir
effect by measuring the small attractive force these fluctuations exert on the
device. In this new set of experiments, we propose to directly detect the
Casimir Energy in the vacuum modified by the presence of metallic parallel
plates, a fundamentally new measurement of considerable interest to the
theoretical physics community. Our approach uses a superconducting film as a
sensor. The changes in the Casimir Energy within the superconductor volume is
expected to shift the superconducting transition temperature because of an
interaction between it and the superconducting condensation energy. The
experiment we propose consists of taking a superconducting film, carefully
measuring its transition temperature, bringing a conducting plate close to the
film, creating a Casimir cavity, and then measuring the transition temperature
again. The expected shifts will be small, ~1mK, comparable to the normal shifts
one sees in cycling superconducting films to cryogenic temperatures and so using
MEMS plates and doing this in situ is the only practical way to obtain accurate,
reproducible data. We propose to use a MEMS device where the location of the
plate can be changed while at low temperatures and look for this effect.
Mechanically oscillating the MEMS plate position will modulate the effect and
eliminate 1/f noise and long-term drifts from the measurement.