* 1708637
* Waveguiding Nanomaterials: A Path Towards Ultrafast Scintillation Detectors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Serge Oktyabrsky, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 399,779.00

Nontechnical Description: This project addresses science and technology of a new
materials system comprising nanoscale islands - quantum dots - embedded in a
thin semiconductor film. The electronic and optical properties of the materials
are designed to enable ultrafast detection of x-rays and energetic quantum
particles. The key element of this sensing material is a light-emitting quantum
dot ensemble capable of converting energy from incoming x-rays into infrared
light. This type of material performance, known as scintillation, is carried out
with unsurpassed energetic yield and speed, thus providing a long-expected
solution for key technological applications. Such ultrafast x-ray detection is
essential for implementing low-dose x-ray three-dimensional medical imaging, as
in computer or positron-emission tomography (PET), as well as for improving
accuracy and turnaround time in nuclear systems security. The project enables
technology development and commercialization, potentially facilitating the
emergence of higher quality medical and defense instrumentation at reduced cost.
The educational component of the project includes direct support of a graduate
student research assistant towards a Ph.D. in nanoscale engineering, hands-on
training of undergraduate students, launching a new optical nanomaterials
laboratory segment for K-12 students, and training of science teachers within
the educational College infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The relatively weak existing material interactions at high energies
lead to a fundamental challenge for picosecond-scale timing of energetic
particles and photons. A large-volume scintillation medium coupled to a small
and fast photodetector is the preferable approach to remedy this limitation,
where the time response is limited by the excitation transfer and emission, as
well as the optical transit time. This project develops a new scientific
approach and technology for a scintillation material using quantum dots as nano-
engineered emission centers capable of providing unsurpassed speed and light
yield, additionally exploring detector integration in order to test the
performance benefits. While the concept is not material-specific, the current
technology level and the required device properties favor self-assembled InAs
quantum dots (QDs) embedded in a GaAs waveguide as the test material system. The
project includes a modeling component, engineering and fabrication of QD
waveguides with an integrated photodetector, and assessment of time and energy
resolution. This study paves a path for enabling reduced radiation doses in
medical 3D imaging/tomography applications, improving spectroscopic accuracy in
nuclear security, and enhancing particle identification capabilities in high-
energy physics experiments. The project enables technology development and
commercialization efforts, promotion of nanotechnology to the broader public,
additionally enriching the College outreach infrastructure.