* 1708151
* I-Corps: A solar radiation and sky condition monitoring system
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Qilong Min, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
accurate measurements of solar radiation and sky condition for weather, climate,
air quality, and solar energy applications. The I-Corps project enables accurate
monitoring and understanding of the inherent variability of solar radiation due
to cloud cover, aerosol loading, and other atmospheric gases that are essential
for determining solar energy generation. The technology and associated data
analytics enable solar energy producers, developers, distributors, and
researchers to improve solar energy prediction, to enhance solar panel
efficiency, to reduce operation and maintenance costs, and to potnetially
increase the penetration of solar energy into the power grid.

This I-Corps project will enable customer discovery for a core technology which
integrates a multi-channel radiometer and a sky imager into a shadowband
scanning smart system. This smart system measures spectral and angular solar
radiation distribution and meteorological parameters for monitoring solar
radiation and weather conditions. It also combines communication, computing,
remote sensing, and advanced analytics, and responds to feedback from the
prevailing environment to deliver improved accuracy and performance. Thereby, it
represents a multi-fold improvement over existing methods/systems. This enables
more accurate retrievals of optical properties of aerosol, cloud, ozone, and
water vapor in the atmosphere. The proposed activities will advance science and
technology in weather, climate, air quality, and solar energy.