* 1708716
* Crystallization under Nanoscale Confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Michael Ward, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization, one of the largest unit
operations in U.S. industry, is critical to the advancement of materials science
as well as various technical sectors that rely on solid formulations, from the
pharmaceutical industry to optical and electronic materials. Nonetheless,
crystal growth remains a poorly understood phenomenon. Moreover, advanced
technologies - from information storage to energy conversion - increasingly rely
on materials design at the nanometer length scale. This project examines
crystallization of materials in ultrasmall nanometer-scale pores that constrain
the size of crystals to dimensions where properties that are central to key
technological sectors depart from the ordinary. The unique environment provided
by the nanopores in refractory monoliths will be used to evaluate the properties
and reactivity of magnesium salts, which have been implicated as water reporters
on Mars. Composites consisting of large ensembles of nanocrystals in free-
standing monoliths that can be handled readily and are anticipated to have
unusual properties, will be investigated. The project also will support
education activities aimed at widening the STEM pipeline for emerging young
scientists, including the creation of teams of NYC middle and high-school
students who will compete in the US Crystal Growth Competition, concurrent with
a curriculum on structure and properties of crystals. The principal investigator
also will operate a Material World workshop for faculty from minority-serving
institutions designed to introduce new interdisciplinary curricula to college
classrooms, and he will host the 24th biannual International Conference on the
Chemistry of the Organic Solid State in 2019. These activities will augment
substantial existing STEM activities at the New York University Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate crystallization in nanoscale
pores of inert monoliths, providing an approach to narrow the knowledge gap in
nucleation and growth by confining crystallization at a length scale that
typically is impenetrable to study. The pore dimensions are comparable to the
critical size regime where crystallization outcomes are determined, providing an
opportunity to examine the influence of size on polymorph selectivity during
crystallization as well as size-dependent polymorph stability rankings for
confined crystals, effectively adding size as a variable on the phase diagram.
The project will unravel the correspondence between size-dependent thermal
properties, polymorph stability ranking, and critical sizes estimated from 2D
X-ray diffraction. The nanosized pores provide an ideal environment to examine
the role of stereochemical auxiliaries on polymorph selectivity and stability,
which is thought to involve binding at specific crystal faces of incipient
nuclei at the early stages of crystal growth. Characterizing the behavior of
magnesium salt hydrates, confined in pores to emulate intergrowths, may inform
on recent hydrated phases on Mars. Free-standing composite materials based on
large ensembles of aligned functional nanocrystals (&gt; 1010 crystals/cm2),
which can obviate the need for bulk single crystals, also will be explored.
Collectively, the project will provide much-needed insight into nucleation and
crystal growth at critical length scales where crystallization can be
deterministic while also providing a pathway to new hybrid materials. Students
working on this project will acquire expertise in advanced X-ray diffraction
methods, crystal structure analysis, polymorphism, molecular modeling,
spectroscopy and near-field microscopies, and they will be trained in materials
concepts that impact critical technological sectors, including pharmaceutical
and electronic materials.