* 1708579
* OP: Electrically Controlled Solid-State Cavity QED with Single Emitters in Monolayer Material
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Xiaodong Xu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2020
* USD 358,000.00

We live in the midst of an information technology revolution. In the last few
decades, with the aggressive scaling of electronic devices, we have realized
unprecedented performance in computing and communication. However, this rapid
scaling, commonly known as "Moore's Law" is slowing and it is well-understood
that next-generation computing technology will rely heavily on data centers and
cloud computing. We are already experiencing this trend with the increased
investment from large technology companies in these sectors. To support this
architecture, however, we need to bring optical interconnect technology, which
is the backbone of the modern internet, to shorter length scales. These optical
devices need to operate at extremely low power. Going beyond traditional
computing and communication, quantum technology presents a paradigm shift in the
way we think about information technology. Extremely low-power optical devices
can also provide solutions for these quantum technologies. In our research, we
will develop photonic integrated circuits, similar to electronic integrated
circuits, integrated with single atom thick 2D materials to create these low-
power optical devices. Specifically, we will be using atomic defects in 2D
materials to push the energy to the single photon level, which is the lowest
conceivable energy in photonics, and almost a million times smaller compared to
energy consumption in existing optical devices. Our work will bring the
innovations in atomic physics to chip-scale technology, and with 2D materials,
it is possible to develop these low power devices in a silicon platform
exploiting the same fabrication technology which is used to manufacture today's
computers and smart phones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical and quantum signal
processing using light has been a long-standing goal for scientists and
engineers. Recent progress in micro- and nano-scale optical devices has renewed
interest in this subject, as it can allow pushing energy consumption to regimes
that have not been attainable in bulk optical systems. Specifically, by
exploiting nanoscale optical cavities and single quantum emitters, the potential
exists for building photonic devices based on principles of quantum
electrodynamics. However, in all the existing cavity quantum electrodynamic
devices, the single emitters are embedded in a 3D-substrate, rendering external
control and facial integration with existing electronic and photonic platforms
difficult. These limitations can be circumvented by using a quantum emitter in a
2D substrate, such as single emitters in monolayer materials like transition
metal dichalcogenides. The unprecedented material compatibility of monolayer
materials will also allow building these quantum optical devices using scalable
CMOS technologies. The current proposal aims to research and develop a solid-
state cavity quantum electrodynamic platform with single quantum emitters
embedded in monolayer materials coupled to integrated solid-state nano-scale
cavities. Combining numerical simulation, device fabrication, and optical
characterization, the research thrusts include: (i) measure Purcell enhancement
with a tunable 2D emitter-cavity system; (ii) demonstrate cavity-enhanced light
emitting diodes and (iii) observe strong coupling cavity quantum electrodynamic
effects. The ultimate goal is to demonstrate electronically tunable strongly
coupled emitter-cavity system, where electro-optic and all-optical switching can
be performed at a single photon energy level, and non-classical light can be
generated exploiting strong correlation between photons.