* 1708600
* Nanofiber-Based Ceramic Structures: The Roles of Initial Phases and Microarchitecture
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Andrei Stanishevsky, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 497,449.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nanofiber-based ceramics are part of a rapidly
growing class of engineered advanced ceramics whose market is projected to reach
$134 billion worldwide by the year 2024. Ceramic nanofibers have diameters from
one to four orders of magnitude smaller than conventional microfibers produced
by mechanical drawing. These nanofibers can exhibit unique characteristics such
as superplasticity, enhanced machinability, and superior strength and/or
toughness that make them attractive for applications in next generation ceramic
matrix composites, sensors with high sensitivity and selectivity to various
deleterious gases and volatile organic compounds, improved catalysts and
catalyst supports, more efficient fuel cells and batteries, and stronger dental
composites. However, the technology of nanofiber-based ceramics faces
significant challenges in obtaining porous or dense ceramic structures at
competitive productivity and cost while preserving the desired properties. This
project addresses those challenges through establishing the crucial process-
structure-property-performance relationships for selected nanofiber-based
ceramic structures, and building the realistic models which can be applied to
various nanofibrous ceramic systems to explain and predict the material
performance and to advance development of sustainable manufacturing technology
and commercial products. Students at different levels (university and high-
school) are involved in every aspect of this study and are developing hands-on
skills needed for highly specialized jobs in expanding advanced ceramics and
associated research and manufacturing domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This project investigates the roles of initial porosity, structure and
ordering of individual oxide ceramic nanofibers during sintering on the
resulting microarchitecture and mechanical properties. The key aspects being
addressed include: How the nanofibrous state can be preserved during sintering
and lead unique and useful properties not otherwise achievable in traditional
materials. How structure, porosity, and interaction of nanofibers affect the
properties of a fibrous ceramic assemblies. The maximum density that can be
achieved while maintaining the nanofibrous structure. Identification of any
sintering phenomena associated exclusively with the nanofiber shape. The
research activities are carried out with several representative oxide ceramic
nanofibers (alumina, silica, zirconia, Mg-Al spinel, and combinations thereof)
arranged into 2-D and 3-D nanofibrous constructs. The research is centered on
the investigation of (i) effects of the individual fiber behavior and fiber-
fiber interaction in the nanofibrous assembly during calcination/sintering; (ii)
relationships between the ceramic nanofiber packing, sintering behavior and
final structure of nanofiber-based ceramics; (iii) structure /mechanical
property relationships in fabricated nanofiber-based constructs, and (iv)
building models that are applicable to various nanofibrous ceramic systems to
explain and predict material behavior. An advanced high-yield free-surface
electrospinning method is employed in this study to produce the ceramic
precursor fibers and fibrous assemblies in sizeable quantities with
characteristics not achievable by other methods. The project involves two
graduate students on the Ph.D. track and provides the research opportunities on
a yearly basis to at least three undergraduate students and three local high-
school students interested in science.