* 1708544
* Midwestern Young Researchers Conference on Commutative Algebra and Related Disciplines: KUMUNU Jr 2017
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Mark Walker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 02/28/2019
* USD 6,800.00

This award supports participation in the 2017 KUMUNUjr Conference, to be held at
the University of Nebraska-Lincoln during April 8-9, 2017. KUMUNUJr is an annual
conference series designed to promote interaction among junior researchers in
commutative algebra and related disciplines (including homological algebra,
algebraic geometry, K-theory, and coding theory) at Midwestern schools. The
conference series is anchored by the Universities of Kansas (KU), Missouri -
Columbia (MU), and Nebraska - Lincoln (NU). The conference will last for two
days and will feature six talks by post-docs or senior graduate students and
five talks by junior graduate students. The conference will be open to all
interested graduate students and post-docs. Special efforts will be made to
recruit women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the conference are to foster collaboration among young researchers in
commutative algebra from Midwestern institutions, and to expose commutative
algebra students and postdocs from Midwestern institutions to the current work
being done in their fields at neighboring institutions. The primary impacts of
the conference are its enrichment of the research careers of the participants
and the dissemination of recent ideas in commutative algebra research at the
graduate and postdoctoral levels. In particular, the interaction and exposure to
the work of their peers will benefit students from universities with small
commutative algebra research groups, those who will become faculty at small
institutions, women, and members of groups underrepresented in mathematics. In
addition, participants will take ideas and collaborations initiated at the
conference to the institutions where they eventually establish
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web page:
http://www.math.unl.edu/~ecanton2/KUMUNUjr/2017/