* 1708160
* Cavity-based atom interferometry for testing gravity and dark-sector physic
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Holger Mueller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 902,948.00

This project will pioneer new measurements of the gravitational interaction
between atoms and a 100-gram mass. To make sensitive measurements, this project
will use an atom interferometer to study how gravity affects the quantum phase
of atoms. New tests of gravitational physics are crucial for studying the nature
of Dark Energy and Dark Matter, and thus understanding the history and fate of
the universe. Precise measurements of gravity can also improve military and
commercial navigation, and help study underground resources such as mineral ore
deposits and groundwater aquifers. This project will train students to develop
advanced atom interferometry technology that will have many applications in
atomic and molecular physics, navigation, and fundamental studies of
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fact that gravity is so weak relative to the
other fundamental forces of nature has made it relatively elusive. For example,
gravitational interactions between two individual atoms cannot yet be measured.
This is a major obstacle for gaining a better understanding of hypothetical new
forces that could arise from cosmological dark energy (which is thought to drive
the accelerated expansion of the universe) and the effects of gravity in the
microscopic world, where the laws of quantum mechanics apply. This research team
has built the first instrument (an atom interferometer) able to measure the
gravitational force between individual atoms and a miniature (1-inch diameter)
source mass. For this project they will apply this unique instrument to perform
several new experiments. First, they will use it to look for evidence for small
corrections to the gravitational force that might arise as a consequence of
cosmological Dark Energy. This will close the gap that exists in the parameter
space between results from microscopic experiments (colliders, atomic structure,
and atom and neutron interferometers) and macroscopic ones (torsion balances and
solar system physics). Second, they will improve the instrument by extending the
coherence time of the atoms to 10 seconds, which would be the longest
demonstrated in any matter-wave interferometer. The instrument will then be used
to demonstrate the gravitational Aharonov-Bohm effect, an effect of gravity on
the quantum state of a particle, which can only be observed with a quantum
sensor such as an atom interferometer.