* 1708773
* Development of Fluorine Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy as a Versatile Probe of Structure and Chemical Environment in Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Tatyana Polenova, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 793,400.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professors Angela M. Gronenborn from the University of
Pittsburgh and Tatyana Polenova of the University of Delaware. The research
project involves the use of fluorine nuclear magnetic spectroscopy (NMR), a
versatile analytical tool in chemistry used for probing chemical structures and
geometries. Naturally-occurring, magnetically-active isotopes of elements such
as deuterium (a form of hydrogen), carbon (C-13) and nitrogen(N-15) are most
commonly studied in biomolecular NMR; however, fluorine (F-19) is a very
attractive and sensitive nucleus, which offers rich information about molecules
in the solution and solid states. The overall goal of this research program is
to establish fluorine-19 NMR spectroscopy as a versatile approach for describing
the structure and geometry of proteins. The project involves an integration of
computational and experimental approaches. The broader impact plans integrate
scientific training with studies in the humanities in an effort to prepare
students for communicating science to the public. In addition, there are
educational activities that involve a graduate student exchange program between
the laboratories of the academic researchers and industry collaborators at
Bruker. These students spend 2-3 weeks acquiring complementary training in
advanced experimental biophysical chemistry, hands-on NMR spectroscopy, and
instrumentation. Outreach activities for undergraduates and high-school students
attract students with diverse backgrounds into the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of this project are to develop fluorine-19 chemical shifts
as a probe of geometry, electronic structure, chemical reactivity, and dynamics
in peptides and proteins. The project integrates fluorine-19 solution and solid-
state NMR parameters with quantum chemical calculations. The research exploits
the vast range of chemical shifts and the sparsity of fluorine-19 sites, to
develop solution and solid-state NMR experiments for mapping out long-range
distances and interaction sites in peptides and proteins. The research may
overcome the current challenges in the calculations of accurate fluorine-19
chemical shift tensors for biochemical systems and in fluorine-based distance
measurements. Given the simplicity of biosynthetic incorporation of fluorine
into a wide variety of specific and unique sites, the approaches enable
fluorine-19 solution and solid-state NMR applications for a broad range of
biochemical systems.