* 1708315
* Carbon Nanomaterial Devices for Infrared and Terahertz Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Junichiro Kono, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

Although technologies for the manipulation and detection of light in the visible
and near-infrared range of the electromagnetic spectrum have seen extraordinary
success, devices for the mid-infrared (MIR) and terahertz (THz) range of the
electromagnetic spectrum have yet to reach maturity. Expanding access to this
frequency range holds promise for applications in the fields of health, energy,
space, communications, imaging, and sensing. Carbon nanomaterials have unique
physical properties, which make them suitable candidates for applications in the
MIR and THz range. Depending on the type of carbon nanotubes, they strongly
absorb light in the entire frequency range from the visible to the THz region.
One can select the type of carbon nanotube for a given application by selecting
for a particular frequency range. Graphene absorbs light over the entire
electromagnetic spectrum as well, and furthermore, one can tune the strength of
absorption in the MIR and THz range by applying a gate voltage. Graphene also
has a high electrical conductivity, making it suitable for high operation speed.
The goal of this research is to develop devices for the detection and
manipulation of light in the MIR and THz region, using sheets of aligned carbon
nanotubes, graphene, and a combination of the two utilizing the best properties
of each material.&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Carbon
nanomaterials such as single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and graphene are
low-dimensional materials with electronic, photonic, and magnetic properties
that are suitable for a variety of optoelectronic device applications especially
in the less technologically developed mid-infrared (MIR) and terahertz (THz)
spectral ranges. Depending on chirality, SWCNTs strongly absorb radiation across
the entire electromagnetic spectrum. Recently, the fabrication of wafer-scale
films of aligned, densely packed, and chirality-enriched SWCNTs has been
developed using slow vacuum filtration of SWCNT solution. These films maintain
the extraordinary properties of one-dimensional/anisotropic SWCNTs in a
macroscopically aligned film, bringing the extraordinary properties of the
nanomaterial to a technologically useful macroscopic scale. For instance,
depending on the polarization of radiation with respect to the nanotube
alignment in the film, one can strongly absorb or completely transmit incident
radiation over a broad frequency range, including the MIR and THz regions.
Graphene also absorbs light in the entire electromagnetic spectrum, but the
carrier density can be tuned by electrostatic gating to control the absorption
of light in the MIR and THz regions. Furthermore, the high electrical
conductivity of graphene leads to high operation speed. The goal of this
research is to create hyperbolic metamaterials, photodetectors, and modulators
in the MIR and THz range, utilizing aligned SWCNT films, graphene, and a
combination of the two materials.