* 1708213
* Gravitational Radiation and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 990,000.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) has detected
gravitational waves (GWs) --ripples in space and time-- that were emitted by the
collision of two black holes billions of light-years from Earth. The rate and
accuracy of these detections will improve as LIGO is upgraded. By comparing the
detected waves with detailed predictions of the waves, scientists can measure
properties (locations, masses, spins) of the black holes and learn about how
they might have formed and how they warp space and time as they collide. The
predictions are made using the equations of General Relativity, written down by
Einstein in 1915 but unsolvable (for colliding black holes) until about 2005
with the development of advanced methods and powerful supercomputers. This
project supports theoretical work designed to underpin and improve LIGO's
ability to extract from observed GWs the rich information that the waves carry.
This includes the improvement and use of the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC),
currently the most accurate computer code for solving Einstein's equations for
black hole binaries. SpEC will be used to carry out numerical solutions of
black-hole collisions for the purpose of analyzing LIGO data. In addition, a new
computer code SpECTRE will be developed; this is a next-generation upgrade of
SpEC designed for new upcoming computer architectures and accuracies beyond
those of current codes. SpECTRE will be used to predict gravitational waveforms
from two colliding neutron stars and from a black hole colliding with a neutron
star. Gravitational waves from neutron-star collisions are expected to be
observed by LIGO, and can teach scientists about how matter behaves at ultra-
high densities. This program will also serve as a training ground for young
physicists and astrophysicists. The new code SpECTRE and its output will be
publicly released. Group members will reach out to the general public through
lectures, interactive web pages, and YouTube videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
combining analytical techniques and numerical simulations with SpEC: (i)
Gravitational-wave signals for black-hole binaries will be generated for use in
LIGO data analysis, will be used to calibrate analytic models, and will be used
to produce numerical surrogate models that can evaluate a single waveform in
milliseconds while retaining the accuracy of full numerical simulations; and
(ii) the dynamical behavior of highly curved spacetime will be explored via
analytic, perturbative, and numerical approaches. The next-generation open-
source code SpECTRE will be developed for numerical relativity simulations with
matter and radiation. SpECTRE uses Discontinuous Galerkin finite element
methods. It is designed for high accuracy and high scalability on current and
future supercomputers by following a novel task-based parallelization paradigm.
SpECTRE's initial version already implements general-relativistic
magnetohydrodynamics. It will be upgraded to handle the dynamical space times of
neutron star-neutron star and black hole-neutron star mergers, including
nuclear-theory based hot equations of state and neutrinos. SpECTRE will be
applied to studies of BH and accretion disk formation to understand dynamics and
GW emission. It will be used for high-accuracy ultra-long neutron star inspiral
simulations to predict GW signals and help LIGO constrain the nuclear equation
of state.