* 1708919
* RUI: A platform technology for elucidating design rules of the Epoxomicin synthase, enabling biosynthesis of complex anti-tumor molecules
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Katharine Watts, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 343,306.00

Bio-active natural products (pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals) are generally
difficult to replicate chemically, because they result from a sequence of
reactions that add, piece by piece, different subunits to the growing molecule.
As a result, they are harvested primarily from plant material, usually with low
yield of product. This project will investigate a strategy that manufactures
subunits of the larger drug molecule in the absence of cells, then brings the
subunits together to create the final product. If successful, this could
dramatically improve the efficiency of large molecule drug production, and could
also increase the speed of identification of more effective drug molecules.
Research efforts will be driven primarily by undergraduate students who will
participate in all proposed experiments and broad dissemination of results.
Undergraduate students will also lead inquiry-based learning modules for K-12
outreach through an established "Learn by Doing Lab" and through expansion of
the SciTrek program into local schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches
to the biomanufacturing of previously intractable natural products are limited
in their capacity to biosynthesize new natural products of interest on-demand.
The primary objective of this project is to enable and facilitate on-demand
biosynthesis of natural products and their derivatives. Specifically, a novel
approach to elucidating the mechanistic underpinnings of epoxomicin natural
product biosynthesis machinery will be developed by 1) "dissecting" the non-
ribosomal peptide - polyketide synthase (NRP-PKS) mega-enzyme that synthesizes
epoxomicin, 2) identifying the molecular determinants of substrate specificity,
and 3) engineering the epoxomicin biosynthesis machinery for the generation of
derivatives. These metabolic engineering efforts will be pursued in a cell-free
environment; the open nature of this platform will provide direct access to
metabolic reaction conditions for design-build-test cycles that are more rapid
than traditional platforms for metabolic engineering. Potential contributions
include A) knowledge of biochemical principles by which NRP-PK mega-enzymes
biosynthesize complex natural products; and B) a platform technology that
enables engineering and bio-manufacturing of complex natural products on-demand.
Advances made through this work will apply directly to characterization and
engineering of a myriad of other NRP-PKS mega-enzymes. In addition, this work
will provide a foundation for training undergraduate students in conducting
biotechnological research and communicating science to their community.