* 1708334
* A study of unconventional transport in electron-doped oxide superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* richard greene, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity, the complete absence of
electrical resistance, is an amazing low temperature property of some elements
and compounds. This quantum property of solids was discovered in 1911 and was
believed to be fully understood in 1957 by the Bardeen, Cooper, Schrieffer (BCS)
theory. In 1987 some copper oxide compounds (cuprates) were discovered with
unexpectedly high superconducting transition temperatures (up to 140 Kelvin).
This high-temperature superconductivity cannot be explained by the conventional
BCS mechanism and it is not presently understood. A complete understanding of
high-temperature superconductivity is one of the major unsolved problems of
condensed matter physics. The solution to this problem could lead to the
discovery of room temperature (300 Kelvin) superconductors, a development with
very significant practical applications. This project focuses on experimental
transport studies on one class of cuprate compounds where the superconductivity
can be completely suppressed by the application of a small magnetic field. This
enables the normal metallic state to be studied over a full range of temperature
from 300 K to well below 1K. An understanding of the normal metal state is
believed to be crucial for a full understanding of the origin of the
superconductivity. The transport experiments are planned on specially prepared
thin films with variation of the magnetic field, the temperature and electron
doping, all of which change the normal state properties in ways that are
expected to give deep insight into the nature of the superconductivity. This
project supports the education of PhD and undergraduate students at the
University of Maryland---an urban university with a diverse population---in
advanced vacuum deposition and electronic characterization techniques. These
techniques have proven to be excellent training for productive scientific
careers in academic and technology settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanism of superconductivity and the
non-Fermi liquid normal state in strongly correlated copper oxides (cuprates) is
one of the most significant unsolved problems of condensed matter physics. Much
progress has been made, but there are still many puzzles to be solved. In the
last few years some dramatic new experimental results have been found that give
new insights into the physics of the hole-doped cuprates. Since hole- and
electron-doped cuprates should obey the same fundamental physics, the goal of
this project is to gain a more detailed understanding of the normal state and
superconducting properties of the electron-doped (n-doped) cuprate
superconductors. This new information should allow the mechanism of the
unconventional superconductivity in all cuprates to be determined. A
comprehensive set of experiments helps understand the nature of the normal state
when superconductivity is suppressed by a magnetic field. The n-doped cuprates
are particularly advantageous for this because the low temperature normal state
(0&lt; T&lt; Tc) can be reached with a modest dc magnetic field (H &lt; 10 T).
An understanding of the nature of the normal state of the cuprates is believed
to be crucial for understanding the cause of high-Tc superconductivity in both
n- and p-type cuprates. The experimental techniques to be used are: resistivity,
Hall Effect, magnetoresistance, Nernst effect, thermopower, and tunneling. Some
transport experiments are performed at very high magnetic field at the NSF
supported high magnetic field labs in Tallahassee and Los Alamos. A study of the
superconducting state in the over doped region of the electron-doped phase
diagram is also to be done, since anomalous behavior recently found there is
suggestive of fundamentally new physics. With outside collaborators, penetration
depth, high-field Nernst and thermal diffusivity experiments are attempted. This
project incorporates the training of high-school students, undergraduate science
majors, graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists in various experimental
aspects of condensed matter physics research. As in the past, the principal
investigator encourages women and underrepresented groups to participate in this
project. The external collaborations in this project provide a unique vehicle
for students to experience research in different laboratory environments, i.e.,
university, industry, and government. An ongoing participation in the Graduate
Resources Advancing Diversity (GRADMAP) program at the University of Maryland
involves undergraduates in research exposure programs designed to attract a
broader audience to graduate studies. Efforts to encourage a broader education
in science via existing Physics department outreach programs with predominately
minority public-school students near the University of Maryland are continued.
These include, Physics is Phun, Physics Discovery Days, and the Summer School
Girl's Program.