* 1708173
* Polaron and Spin Transport in Nanoscale Molecular Junctions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* C. Daniel Frisbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry. Professor C. Daniel Frisbie of the
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is supported to develops techniques both for
making ultrathin films (1-10 nm, a tiny fraction of a human hair in width) of
organic semiconductors and for sensitively measuring their conduction properties
using an atomic force microscope (AFM). The organic films are made in such a way
that molecular orientation is precisely controlled so that electrical conduction
is measured in the most favorable direction. These methods advance the frontiers
of organic semiconductor science that underpin display technology by providing
new knowledge about how charges move in oriented molecules. Organic
semiconductors belong to a new class of functional molecular materials that have
achieved widespread commercial success in organic light emitting devices (OLEDs)
employed in smart phone displays and televisions. Understanding the electrical
conduction properties of these molecular semiconductors on microscopic "even
nanoscopic" length scales is vital to their continued improvement. Integrating
the research with education provides research opportunities for graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, training them to be the next generation
of experts in molecular synthesis and characterization, electrical conductance
measurements, and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The plan leverages
unique experimental approaches developed by the PI and his students over the
last 15 years including (i) conducting probe atomic force microscopy (CP-AFM)
for forming metal-molecule-metal junctions and (ii) oligoimine click chemistry
for building surface-anchored pi-conjugated wires with monomer-by-monomer
control over chain architecture. There are four project goals: (1) to use
isotopic labeling to understand the nature of polarons and polaron hopping
transition states in pi-conjugated molecular wires; (2) to investigate polaron
size effects on hopping transport; (3) to measure spin transport as a function
of both molecular wire length and tailored architecture using CP-AFM spin valve
junctions with ferromagnetic (FM) contacts; (4) to demonstrate electronic
structure control and current switching. The team collaborates with two quantum
chemistry groups that provide theoretical and computational support for the
project. Overall, the research plan balances lower risk experiments that are
certain to yield important results with higher risk ideas that open up new
directions.