* 1708299
* Collaborative Research: ACI-CDS&E: Highly Parallel Algorithms and Architectures for Convex Optimization for Realtime Embedded Systems (CORES)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Glen Archer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 349,988.00

Embedded processors are ubiquitous, from toasters and microwave ovens, to
automobiles, planes, drones and robots and are typically very small processors
that are compute and memory constrained. Real-time embedded systems have the
additional requirement of completing tasks within a certain time period to
accurately and safely control appliances and devices like automobiles, planes,
robots, etc. Convex optimization has emerged as an important mathematical tool
for automatic control and robotics and other areas of science and engineering
disciplines including machine learning and statistical information processing.
In many fields, convex optimization is used by the human designers as
optimization tool where it is nearly always constrained to problems solved in a
few hours, minutes or seconds. Highly Parallel Algorithms and Architectures for
Convex Optimization for Realtime Embedded Systems (CORES) project takes
advantage of the recent advances in embedded hardware and optimization
techniques to explore opportunities for real-time convex optimization on the
low-cost embedded systems in these disciplines in milli- and micro-seconds. The
development of novel algorithms and their high-performance implementations for
the real-time solution of practical engineering and scientific optimization
problems on the embedded system will open new opportunities in the area of
emerging computational science and engineering for cyber physical systems on
low-cost platforms. Equally important is the CORES contributions to the
education of the next generation of researchers and creators of future
infrastructure for realtime computational systems for problems involving
engineering optimization. Foremost, CORES will provide undergraduate and
graduate level educational opportunities with a multidisciplinary breadth
spanning areas as diverse as optimization theory, parallel algorithms for
numerical optimization, embedded computer systems, and heterogeneous computing
architectures. Interactions with the control engineering and auto industries in
the State of Michigan confirms the need for the development of expertise in this
area for present and future engineering research and development. The results
from CORES research will have an impact in the fields of engineering
optimization and computing infrastructure for cyber physical systems.



The current algorithms for realtime convex optimization can only solve the
problem with about a hundred unknowns in the Karush Kuhn Tucker (KKT) convex
optimization matrices. This is because the realtime solution enforces a strict
time limit on the linear solver (e.g., in microseconds) and the current
algorithms are not designed to fully utilize the limited compute power of the
embedded system (e.g., a few CPU cores, plus a GPU). The CORES project will
analyze the structure of complex multi-dimensional convex optimization
algorithms and replaces the existing sequential implementations, which are the
current performance bottleneck, with implementations of new tracking algorithms.
Efficient implementations of the algorithms that can effectively leverage the
compute power of the scalable heterogeneous system architecture (SHSA) of the
embedded system will be developed. The goal is to speed up the solution process
and scale up the size of the optimization problems by orders of magnitude for
realtime embedded applications such as control of complex cyber-physical systems
(CPS). Specifically, CORES will focus on: (1) Development of high performance
linear solvers that exploit the structures of the KKT matrices and leverage the
compute power of SHSA and (2) Development of automatic code generation and
analysis tools that analyze the structure of the convex optimization problem
from a high level modeling language like MATLAB or PYTHON, perform a mapping to
a decomposed parallel algorithm, and generate a hybridized multicore CPU and GPU
code in OpenCL/CUDA format. Tools that CORES aims to develop come with
hierarchical parallel-feature extraction, targeted for various computing
elements of SHSA e.g. CPUs and GPU) in a way that eliminates the inefficiencies
of inter-processors data sharing. Emerging SHSA combines general-purpose low-
latency CPU cores with programmable high-bandwidth vector processing engines on
a single platform, connected through a high speed data transfer engines that
could still become the performance bottleneck. This feature creates unique
opportunities for CORES, and others, to develop sophisticated and specialized
computational algorithms and tools for engineering applications such as machine
learning and autonomous vehicles that can exploit such architectures for
significantly enhancing performance and scaling up the problem size, while
reducing the cost.

This project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer & Information Science & Engineering and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.