* 1708128
* Physical Models for Cancer Progression
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

The goal of this project is to use theoretical and computational tools to
decipher general principles and to quantitatively describe tumor evolution. The
PI will address two problems in cancer research: (a) how the interplay of
distinct types of somatic mutations impacts tumor evolution and (b) what is the
mechanism of origin of tumor heterogeneity. Solutions to these problems, which
are relevant to all cancers, using physics-based models and analytical tools
based on concepts in glass physics will be sought. The outcome of this work will
provide a quantitative and integrated picture of a few key important issues in
cancer research. The results will provide a platform for analyzing clinical
data, as the initial studies already demonstrate. The PI will provide training
of the next generation of students and postdoctoral research fellows in the area
of theoretical research on cancer in which physics concepts and quantitative
methods will play an increasing role. The training of these scientists will
include sustained efforts to integrate the field of glass physics into cancer
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major issues will be investigated: (1) Role
of beneficial passenger or mini-drivers mutations on cancer progression:
According to the somatic mutation theory, cancer is caused by clonal expansion
of cells due to accumulation of mutations over a life time that gives fitness
advantage to tumor cells. Much of the focus has been on driver mutations as the
cause of cancer, and very little attention has been paid to passenger mutation.
The PI will use models that consider the interplay of driver mutations as well
as deleterious and beneficial passenger mutations to obtain quantitative
predictions for tumor evolution and cancer dormancy in terms of mutation rates,
population size, and fitness of mutation types. (2) Physical models for Cancer
Heterogeneity: There is a resurgent interest in understanding the origin of non-
genetic cancer heterogeneity, although its importance in affecting cancer
therapy was appreciated decades ago. Clarifying the origin of heterogeneity
requires creating three dimensional models accounting for the birth and death of
cells. In addition, the proposed models must include physical inter cellular
forces, allowing us to quantify tumor microenvironment and its evolution with
realistic dynamics. The PI will use two models that explicitly account for both
spatial migration (characteristic of cells that have lost or have reduced
E-cadherin expression) and adhesive forces as found in epithelial cells. The PI
suggests that some of the theoretical concepts rooted in glass physics are
necessary to fully understand cancer heterogeneity. The expected results will
not only bridge the two fields but also provide a way to describe quantitatively
the migration of cancer cells from their sites of origin to distant sites.