* 1708999
* Understanding Polymer Crystallization at Molecular Levels: A Solid-State NMR Study
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Toshikazu Miyoshi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,127.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 70 % of industrial plastics
are made of semicrystalline polymers, which have the ability to crystallize when
processed industrially. The inherent nature of polymer molecules, consisting of
very long molecular chains, leads to a highly complex hierarchy of structures in
the solid state. The ability to control these hierarchical structures
significantly influences mechanical and thermal properties of the resulting
materials. Thus, semicrystalline polymers are used in a wide variety of
applications including packaging, textiles, automobile, airplane parts, energy,
biocompatible materials, and others. To further improve properties of
semicrystalline polymers, it is necessary to understand their detailed
structures in the solid state as well as the mechanisms of structural formation
at the molecular level. This project focuses on fundamental understanding of
molecular-level structures of semicrystalline polymers in samples crystallized
in various controlled ways, and may lead to predictions of improved properties
for commercially available polymeric materials. The PI will use novel magnetic
resonance techniques to probe the molecular trajectory of polymer chains in the
solid state of such polymer materials. This information will provide
unprecedented detail about the molecular morphology of polymers and the
interconnections among crystals, and would have implications on their mechanical
properties. This project will also include advanced scientific training of
graduate students in technologically important areas. They will experience a
wide range of polymer research covering polymer synthesis, crystallization,
advanced instrumentation, and molecular dynamics simulations. The research
results will be reported in scientific journals and presented by the PI and
students at national scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer crystallization induces structural changes of
polymer molecules from random coils to folded chains in thin crystals. The
mechanism of crystallization has been theoretically and experimentally studied
in many publications over the past several decades. However, no decisive
conclusion has been reached regarding the crystallization mechanism and chain-
level structure. The PI has developed advanced techniques for 13C-13C double
quantum (DQ) NMR combined with selective isotopic 13C labeling. Using these
together with spin-dynamics simulation enables determination of the re-entrance
sites of folded chains, the adjacent re-entry fraction, the successive folding
number of semicrystalline polymers in the bulk and in solution-grown single
crystals as a function of crystallization temperature. These experiments shed
light on the extent of adjacent re-entry of polymer chains in solution-grown and
bulk materials, the formation of three-dimensional nanostructures, and the
effect of crystallization kinetics on the extent of chain folding. These aspects
can be correlated with bundle and aggregation models and recent molecular
dynamics simulation results. The planned experiments will further investigate
the effects on chain trajectory in crystalline regions for a variety of
important parameters including i) molecular weight, ii) polymer concentration,
iii) solvent-polymer interactions, iv) confined spaces, v) entanglements, and
vi) melt-memory. Such studies will provide detailed crystallization mechanisms
of flexible semicrystalline polymers while contributing to the advanced training
of students in technologically important areas.