* 1708467
* Collaborative Research:  Environmental Electron Doping of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles:  Influence on Particle Properties and Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Drew Latta, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 298,906.00

This award is funded jointly by the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS)
Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Geobiology and Low Temp
Geochemistry Program in the Division of Earth Sciences. Professor Scherer
(University of Iowa, UI) and Professor Tratnyek (Oregon Health Sciences
University) study the electrochemical behavior of iron oxides in soil and water.
Iron oxides are found in virtually all surface environments on Earth, and have
also been identified on the surface of Mars. These tiny, often nano-sized (1
billionth of a meter), particles are also major components of paints, steel, and
batteries. Despite their environmental and technological relevance, the
electrochemical behavior of iron oxides in the environment remains poorly
understood. The goal of the project is to understand the behavior of iron oxide
nanoparticles in water and soil. This understanding may help environmental
chemists and engineers address important water quality issues such as arsenic in
groundwater and develop alternative methods for low-cost, low-energy water
treatment. This work aids in the protection of public health by advancing
predictions of chemical exposure from surface and ground waters. It also
provides important insights into how land use changes impact climate change, as
carbon is often directly bound to iron oxides in soils. The graduate students at
UI working on this research project are part of the NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) program in Sustainable Water Development. Professors Scherer and Tratnyek
develop and lead educational outreach efforts to K-12 students and water
treatment professionals. Professor Scherer uses LEGO Molecule Kits to develop
hands-on activities for students to learn about environmental reactions and
Professor Tratnyek workshops for technical training certification for wastewater
and water operators at a local community college. The results from this research
may help protect public health by providing new knowledge on how to minimize
exposure to contaminants in water (e.g., arsenic, which is linked to iron oxide
solubility) and manipulate iron availability to raise primary productivity of
oceanic waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that iron (Fe) oxides are
semiconductors and that their properties and behavior can be altered
significantly by introducing trace impurities, i.e., doping. It is, however,
still unclear to what extent electron doping of iron oxides occurs in the
natural environment. The goal of this project is to determine whether iron oxide
nanoparticles can be doped with electrons from reaction with natural chemical
species, such as ferrous iron and sulfide, and how doping alters iron oxide
properties and reactivity. Advanced spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques
are used to measure changes in electronic or magnetic particle properties, such
as band gap and MÃ¶ssbauer transition temperatures. In addition, a suite of
electrochemical methods is used to measure the redox properties of the
particles. The reactivity of electron doped nanoparticles is measured with
respect to contaminant oxidation, contaminant reduction, and dissolution. in
additional to possible impacts in the environment, this research may also
provide new insights on the material properties of Fe oxide which can be used to
develop innovative, cost-effective batteries for energy storage and conversion.