* 1708257
* Student Travel Support for the 2017 International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD); Boston, MA; November 5-8, 2017
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Omer Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal requests funding to assist 15 US-based graduate students for
attending the 35-th IEEE International Conference on Computer Design (ICCCD)
with the intention of exposing them to the discipline and to encourage them to
pursue careers in emerging issues in computer architecture. Participation in
this symposium is considered an important part of the graduate school experience
of students in the field of computer engineering, providing the opportunity to
interact with senior researchers and to be exposed to leading edge work in the
field. The support will enable dissemination of scientific knowledge to students
who would otherwise not have the experience. This student travel support will
also facilitate the development of promising graduate students, and will thus
indirectly also help train the workforce of the future in the important area of
computer engineering. Women and underrepresented groups will be given due
consideration for receiving support through this grant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Conference on Computer Design
(ICCCD) for the past 34 years has been the premier academic forum where emerging
trends and novel concepts computer design issues are explored. The 35-th edition
of this conference will addresses key trends and challenges in the area that
includes Keynote and Plenary Talks, Technical Paper Sessions, Tutorials, Panels,
Special Sessions. The conference committee has set up an adequate evaluation
criteria to select the qualified students from a pool of applicants formed via
open advertisement. The committee also plans to consider a small number of
undergraduate applicants in order to better reach a diverse population of
potential researchers in this field.