* 1708016
* Current-driven magnetic sources at microwave frequency
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Gregory Fuchs, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 359,998.00

Microwave frequency sources are a critical component of technology for
applications ranging from mobile devices to communications to computing. There
is a need to develop extremely compact sources, and to develop sources that are
agile, meaning their frequency can be shifted on the shortest possible
timescale. A good candidate is nanoscale magnetic oscillators that produce
highly tunable microwave frequencies through the application of d.c. current.
Singly, these magnetic oscillators have insufficient output power and too broad
a linewidth to be applied in technology, however, if they can be connected to
each other so that they synchronize their microwave output, both the power and
the linewidth problem can be overcome. While a few magnetic oscillators have
been coupled together previously, it has been difficult to design them so that
they synchronize in a scalable way. Additionally, understanding the nanoscale
magnetic interactions between oscillators is an interesting scientific problem
that has implications beyond technology. This project will train both
undergraduate and graduate students in an interdisciplinary environment, and it
will offer research experience for science teachers.

In this proposal, the research team introduces three innovate concepts to
overcome the challenge of scalably synchronizing nanoscale magnetic oscillators.
First, they propose to design, model and fabricate lateral magnetic oscillators
driven by the spin Hall effect in a periodic array using concepts from the
emerging field of magnonics. Second, they will employ spatiotemporal magnetic
microscopy to experimentally examine the dynamical modes of these structures,
which will help reveal how individual STOs are coupled to its neighbors in real
devices. This is a new opportunity offered by recent breakthroughs in lateral
spin Hall oscillator devices because magnetic oscillator networks were
previously based on direct injection, vertical transport devices. In those
devices, the magnetic layers are buried and very difficult to image. The
availability of imaging creates an opportunity to engineer devices based on
specific, device-level insight. The third innovate concept is to use
stroboscopic imaging to study loss mechanisms from magnetic modes.
Traditionally, stroboscopic methods are blind to incoherent processes, like the
coupling between spin wave modes that can lead to dynamically enhanced magnetic
damping. By combining microwave driving fields that are both commensurate and
incommensurate with the stroboscope, the research team will examine how energy
can be transferred between useful magnetic modes and spurious magnetic modes.
The insights from this research will enable new and better designs to
synchronize magnetic oscillators.