* 1708706
* A Nanotechnology-Based Wearable Biological Sensor for Continuous Monitoring of Inflammatory Immune Diseases
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xiaogan Liang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 410,000.00

Healthcare is the field in which our modern society is witnessing rapid-paced
and eye-opening technological advancements and demonstrations on a daily basis.
In particular, wearable biological sensors built on a mechanically flexible
substrate hold great promise to enable minimally invasive, point-of-care human
health monitoring. This especially applies to those who need constant care,
including bedridden and neonatal patients. However, current wearable sensors
only allow for measuring a handful of physical parameters, thus lacking
versatility, specificity, and often sensitivity offered by conventional
biochemical techniques operated in a laboratory setting. This research aims to
develop a nanotechnology-based wearable biological sensor device platform that
can be attached onto the curved surface of a mouth guard and enables continuous
monitoring the concentration levels of inflammatory immune disorder biomarker
proteins in saliva at high accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity. This sensor
platform could be eventually translated to wide clinical use to tailor the
immune therapy blocking inflammation-causing agents in the body. Eliminating the
long measurement lead-time and labor intensiveness that conventional clinical
tests suffer from, the technology coming out of this research has the potential
to provide the means to precisely monitor the immune status of an individual
person, which meets the urgent need for 'Precision (or Personalized) Medicine'
curing systemic immune disorders. In this program, the principal investigators
(PIs) will collaborate with the Ecotek lab's Young Xplorer program in order to
offer after-school hands-on research experiences in sensor nanofabrication to
K-12 students. This program will allow the PIs to participate in conferences
organized by Science-Technology-Engineering-Mathematics (STEM) societies, such
as Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE), Advancing Hispanics,
Chicanos, and Native Americans in Science (SANCAS) Society, and Society of Women
Engineers (SWE), to stimulate the interests of underrepresented minority
students in nanotechnology-based biological sensor devices and solicit their
participation in the Summer Research Opportunities Program (SROP) hosted by the
PIs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytokines are key biomolecules acting as mediators
and modulators of the complex functional interactions and responses of the
immune system. Quantifying cytokines allows immune responses to be monitored,
providing clinically and immunologically useful information related to
infectious diseases, cancer, autoimmune diseases, allergy transplantation, and
drug discovery. The goal of this research is to establish an integrated device
technology that enables continuous monitoring of the immune status by using a
wearable label-free cytokine biological sensor. With the proposed study
completed, this research will establish nanoscale device fabrication techniques
required for strategically integrating structurally uniform, high-density
nanoplasmonic biological sensor arrays and an atomically thin semiconducting
photodetector device layer onto a mechanically flexible common microsystem
platform. It will also provide fundamental device physics knowledge critically
important to maximize sensor integrability, sensitivity, response speed, analyte
detectability, biological/photo signal transduction efficiency, and versatility
of the device under mechanical deformations on a curved surface. The unique
biosensing scheme used for the fully flexible device employs (1) biologically
tuned nanoplasmonic light absorbance resonance shifts and (2) high-responsivity,
high-quantum-efficiency photoelectronic conversion by two-dimensional
semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) structures. As a result,
the proposed device is expected to enable label-free, continuous, concurrent,
minimally-invasive detection of 4 key salivary cytokine biomarkers at
unprecedented levels of detectability (limit-of-detection (LOD) &lt; 1 pg/mL ~
50fM) and response speed (&lt; 10 min) in point-of-care settings. This sensor
response speed is equivalent to a total assay time more than 20-100 times
shorter than that of the conventional gold standard clinical test. This research
holds great promise to develop the first wearable photoelectronic biological
sensor technology based on the analyte-receptor binding immunoassay mechanism,
which is broadly applicable to detection of a wide variety of protein disease
markers.