* 1708057
* EAGER: Enhancing the Radical Scavenging Activity of Oxide Nanoparticles Beyond the Current Limits - an Unconventional Solution through Multidisciplinary Science
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Thomas Dziubla, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2019
* USD 0.00

1708057&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Enhancing the Radical Scavenging Activity of Oxide
Nanoparticles Beyond the Current Limits - an Unconventional Solution through
Multidisciplinary Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactive oxygen species are
formed as a natural byproduct of normal metabolism in biological systems. Their
levels can increase dramatically during times of environmental stress such as
sun's ultraviolet light, ionizing radiation, exposure to toxic chemicals,
atmospheric pollutants, and inflammation. The imbalance between the production
of reactive oxygen species and their removal by antioxidants results in a net
accumulation of these species in the body, leading to the destruction of the
cells and can cause a range of disorders such as cancer, Parkinson's disease,
Alzheimer's disease, heart failure, stroke, autism, vitiligo, and depression.
Engineered oxide nanoparticles have been shown to possess antioxidant activity
and the ability to effectively regulate and scavenge a variety of reactive
oxygen species. Despite many successes in the field, new breakthroughs are still
needed to develop safer and more effective therapeutic nanoparticles. This
research project seeks to establish a new approach toward the design and
engineering of nanoparticles with high efficacy for trapping the reactive oxygen
species in biological systems. The outcome of this project will allow
researchers to further expand the family of nanoparticles used for the
prevention and treatment of various types of diseases, and will ultimately
impact society's health status and well-being. Besides the immediate impact of
this research on the use of nanoparticles for therapeutic applications, the
proposed scientific concept has the potential to lead to the discovery of highly
responsive and selective nanoparticles for emerging applications such as real
time selective biosensors, engineered plant functions for solar energy
harvesting, and non-degradable polymeric membranes for low-emission vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerium oxide (ceria) nanoparticles have demonstrated the
potential to actively scavenge a variety of reactive oxygen species in cell and
animal models. The capacity of ceria nanoparticles to scavenge free radicals is
strongly related to the exposed particle surfaces and considerably constrained
by the limited number of oxygen vacancies on the surface. While the relatively
immobile lattice vacancies in the core of particles do not contribute to the
observed scavenging capacity of ceria nanoparticles, it may be possible to
access these vacancies to regenerate the consumed oxygen vacancies on the
surface to enhance the scavenging activity. In this Early Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project, an unconventional approach, based on the principles of
oxygen vacancy migration in the field of solid state ionics, will be applied to
explore fundamental relationships between lattice ion mobility and the surface
scavenging activity of nanoparticles. The specific objective of the proposed
research is to explore the scavenging properties of barium cerate nanoparticles
in comparison with ceria nanoparticles in order to compare two compounds with
similar transition metal cations (cerium), but with significantly different
oxygen-ion mobilities. Utilizing lattice vacancies and continuous regeneration
of surface oxygen vacancies to enhance the scavenging activity of nanoparticles
is an entirely new concept to advance the field in novel and unexplored ways. A
multidisciplinary team will synthesize and characterize oxide nanoparticles, and
will evaluate the scavenging activity and redox-induced surface changes of the
nanoparticles using spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques.