* 1709902
* Collaborative Research: From Synthesis, Local and Electronic Structures, to Optical and Scintillating Properties of Lanthanoid Hafnate Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* James Dorman, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2020
* USD 119,676.00

Many chemical substances have the property of emitting radiation, called
luminescence, which is useful in light-emitting applications. Lanthanide
luminescence plays a vital role in our daily life due to the unique optical
properties of these ions with respect to light generation and amplification.
Extending from laser physics, other familiar applications in our regular life
include lighting, displays, optical telecommunications, night vision, security
inks, counterfeiting tags, luminescent coatings, medical imaging, medical
diagnostics, and airport security checks. New and more effective luminescent
materials are desirable from both a technological and an economic necessity in
order to make cheap, widely available, and long-lasting light emitting, or
photonic, devices. Dr. Yuanbing Mao of the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
and Dr. James Dorman of Louisiana State University are making metal oxide
nanoparticles with increased luminescence by developing new preparation methods.
Using various techniques and in collaboration with scientists at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, the research team is figuring out how their reliable
synthesis methods make these nanoparticles ultra-small and uniformly shaped and
sized, at more than 1000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. The
team also studies the relationship between the size, shape, structure,
composition, and luminescence performance of these nanoparticles. The
fundamental understanding gained in this project helps the future design of new
luminescent nanomaterials, photonic devices, and nanoparticle synthesis methods.
Dr. Mao's and Dr. Dormans's research is attractive to students at many levels,
emphasizing the involvement of underrepresented students as research assistants.
The research team has introduced a university-wide seminar series and several
new course modules. Through these activities, Drs. Mao and. Dorman directly
raise awareness and advocacy for nanoscience and optoelectronic materials among
varied demographic groups as a way to improve the community, the national
economy, and the environment. The partnership focuses on building a strong
pipeline for underrepresented students and enabling fruitful student-faculty
exchange programs between the two
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, Dr.
Yuanbing Mao of the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) and Dr. James
Dorman of Louisiana State University (LSU) are supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program to develop a reliable synthetic
process, understandthe growth mechanism, investigate the size effects, and
correlate the crystal, local and electronic structures with the optical and
scintillating properties of these lanthanoid hafnate nanophosphors. Ex situ and
in situ techniques are used to elucidate the synthetic parameters which
determine the particle size and structural parameters for these Ln2Hf2O7
nanoparticles. Based on the obtained results, growth mechanisms of these
nanoparticles are developed for directed design of luminescent nanoparticles
based on application specifications. Next, the relationship between the crystal,
local, and electronic structures of these nanoparticles and their luminescent
properties is probed via complementary techniques, such as Raman spectroscopy,
synchrotron X-ray and neutron diffractions, X-ray absorption, emission and
photoelectron spectroscopies, photoluminescence, and radioluminescence. In
addition, this study provides general guidance for proper selection of Ln2Hf2O7
compounds for suitable applications in a wide variety of devices, such as solid
electrolytes in high temperature solid oxide fuel cells, thermal barrier
coatings, and nuclear waste storage. Dr. Mao involves high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, with an emphasis on underrepresented
students, in his research, and has introduced a university-wide seminar series
and new course modules which highlight the topics of his team?'research. He and
Dr. James Dorman of the Louisiana State University (LSU) communicate science to
students at all age levels, directly raising awareness and advocacy for
nanoscience and optoelectronic materials among varied demographic groups as a
way to improve the community, the national economy, and the environment. The
activities also build a strong pipeline for underrepresented students and enable
fruitful student-faculty exchange programs between UTRGV and LSU.