* 1709315
* Dynamics of Associative Polymers Revealed by Self-Diffusion
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Bradley Olsen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associative polymers are giant
molecules that contain "sticky" functional groups, binding them together with
reversible physical bonds. Some of the most widely used polymers are associative
polymers, including those used to make golf balls, the absorbing gels in
diapers, flow modifiers for shampoos or conditioners, and new materials being
developed for biomedical uses and enhanced oil recovery. The use of these
existing materials and the development of new systems relies on understanding
how the molecules move: how they are processed into the shape of a final object
and how they deform under mechanical force. Ultimately, these properties are
governed by the way that the molecules move on microscopic scales. Recently
researchers have discovered that molecular motion in associative polymers shows
unexpected relationships between how fast a molecule moves and the distance that
it moves, prompting a reconsideration of some of the scientific understanding
behind the design of the polymer properties. This project will use specialized
X-ray and laser light techniques to study associative polymer motion at the
micro and nanoscale, allowing us to further understand the mechanisms by which
they move. Theory and simulation of these systems will be applied to relate
molecular properties to the chemical design of new polymers, providing
fundamental insight that allows faster discovery of improved polymeric
materials. A diverse group of graduate and undergraduate researchers will
apprentice through this project, developing scientific expertise that will
contribute to the U.S. economy. The discoveries in this project will be shared
with the public through YouTube and scientific publications and presentations
and will also be developed in collaboration with high-school teachers into new
materials to inspire the creativity and inventiveness of young
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of associative polymers has led to a solid
theoretical understanding based on transient network theory for telechelic
polymers, which models the dynamics of the networks based upon kinetic equations
that model bond association and dissociation during deformation. These concepts
have also led to the development of sticky Rouse and sticky reptation theories,
grounded in the same conceptual framework but applicable to polymers with
associating groups spaced along the backbone. Rheological measurements on a huge
variety of associative polymer systems have established the validity of these
approaches, at minimum in a qualitative sense. However, these theories have not
been similarly tested using experimental measurements of diffusion dynamics.
Recent diffusion measurements performed using forced Rayleigh scattering (FRS)
show something that is not anticipated by any of the theories: an apparent
super-diffusive regime on length scales 10-1000 times greater than Rg, even
though the gels show no signs of structure at this scale. Similar behavior has
now been observed in four separate systems, suggesting it is common across many
polymers. It is hypothesized that this super-diffusive regime is due to
molecular "jumping" or "hopping" as the dominant diffusion mechanism at long
length scales, something that is not anticipated in existing theories.
Preliminary Brownian dynamics simulations performed on a simplified associative
polymer model for center-of-mass diffusion show that this hypothesis produces
diffusion results that qualitatively match the FRS measurements. Throughout the
proposal, effects of molecular design will be systematically explored using FRS
and X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS), both in experiments and using
simplified coarse-grained models. Because of the ubiquitous nature of
associative polymers in applications and the key importance of dynamics in these
materials for their end use, the potential for fundamental scientific insight
provided by the proposed work will be large across many different industries and
technology areas, ranging from oil recovery to lubricants to medicine to food.
To share with the broader community excitement about the interesting physics of
these everyday materials, a series of educational videos will be made for
YouTube that explain different aspects of the experiments and theory as they
develop. In the final year of the project, a collaboration will start with a
high-school teacher to develop an educational model that combines the videos
with simple lab rheology experiments to introduce students to the concepts of
associative polymers.