* 1709182
* Exciton Dynamics in Perovskite Quantum Dots and 2D Nanoplatelets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,620.00

Exciton Dynamics in Perovskite Quantum Dots and 2D
Nanoplatelets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program of the Chemistry
Division, Prof. Tianquan Lian and a team of graduate and undergraduate students
at Emory University investigate two emerging classes of nanomaterials. One type
of material (an inorganic class of compounds called perovskites) consists of
extremely small spherical particles (called quantum dots), where the size of the
particle determines how it absorbs and emits light. The other material is a very
thin plate, which can be viewed as a structure with only two dimensions (called
nanoplatelets), made from various semiconductor compounds. The flow of energy in
these materials, in discrete amounts (excitons) can be followed and controlled.
These new materials have potential applications in solar energy conversion and
nanoscale lasers. Developing efficient and cost-effective solar energy
conversion materials is one of the most important scientific challenges of the
21st century. The proposed work will lead to a fundamental understanding of the
properties of these materials, facilitating their further development and many
potential applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bulk perovskite materials have
achieved impressive performance in multiple applications, including highly
efficient solar cells (with certified power conversion efficiencies of &gt; 20%)
and low threshold lasing. Colloidal perovskite quantum dots offer the
possibility to further tune, improve and optimize the properties of these
materials through the quantum confinement effect. Colloidal two-dimensional
cadmium chalcogenide nanoplatelets, are an emerging novel class of semiconductor
quantum well materials with atomically precise thickness. The uniform energy
over lateral dimensions of 10s to 100 nm in nanoplateletes suggests the
possibility of novel exciton properties, such as the giant oscillator strength
transitions effect. These unique properties, differing significantly from zero-
dimensional quantum dots and one-dimenisonal nanorods, suggest many novel
applications in optoelectronic devices and in solar energy conversion. The
proposed studies are aimed at a fundamental understanding of exciton and charge
carrier dynamics in these novel materials, which is essential to their
development, rational design and improvement. The specific aims of the research
plan are: 1) To study how the electron and hole transfer rates from perovskite
QDs to molecular acceptors depend on the QD size and anion identity, testing
theoretical models for charge transfer from QDs; 2) To examine how the
interfacial electron transfer rates from perovskite QDs to oxide nanocrystalline
thin films depend on the QD (size and anion) and oxide (TiO2, SnO2 and ZnO),
testing current theoretical models of interfacial ET at QD/oxide interfaces; 3)
To measure 2D exciton Bohr's radius and exciton center of mass coherent
delocalization length of CdX(X=S, Se, Te) NPLs as a function of layer thickness,
materials, solvent dielectric constant and temperature, testing the
applicability of 2D hydrogenic model for describing excitons in NPLs and the
extent of the giant oscillator strength transition effect; 4) To directly image
the spatial distribution of excitons in CdSe core-only, type I CdSe/CdS
core/crown and type II CdTe/CdSe core/crown NPLs using electron acceptor (TiO2)
modified AFM tips, examining how band alignment in NPL heterostructures affect
exciton spatial distribution. In addition to the training of graduate students
and undergraduate students, the proposed work will lead to the development of
new course materials on clean energy at the undergraduate level and broadened
participation of under-represented minority students.