* 1709763
* Transport and Dynamics of Swimming Microorganisms in Time-Periodic Flows
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Paulo Arratia, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 420,700.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The main goal of this proposal is to understand the
dynamics and behavior of motile (i.e. swimming) microorganisms in flows. Many
microorganisms live and function in environments in which fluid flow is present.
Examples include algae in lowland rivers and ocean, bacteria in the gut and
intestines, phytoplankton in oceans, and sperm cell in human reproductive
tracts. Here, the PI is interested in the transport and mixing of microorganisms
in flows in order to gain insight into many poorly understood phenomena, some of
which are mentioned above. From a technological point of view, motility and flow
interactions are of much interest in applications that include fermentation
processes for vaccine &amp; food production, sewage treatment plants, and
production of biofuels. These processes stand to greatly benefit from a better
understanding of the nontrivial coupling between flow and motility. Here, the PI
proposes a systematic experimental investigation on the effects of (i) flow on
the transport &amp; mixing properties of swimming microorganisms and (ii) of
active stresses on the imposed 2D time-periodic flows. The research team is
composed of a graduate student who is receiving training in fluid dynamics,
biophysics, experimental &amp; statistical methods, and nonlinear dynamics. The
research team also includes undergraduate students, who are supervised by the PI
and the graduate student. The fundamental knowledge obtained from this
investigation can be useful in the development of new models for the transport
and mixing of active matter and of forced active flows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The main goal of this proposal is to
develop fundamental understanding on the transport, mixing, and dynamics of
swimming microorganisms in flows with complex spatiotemporal structures. These
processes are experimentally investigated in well-controlled flows in an
electromagnetically driven thin fluid layer placed atop an array of magnets. A
time-periodic current that travels horizontally through the fluid layer results
in Lorenz forces that drive a (time-periodic) flow in the fluid. Spatially- and
time-resolved velocity fields are obtained using particle tracking methods and
differentiated to obtain the flow stretching fields or Lagrangian structures.
Stretching fields are intimately related to the rate of divergence of initially
nearby-points, which in chaotic flows is exponential in time (t) on the average.
These stretching fields have been used to characterize the mixing dynamics,
predict mixing rates, and the transport of passive impurities and particles, and
are applied to study active matter (i.e. swimming microorganisms) under flow.
Experimentally computed stretching fields are instrumental in understanding the
Lagrangian dynamics, transport, and mixing of self-propelled microorganisms such
as the bacterium V. cholerea and the alga C. reinhardtii. The knowledge obtained
from the proposed work can be potentially useful for the successful design of
controllable underwater autonomous vehicles (micro-swimming robots), the
prevention of waterborne disease outbreaks associated with drinking water, and
development of accurate models for the dispersion of planktonic matter in
oceans. Using such methods, the PI hopes to address many outstanding questions
such as: (i) What are the main flow parameters governing the transport and
mixing of swimming microorganisms in time-periodic flows? (ii) How are the
dynamics of the swimming suspension affected by flow? Does 'bacterial
superfluidity' leads to enhanced transport? (iii) Do microorganisms align with
regions of high stretching and unstable manifolds? (iv) Is mixing enhanced or
hindered by the microorganisms' swimming action? How pullers or pushers affect
the flows finite time Lyapunov exponent?