* 1709646
* Long-distance spin transport in disordered insulators and low-damping metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Barry Zink, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 428,241.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The study of spin transport by excitation of
collective magnetization is an important new frontier in condensed matter
physics. Spin transport in magnetic insulators, metals, or carbon nanomaterials
via degrees of freedom not simply carried by propagating electrons is proving to
be fertile fundamental ground rich with potential technological innovation. New
discoveries in these areas inform future nanoelectronic models that could one
day replace current technologies. For example, a spin information conduit formed
from a disordered magnetic insulator thin film could allow easy materials
integration and an essential inter-connect in a future all-spin computer
processor. Similarly, large spin-wave effects in low-damping metallic
ferromagnets could provide new ways to generate the spin currents needed to
drive such a processor. Optimized carbon nanotube network films offer potential
for spin transport applications, but could convert waste heat to usable energy
if their fundamental thermal and thermoelectric physics is better understood.
This project explores the fundamental science of these potentially
transformative advances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on measuring spin and heat transport
(and their interplay) across three classes of materials: disordered magnetic
insulators, low-damping ferromagnetic metals, and single-wall carbon nanotube
networks. Each of these explores new and potentially transformative directions.
The study of spin transport in disordered magnetic insulators follows on
preliminary results showing that spin transport, driven by the spin Hall effect
and detected via the inverse spin Hall effect, is surprisingly efficient where
antiferromagnetic correlations exist but in the absence of magnetic and
structural long range order. Specific tasks in this area include: 1) initial
tests of amorphous Cr2O3 and NiO, 2) detailed characterization of distance and
geometry dependence, 3) effects of annealing of amorphous YIG, 4) understanding
of thermal gradient dependence, 5) waiting time and aging experiments, and 6)
direct testing for non-equilibrium spin thermal conductivity in the disordered
magnetic films. Exploration of magnon-driven spin and heat transport and
thermoelectric effects in low-damping metals focuses on the Co-Fe alloy system
and is motivated by potentially dramatic new spincaloritronic effects. Specific
tasks here include: 1) studies with the "standard" Zink Lab thermal isolation
platform, 2) characterization of AMR, MTEP, PNE, and ANE, and 3) exploration of
magnon-driven spin currents using e-beam lithographically defined thermal
isolation structures. Finally, study of spin and heat transport in carbon
nanomaterials leverages expertise in preparation and study of highly-tuned
single-wall nanotube network films. Specific tasks here include: 1) study of
Wiedemann-Franz "violation" and doping dependence of thermal conductivity, 2)
designing more sensitive thermal isolation platforms, and 3) testing spin
transport in the networks using a non-local spin valve geometry.