* 1709796
* Bright and responsive fluorescent nucleosides from structure-photophysics relationships
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Byron Purse, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2019
* USD 130,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Byron Purse of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at San Diego State University is developing next-
generation fluorescent nucleosides as tools for studying nucleic acids. In
addition to storing the genetic code, nucleic acids have many important
regulatory roles in gene expression and metabolism. Fluorescent nucleosides are
chemically modified building blocks of nucleic acids that are widely used in
biophysical studies aimed at understanding the regulation of gene expression.
This project aims to enhance the understanding of the relationship between
structure and fluorescence properties of these nucleoside probes, and to use
this knowledge to add new capabilities to the toolkit of fluorescent nucleoside
analogues. Integral to the research plan is the studying of the fluorescence
properties of these new nucleoside analogues in the Physical Chemistry teaching
laboratory of San Diego State University and an outreach program targeting high
school and community college students in the computational work.

The rational design of fluorescent nucleoside analogues with specifically
targeted properties is a great challenge because predicting photo-physical
properties based on structure, especially in a complex environment like a
nucleic acid duplex, is difficult to achieve. In this project, photophysical
studies coupled with density functional theory methods are being used to
establish structure-photophysics relationships, in order to develop next-
generation fluorescent nucleosides with desired fluorescence properties. The
desired fluorescence properties include: (a) large fluorescence turn-on
responses to base stacking (i.e. > 100-fold), (b) brightness matching
conventional fluorophores, sufficient to enable single-molecule biophysics and
tracking of labeled nucleic acids by fluorescence microscopy, and (c) analogues
that absorb and emit at the red end of the visible spectrum.