* 1709667
* CDS&amp;E: Resolving Nonlinearity in Thin Film Chemical Analysis: Roughening, Matrix Effects and Chemical Damage
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lev Gelb, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 345,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division. Professors Lev Gelb and Amy Walker of the University of
Texas at Dallas are improving methods for interpreting surface chemical analysis
data. Many methods for studying a surface or thin film involve blasting it with
high-energy beams of electrons or ions. These approaches provide information
about the atoms and molecules present, but also cause unwanted chemical
reactions and surface roughening. This team is developing easy-to-use analysis
software to account for these "nonlinear" effects. The result is that the
quality of surface chemical analysis data is improved, and this advances
research in fields ranging from energy, to electronics, to advanced materials,
to biotechnology. Graduate and undergraduate students are trained in the
critically important fields of surface characterization, data analysis,
numerical methods, and high-performance computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on two types of nonlinearity in chemical imaging: quantitative
modeling of matrix effects in secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) imaging of
organic surfaces, and resolution of chemical damage and roughening in x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) depth profiling of complex oxides. Extraction
of sample properties in the presence of these nonlinearities is addressed
through physical modeling within a Bayesian framework, which is made possible
through a combination of theoretical developments, modern computing power,
improvements in experimental protocols, and physical understanding of the
underlying phenomena. In order to promote the use and further development of
advanced data analysis in chemical imaging, software developed in this project
is freely distributed and promoted as a community resource, along with online
exercises that illustrate its use and application. SIMS and XPS are widely used
in many areas, so improving the performance of these and related techniques is a
significant long-term benefit to society at large.