* 1709158
* Traveling solvent crystal growth of anisotropic Zintl thermoelectrics.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Alexandra Zevalkink, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 528,739.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric materials are
used to convert heat into electricity. They have applications ranging from
industrial waste-heat recovery, to remote sensing, to space exploration. High
efficiency thermoelectric materials need to simultaneously exhibit high
electrical conductivity, a large Seebeck coefficient and low thermal
conductivity. This combination of properties is exceptionally difficult to
achieve. Materials with highly anisotropic crystal structures offer a potential
strategy to increase the thermoelectric efficiency, because their physical
properties display different values when measured along different
crystallographic directions. The goal of the research funded by this award from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program is to develop a powerful and
adaptable method for single crystal growth of compounds with complex,
anisotropic crystal structures. Characterizing these large crystals advances our
understanding of the fundamental connection between the atomic structure of
materials and the anisotropic thermal and electronic behavior, providing routes
to enhanced thermoelectric efficiency. This interdisciplinary and collaborative
project utilizes facilities at the NSF-supported PARADIM Materials Innovation
Platform. With this Solid State and Materials Chemistry funded award graduate
and undergraduate students are trained in solid state synthesis and physics of
materials; the principal investigator also leverages results from this grant for
outreach activities such as the 'Introduce a Girl to Engineering' day, the 'Lady
Spartans Engineering Summer Camp' and in-class activities at local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research for this award is based on the
understanding that one of the most fundamental conflicts in the design of
thermoelectric materials - the need for simultaneous high electronic mobility
and a high density of states near the Fermi level - can be circumvented by
exploiting anisotropic electronic transport. Zintl intermetallic phases, with
their vast structural variety and excellent high-temperature thermoelectric
performance, stand out as an intriguing subject area for the study of thermal
and electronic transport anisotropy. Although theoretical studies predict
significant thermoelectric efficiency gains along the covalently-bonded, high-
conductivity directions in some Zintl phases, experimental confirmation is
lacking due to the difficulty of growing single crystals suitable for transport
measurements. With this grant from the Solid State Materials Chemistry program
the principal investigator aims to bridge this gap between theory and experiment
by adapting the traveling-solvent floating-zone (TSFZ) crystal growth technique
to the growth of large Zintl single crystals. The TSFZ technique is a crucible-
less method that combines flux growth and directional solidification and is
particularly well-suited for refractory compounds with incongruent melting
transitions. It is a natural extension of flux growth - a historically
successful method for the growth of Zintl crystals - but it allows for the
growth of larger crystals suitable for transport measurements. Zintl
antimonides, which exhibit high thermoelectric efficiency even in
polycrystalline form, are the focus of this work. Characterization of the grown
crystals combined with first principles investigations are used to explore the
link between polyanion dimensionality and transport, with an emphasis on the
anisotropy of electron and phonon velocities and scattering rates. This project
applies a closed-loop approach to material design and selection by directly
validating theoretical predictions, thus leading to a more complete picture of
anisotropic transport behavior in complex semiconductors used in a broad range
of applications. At the same time results from this research are leveraged for
outreach activities such as the 'Introduce a Girl to Engineering' day, the 'Lady
Spartans Engineering Summer Camp' and in-class activities at local high schools.