* 1709351
* CDS&amp;E: D3SC: The Dark Reaction Project:  A machine-learning approach to exploring structural diversity in solid state synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Alexander Norquist, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2019
* USD 645,288.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award receives funds from the Division of
Materials Research, the Chemistry Division and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure. This award supports research and education that uses data-
centric methods to enable the prediction of metal oxide compounds with desired
properties. Organically-templated metal oxides have a tremendous degree of
structural diversity and compositional flexibility. This allows chemists to tune
the structures, properties, and symmetries of these compounds to optimize their
performance in specific applications that include catalysis, molecular sieving,
gas adsorption, and nonlinear optics. However, new compounds are typically
created by a trial-and-error procedure, and creating novel compounds with
specific structures is a grand challenge in solid state chemistry. This project
will develop artificial intelligence techniques for computers called machine
learning techniques that can be used to predict the conditions for chemical
reactions that will increase structural diversity and lead to specific
structural features. This project will also develop machine learning techniques
that generate human-readable explanations about the formation mechanism, which
will be tested in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary impact of
this project will be to decrease the amount of time and to lower the cost of
discovering new materials with specific structural features, which in turn help
bring new materials for applications to market more quickly. This project is an
example of a collaboration among synthetic chemists, computational chemists, and
computer scientists and as a model it may be directly transferred to a wide
range of disciplines and avenues of investigation. Undergraduate student
research opportunities and curricular developments will be involved throughout
the project, thus contributing to the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award receives funds from the
Division of Materials Research, the Chemistry Division and the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure. This award supports research and education that
uses data-centric methods to enable the prediction of metal oxide compounds with
desired properties. Hydrothermal synthesis is widely used to create new metal
oxide materials with a wide range of functional properties and applications.
This project will advance the field by developing software infrastructure for
associating the results of X-ray diffraction experiments with individual
reactions, extracting structural outcome descriptors from this data, and then
determining the extent to which these structural outcomes can be predicted from
reaction description data. This will be achieved by developing structural
outcome descriptors for geometric properties, non-covalent interaction
properties, and electron-density properties, then building machine learning
models that correlate these outcomes to reaction conditions, and finally testing
the quality of these predictions experimentally. Active learning and auditable
and interpretable models will be incorporated into the workflows to help
synthetic chemists select better (more insightful/novel) reactions in an
interactive fashion.