* 1709903
* Implementing Techtivities to Promote Students' Covariational Reasoning in College Algebra (ITSCoRe)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jeremiah Kalir, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Promoting students' opportunities to succeed in gatekeeping, introductory
undergraduate mathematics courses, such as college algebra, is of utmost
importance for students' graduation from college in general and for persistence
in STEM majors specifically. To address this challenge, this project will
develop, implement, and study Techtivities: free, web-based, learning
experiences that link video animations with dynamic, interactive graphs. These
engaging activities will focus on students' covariational reasoning, which
involves forming and interpreting relationships between changing quantities.
Covariational reasoning is a competency important for students' success in key
areas of college mathematics (e.g., functions, rates, and graphs) as well as for
critical thinking as an educated citizen. By embedding a professional
development intervention, the project will foster college algebra instructors'
use of Techtivities with their students. More broadly, the Techtivities will be
available in Desmos, a freely available digital mathematics tool, which will
promote sharing project products with a wide range of stakeholders, including
those invested in both undergraduate and pre-college
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will accomplish a threefold goal:
(1) develop and validate an instrument measuring students' covariational
reasoning; (2) improve student outcomes in college algebra by increasing student
engagement and enhancing students' covariational reasoning; and (3) promote
purposeful, engaged students by drawing connections between students' views of
themselves as doers of mathematics, their success in college algebra (as
measured by their performance on a common final exam and their final course
grade), and their performance on a covariational reasoning instrument. In
addition, the project will address three research questions, which are directly
aligned with the project's goals: (1) How can students' covariational reasoning
be measured? (2) To what degree do student outcomes increase after Techtivities
PD intervention? (3) How do students view themselves as doers of mathematics?
The mixed-methods study will include analysis of student-level data from sources
such as clinical interviews with undergraduates, student performance on a common
final exam, and student performance on the covariational reasoning instrument.
Instructor-level data will include interviews with participating instructors, a
Likert-scale measure of instructors' perceptions of covariational reasoning, and
pre-/post-surveys with instructors to gauge their use of Techtivities.