* 1709751
* The effect of environmental conditions at particle genesis stage of secondary organic aerosol formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Giuseppe Petrucci, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 408,645.00

This project is jointly funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in
the Chemistry Division and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program of the Atmospheric
and Geospace Sciences Division. Professor Giuseppe Petrucci of the University of
Vermont investigates the role of water (humidity) in the formation and ageing of
organic particles in the atmosphere. Leafy trees and plants release volatile
organic compounds during photosynthesis and respiration. These compounds react
with pollutants like ozone to produce the majority of organic particles in the
atmosphere. Professor Petrucci and his group explore how humidity influences the
chemical composition of particles, the phase (liquid or solid) of the particle,
and their ability to scatter and/or absorb light. Understanding the chemical
changes that these particles undergo once they are formed is crucial for
understanding their impact on the atmosphere. This research is leading to a
better understanding of the troposphere, the lowest part of the atmosphere, in
terms of effects on human health, visibility, and climate. Training is provided
to graduate and undergraduate students. The research team also carries out
outreach to K-12 students at various levels through the University of Vermont
Chemistry Camp. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Determining the composition of organic
particles in the atmosphere is challenging because each particle may contain
hundreds of different molecules. In addition, the types of molecules may change
during the particle's time in the atmosphere, which is typically five to seven
days. Professor Petrucci and his group develop a novel environmental chamber
setup for the study of chemical processes during particle formation. This
chamber allows the use of mass spectrometric and spectroscopic techniques to
study the particle's composition. These techniques also provide information on
changes in particle composition due to changes in reaction conditions, like
humidity. Further, using a separate approach, the researchers impinge particles
at a hard surface and count how many bounce off compared to how many stick.
Solid particles bounce, while liquid particles stick. The phase of the particles
is compared with particle composition. Ultimately, the goal of this research is
to predict the physical and optical properties of organic particles based on
their chemical composition. This information is used to develop models that
describe the effect of aerosols on the Earth's radiation balance and the
formation and properties of clouds. The graduate, undergraduate and high school
students working with Professor Petrucci gain experience in sophisticated
experimental methods, and skills in chemical reaction mechanisms, aerosol
science and analytical methodology.