* 1709914
* Selection of Lengthscales in Fe-based Nanochessboards to Enhance Exchange-Coupled Ferromagnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* J. Floro, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 02/28/2023
* USD 483,745.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permanent magnets are key components
in a diverse range of technologies, most notably&lt;br/&gt;in electric motors
and electric generators. They are also critical to magnetic
recording,&lt;br/&gt;which still forms the foundation of large-scale data
storage devices. To improve the&lt;br/&gt;performance of magnets, new materials,
new strategies, and new science are needed. One&lt;br/&gt;approach towards
improving magnetic behavior is called exchange coupling, in which&lt;br/&gt;two
different magnetic materials interact at the quantum level to create new
properties&lt;br/&gt;not available from either material by itself. For this to
be effective, however, requires that&lt;br/&gt;the materials be intertwined at
the nanoscale, called a nanocomposite material. Most&lt;br/&gt;research on
nanocomposite materials has explored two extremes. Extreme simplicity
is&lt;br/&gt;provided by thin films, in which the two materials are simply thin,
planar layers on top of&lt;br/&gt;one another. Extreme complexity is provided by
bulk nanocomposites, where tiny grains&lt;br/&gt;with irregular shapes, sizes
and interfaces, are mutually intertwined. This project&lt;br/&gt;investigates a
very special nanocomposite, called the nanochessboard, where a
regular&lt;br/&gt;tiling of the two materials is achieved by self-assembly, in
specific combinations of&lt;br/&gt;materials, simply by heating them. The
resulting structure looks much like a chessboard,&lt;br/&gt;but where the
individual tiles are nano-sized. The Intellectual Merit of this
study&lt;br/&gt;emphasizes varying the materials combinations in order to
illuminate how the nature of&lt;br/&gt;the materials affects both their self-
assembly into nanochessboards, and their ability to&lt;br/&gt;exchange couple.
In turn, this will provide the Broader Impacts of the study -
the&lt;br/&gt;important new understanding of the behaviors that can be used to
define new strategies&lt;br/&gt;for creating high-performance exchange-coupled
magnets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will select and compete lengthscales, structural vs. magnetic, using
advanced&lt;br/&gt;processing techniques to create refined nanochessboards in
the Fe-Pd and Fe-Pt systems,&lt;br/&gt;in order to better understand, control,
and enhance exchange-coupled ferromagnetism.&lt;br/&gt;These binary systems
contain eutectoids of the form A1-- L10+L12 that result in&lt;br/&gt;chessboards
by pseudo-spinodal decomposition, if processing conditions are
carefully&lt;br/&gt;controlled. The Intellectual Merit is framed by the specific
choice of alloys to be used&lt;br/&gt;here, which dictates the uniaxial
magnetocrystalline anisotropy associated with the L10&lt;br/&gt;phase, which, in
turn, selects the critical lengthscale for exchange coupling.
Chessboards&lt;br/&gt;are produced by cooling continuously through the
eutectoid, but to gain additional control&lt;br/&gt;over the periodicity,
thermomechanical processing and cyclic annealing will be&lt;br/&gt;investigated.
The degree of exchange coupling will be interrogated using First
Order&lt;br/&gt;Reversal Curve analysis, which excels at revealing how magnetic
phases interact. In&lt;br/&gt;addition to the growth of chessboards from an
initially polycrystalline A1 starting&lt;br/&gt;material, monocrystalline A1
will also be grown, and then annealed under magnetic fields&lt;br/&gt;or biaxial
strain, to create a single-alignment-variant chessboard. This will enable
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the magnetization reversal mechanisms, as well
as the chessboard&lt;br/&gt;transformation itself. Real-time x-ray diffraction
will be employed during chessboard&lt;br/&gt;formation to better elucidate the
kinetics and progression of the transformation. The&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of
success in the proposed research would be the contribution to
our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of exchange-coupled ferromagnetism in bulk
nanocomposite magnets, not&lt;br/&gt;only including hierarchical lengthscales,
but the role of phase morphology, interfaces and&lt;br/&gt;strain. Improving
permanent magnets is of ongoing major significance with regard
to&lt;br/&gt;increasing the efficiency of electric motors.