* 1709704
* Tunable Si-compatible Nonlinear Materials for Active Metaphotonics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 349,059.00

Nontechnical description: This project advances the understanding of materials
with largely tunable optical properties and efficient nonlinear behavior,
potentially leading to photonic devices with unique nanoscale functionalities.
The research team utilizes experimental and computational approaches to help
develop novel nonlinear optical materials and structures that enable
controllable metallic behavior, for use in next generation power-efficient
nanophotonics devices, as well as in advanced optical communications and sensing
technologies on silicon chips. The project supports one graduate student and
encourages the involvement of undergraduate students in the research through an
outreach effort aimed at introducing fundamental concepts of materials science
and optical engineering into academic curricula, alongside practical laboratory
demonstrations and research activities through summer programs at Boston
University. An important component of the outreach plan is to attract
underrepresented minorities to a career in materials science and optical
engineering through participation in the project. Finally, the outreach involves
the development of a focused teaching module, addressing the structural and
optical properties of photonic materials. The module is offered yearly to
college students as well as practitioners both in industry and academia at the
Boston University Photonics Center, and in partnership with the Nanotechnology
Innovation Center at Boston University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The primary goal of this project is to develop widely tunable, low-
loss and silicon-compatible nonlinear plasmonic materials that can be utilized
as engineering building blocks for the next generation of metamaterial devices
integrated atop Si chips. This is achieved by controlling doping, composition
and microstructural properties of transition oxides and oxynitride ceramics
deposited by radio frequency magnetron sputtering followed by thermal annealing.
The experimental three-year project addresses critical structure-property
relationships that enable resonant control of plasmonic near-fields for the
future development of Si-compatible tunable metaphotonics. In particular, the
research utilizes high-resolution energy filtered Transmission Electron
Microscopy, laboratory-based X-ray diffraction, X-ray absorption spectroscopy,
optical spectroscopy and electrical characterization in order to elucidate the
yet-unknown materials parameters that lead to reduced optical losses, enhanced
optical nonlinearity and tunable metallic dispersion across a wide spectral
range spanning the visible to the mid-infrared. In so doing, this study fills
gaps in foundational materials understanding, allowing the creation of new
nanostructures with unique properties and functionalities. The intellectual
merit of the proposed research relies on the development of a novel platform for
nonlinear optical metamaterials that can solve the long lasting problems of
inefficient nonlinear signal generation, lack of tunability, thermal instability
and optical losses that limit metal-based nonlinear metamaterial devices. This
project enables a substantial broader impact as it provides a foundation for the
next generation of highly-integrated, cost-effective active nanoplasmonic on-
chip devices that are crucial components in information processing, highly-
integrated nonlinear nanophotonics, optical sensing and spectroscopy.