* 1709944
* Zero and Low-Field Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Alexander Pines, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2020
* USD 602,000.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a powerful tool for applications in
analytical chemistry, materials science, and the screening of compounds in
search for new medications. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), an offshoot of
NMR, capitalizes on the same scientific principles study structures inside the
human body, providing a critically important tool for diagnostic and cognitive
(neurological) biomedical imaging. A major drawback of both NMR and MRI is the
need for large, immobile, and costly superconducting magnets and associated
infrastructure. With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program
in the Division of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Molecular Biophysics
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professors Alex
Pines and Dmitry Budker and their groups at the University of California -
Berkeley, seek to provide new methodology that enables magnetic resonance data
to be obtained without the need for the huge magnets and with simple
infrastructure, thereby producing information and images with equipment that is
compact, mobile and less costly by a factor of 10-100. The research offers
significant impact on technical innovation from chemistry to biomedicine, while
contributing to the training of an advanced workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of the high magnetic field, Bo, in traditional NMR and MRI is twofold:
a) to act as a means of polarizing the nuclear spins and b) for the efficient
inductive detection of the magnetization precession. Each is proportional to the
magnitude of the field so the total detected signal is proportional to the
square of that field. This accounts for the advantage of high fields (and their
corresponding high frequencies) for spectroscopy and imaging. Typical magnetic
fields for current commercial NMR instrumentation range from 10-25 Tesla. In
order to dispense with the high field, alternative means of polarization and
detection are required. Polarization can be accomplished by optical pumping
and/or parahydrogen-induced polarization. Both methods produce
"hyperpolarization" at zero to ultralow fields (ZULF) which is in fact several
orders of magnitude greater than the thermal spin polarization at high field.
For detection, a non-inductive quantum detector is required. Previous research
utilized the high sensitivity of a superconducting quantum interference device
(SQUID) that operates at liquid helium temperature. Professors Pines and Budker
are now employing a laser atomic magnetometer that can also detect ultralow
precession with high sensitivity but at room temperature. To date, they have
produced ZULF spectra with high signal/noise and with line widths of the order
of 10mHz. In this project, they are expanding the methodology to include: 1)
sophisticated ZULF pulse sequences for spin decoupling; 2) approaches to
selective excitation of single transitions; 3) two-dimensional spectroscopy for
atomic spin interactions; 4) separation of spin isotopomers; and 5) quantum
correlations. The spectra and information emanating from this work may enhance
the applicability of NMR spectroscopy in analytical chemistry and chemical
biology.