* 1709792
* Collaborative Research:  Lipid Bilayers and Membrane Active Peptides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Gavin King, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2022
* USD 274,257.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The work under this award will reveal the fundamental
principles of sequence and structure for pH-triggered and pH-insensitive
peptides that cause macromolecule-sized destabilization of membranes, allowing
passage of macromolecules at very low concentrations. This basic knowledge is
currently lacking, and is a roadblock in the design of membrane-active peptides
with broad applicability. The basic knowledge that will be gained through this
work will be a significant advancement in the field of membrane-active peptides.
The activity that will be studied here with this award, macromolecular-sized
pore formation, has not been explored thus far and its fundamental principles
and mechanism of actions are unknown. Yet, it has many potential applications in
biotechnology and medicine. Success in this work may enable the rational design
and preparation of membrane active peptides for drug delivery and biosensing, as
well as for cancer therapies, anti-viral and anti-bacterial treatments, and in
agriculture for the controlled and effective release of insecticides and
fungicides at very low doses. The proposed research and outreach activities will
promote interest in science, exchange of knowledge, and create synergistic
interactions between students and researchers at different levels in different
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to characterize peptides that enable macromolecules to bypass the barrier of
the plasma membrane. This collaborative effort by three investigators, an
engineer, a physicist and a biochemist, will delineate the sequence-structure-
function relationships of two families of peptides that form large
macromolecule-sized pores in bilayers at low concentrations, one of which is
triggered to act only at pH less than 6.0. While such behavior is extremely
rare, or perhaps non-existent in nature, the investigators have discovered, by
high-throughput screening, peptides with these properties. By comparing the
sequences, functions and structures of these peptides, they will uncover the
fundamental principles behind the unique activity of these families. The
researchers will characterize the macromolecular permeabilization by pH-
insensitive and pH sensitive pore formers by performing circular dichroism,
fluorescence, and atomic force microscopy measurements. They will learn how the
physical properties of the lipid bilayer affect the function of the two classes
of peptides, and will test specific mechanistic hypotheses with sequence
variations. The work will provide many research and outreach opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate and high school students, launching many new careers in
science. This award by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials
Research in the Directorate for Physical and Mathematical Sciences (the managing
program), is co-funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.