* 1709735
* INFEWS: N/P/H20: From Antinutrients to Water Pollutants: Exploring the Behavior of Polyphosphate Anions in Aqueous Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Paul Cremer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2020
* USD 496,819.00

Phytate is a common molecule found in the husks of corn, as well as other plant
materials. Its presence in food can interfere with the adsorption of nutrients
in the digestive track of many animals, including pigs and chickens. As a
result, proteins and vital metal ions present in the animals' feed are rendered
unavailable, causing an enormous loss in efficiency in the meat products made
from these animals. With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Prof. Paul S. Cremer at the
Pennsylvania State University is studying phytate and similar anions (molecules
with extra negative charge) to understand their interactions with metal ions and
to learn how these highly negatively charged species cause the precipitation of
proteins and other large molecules from water solutions. This work not only
helps shed light on how livestock feed can be used more efficiently, but also
helps train graduate and undergraduate students in the chemical sciences.
Simplified versions of these studies are being used as a springboard to update
the curriculum and laboratories used to teach high school students about
intermolecular forces and non-covalent interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Cremer group is exploring interactions between phytate and divalent metal
cations in aqueous solutions. The interactions between various cations and
individual phosphate groups are often similar, but this changes markedly when
metal ions interact simultaneously with multiple phosphate groups, where the
ions can bridge adjacent phosphate moieties. The thermodynamics of ion binding
is being correlated with information on the polyanion's hydration shell that can
be obtained by Raman and vibrational sum frequency spectroscopy. Such studies
are also being extended to understand how ion binding and hydration water
structures affect the salting out of proteins and polypeptides from aqueous
solutions as a function of pH, salt concentration, and specific cation identity.
In addition to phytate, which contains six phosphate groups around an inositol
ring, studies are being performed with one through five phosphate groups placed
around the ring with specific stereochemistry. Measurements are also being made
with phosphatidylinositol lipids in planar membrane formats to elucidate the
difference in binding behavior of polyphosphate groups bound to surfaces and
those in bulk solution.