* 1709380
* Coherent X-ray Studies of Surface Growth and Patterning Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Karl Ludwig, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 271,104.00

Nontechnical description: Controlling the growth and nanometer-scale patterning
of materials surfaces is critical to many applications in energy, communication
and information technologies. However, a major impediment to developing more
useful materials is the difficulty of measuring the evolution of surface
structure during such processes. This research meets that challenge by using
very intense x-rays to measure the nanometer-scale dynamics on surfaces during
growth and patterning. These experiments are made possible by the use of the
latest x-ray sources, which have been rapidly developing increasing brightness.
The experimental measurements are compared with predictions of theory and
computer simulations, leading to increased understanding and predictive power.
Such knowledge can help scientists and engineers better control surface
processes on materials, enhancing their technological capabilities. In addition,
the project trains graduate, undergraduate and high school students in this very
important and rapidly developing part of materials research, leading to future
careers in materials innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
This research is developing x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy as a powerful
new approach to investigating the nanoscale dynamics of surfaces during growth
and ion beam patterning. Given the technique?s early stage of application to
such challenging problems, it is important to examine the range of its
capabilities. This project is therefore investigating a carefully chosen set of
systems and behaviors. First, it is being used to carefully probe the
fundamental processes in kinetic roughening during amorphous film growth, an
issue of long-standing interest and controversy. Second, the applicability of
the technique to investigating epitaxial growth processes is being examined
within the context of vapor deposition of organic semiconductor films and
plasma-assisted atomic layer epitaxial growth of III-V nitride epitaxial films.
Finally, the dynamics of semiconductor ion beam nanopatterning, an issue
generating unusually close interaction between experiment and theory, is being
studied. In all cases, simulations of continuum and atomistic models are being
performed to relate observations to underlying mechanisms. Graduate,
undergraduate and high school students involved have an outstanding opportunity
to work in an area that bridges basic research and application. Participating
students learn a wide range of characterization and computational tools that can
translate well to future careers in industry or academia.