* 1709702
* Dehn Surgery, Four-Manifolds, and Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Tye Lidman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Topology is an area of mathematics that studies the intrinsic shapes of objects,
such as a hula hoop, a massive data set, our universe, or a strand of DNA. For
example, topology can be used to measure how biological processes change the
shape of our DNA. Surprisingly, these shape changes can be analyzed through
three- and four-dimensional manifolds, fundamental shapes in topology that
appear throughout mathematics and physics. This leads to the fundamental problem
of trying to completely understand and classify these three- and four-
dimensional manifolds. While we understand many aspects of three-dimensional
objects, in dimension four we are still mostly in the dark. One effective tool
for studying these objects is called Floer homology, which comes from solving
powerful equations from physics. In this project, the PI will use Floer homology
to study the complexity of these shapes by analyzing the configurations of
knotted loops and surfaces inside of them. The potential outcome of this project
will be to strengthen connections between knots and three-/four-dimensional
manifolds while discovering new structure in the topology of four-dimensional
manifolds. This project will then be disseminated to the public through a
collaboration with Black Box Dance Theater, a North Carolina non-profit dance
company. By way of dance performances and public workshops, this will present to
the public the fundamental notions of topology used in the proposed project.
This joint project will also work to improve public perception of mathematics
and enhance connections between STEM and the arts.

Knots can be used to produce new three- and four-manifolds by an operation
called Dehn surgery, where one removes a tubular neighborhood and reglues via a
homeomorphism. Many invariants and tools in low-dimensional topology, especially
Floer homology, are particularly well-behaved under Dehn surgery, and the PI
will use these tools to improve our understanding of three- and four-manifolds
and further their connections with knot theory. Three major goals of this
project are to: 1) construct homology three-spheres which cannot be obtained by
Dehn surgery on a two-component link, 2) find new constraints on the algebraic
topology of four-manifolds admitting symplectic structures, and 3) further
explore the algebraic structure of the concordance group of knots in homology
spheres modulo concordance in homology cobordisms. Two potential outcomes would
be a better understanding of the complexity of four-manifolds with boundary
measured in terms of their handlebody structures and a stronger connection
between properties of a knot and the topology of its Dehn surgeries.