* 1709060
* Coherent Multidimensional Spectroscopy of the Oxygen Evolving Complex in Photosystem II
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 975,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Wright at University of Wisconsin continuously develops
coherent multidimensional spectroscopy (CMDS) by expanding its capability of
measuring molecular motions. CMDC is a spectroscopic technique to fingerprint a
molecule, which helps scientists to distinguish different molecules present in
complex samples. In this project, Professor Wright uses a pair of laser pulses
to create specific responses from different electrons in a molecule and then
follow the change of their energy levels over a very wide range of time scales.
He then uses this technique to study how vitamin B12 works and how green plants
use sunlight to make oxygen at the molecular level. Studying these two questions
could help us to better understand how human body works and how to harness solar
energy more effectively. Professor Wright also works with an instrument company
on the commercialization of the CMDS technique by reducing the cost and make it
easier to use by other scientists. Through this project, Professor Wright
provides research opportunities to graduate, undergraduate, and secondary school
students. He is also passionate about using active learning methods to prepare
future STEM students for better national competitiveness and works closely with
summer students from Spelman College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Wright's
project has two specific goals - understanding the enzymatic mechanism for
vitamin B12's catalysis of ethanolamine degradation and the mechanism by which
the oxygen evolving complex in photosystem II makes oxygen. The vitamin B12
mechanism serves as a model for understanding enzymatic reactions. The OEC
mechanism is one of the grand challenges of chemistry, particularly for
developing solar energy. For both systems, Professor Wright uses CMDS to create
quantum mechanical superpositions of vibrational and electronic states that
provide the selectivity and structural details required to define the mechanisms
with quantum state resolution. Specifically, he is working to (1) develop a
pump-CMDS probe to create a 3D spectrum; (2) to study the Co-C bond cleavage in
a cobalamin-ethanolamine ammonida lyase (EAL)-ethanolamine (EA) complex to
investigate the enzymatic reaction converting ethanolamine to acetaldehyde and
ammonia; and (3) to characterize the electronic and vibrational states of oxygen
evolving complexes (OEC) in photosystem II to understand the water oxidation
mechanism. In addition, Professor Wright (1) continues his development of active
learning methods in undergraduate and graduate courses; (2) works with students
from Spelman College through a REU program; and (3) plans to disseminate CMDS
through web site tutorials, educational materials, publications and conferences.