* 1709845
* Superparamagnetic Tunnel Junctions for Logic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Superparamagnets switch back and forth between two stable states without
requiring an external power source, using only thermal energy. This project will
investigate the potential for a new type of low power computing using
superparamagnets, where the switching frequency can be controlled by a small
voltage or current. Nanofabrication techniques will be used to make electrical
connections to individual superparamagnets, and then the superparamagnets will
be coupled together. To evaluate the potential of this approach for
probabilistic computing, logic gates and related devices will be built and
tested. for performance and energy efficiency in multiplication and in logic
operations. The results will be used to estimate the potential power reduction
and processing speed of probabilistic logic gates based on superparamagnetic
tunnel junctions. If superparamagnetic tunnel junctions can be optimized for
reasonably fast, low power probabilistic computation, the results would have
tremendous impact on sensors and hand-held electronic devices, where speed is
less critical than battery lifetime. A graduate student will gain experience
with nanofabrication and high frequency electronics. Hands-on and web-based
demonstrations of logic gates will be developed for high school and middle
school students, and both the graduate student and undergraduate researchers
will be trained as STEM ambassadors, learning to communicate technical
information to a broad audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
project will design, fabricate, and test superparamagnetic tunnel junctions that
can be controlled by a voltage or current, for use in logic devices for
probabilistic computing. Suparamagnetic tunnel junctions will be optimized for
large changes in the telegraph signal over relatively small difference in the
bias voltage or input current. Different alloys will be investigated to reduce
the energy barrier for switching, and therefore the speed of the devices. Hard-
wired devices will be fabricated, and the thermal switching rates as a function
of bias voltage and input current will be measured using high frequency
electronics. Following calibration of the individual superparamagnetic tunnel
junctions, they will be coupled together into hybrid circuits and the resulting
devices will be tested for use in probabilistic computing. Analog multiplication
will involve two independent voltage-controlled superparamagnetic tunnel
junctions and a CMOS AND gate. Here the time-average value of the output is
predicted to be the product of the time-average values of the input signals.
This operation is lower energy with probabilistic computing because it does not
require analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion steps. Groups of
three interconnected superparamagnetic tunnel junctions will also be
investigated as prototype logic gates (AND and OR). The output will be measured
as a function of the bias voltages controlling the individual tunnel junctions
to optimize the coupling strength between devices necessary for the truth table
of the logic gate.