* 1709918
* Ultrafast deep UV laser source by all intracavity fourth harmonic generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Chris Hessenius, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2020
* USD 378,380.00

Title: Novel High-Power, Ultra-Violet Lasers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop an ultrafast, deep
ultra-violet (UV) laser source by fourth harmonic generation. A modified
t-cavity vertical external cavity surface emitting laser (VECSEL) is to operate
in the 240-260nm range with pulse widths &lt;10ps and peak powers &gt;10W. The
proposed design will eliminate the need for expensive and inefficient cavity
stabilization electronics and will push the boundaries in various fields
including: nonlinear optics, semiconductor lasers, cavity design, and ultrafast
pulse generation. As part of the research, a new VECSEL gain material will be
designed and grown to deliver the large gain bandwidth needed for short pulse
generation while still providing high peak powers. This new gain material
combined with a semiconductor absorber mirror in a t-cavity configuration will
allow development of a new laser source that can enable future advancements in
science, medicine, material processing, and engineering research. In addition,
this research group will provide an excellent research experience for
individuals from under-represented groups through REU programs and undergraduate
research. Two undergraduate students are to be involved each year for summer
and/or academic internship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will implement a novel t-cavity
configuration for fourth harmonic generation and eliminate the need for cavity
stabilization electronics. Typically, fourth harmonic generation to the UV uses
a source laser that is coupled into a series of external resonator cavities that
recirculate the fundamental and second harmonic modes. These external cavities
are very sensitive to minor movements which lead to phase variations of the
beams and to large power fluctuations of the UV output. This situation requires
that each cavity have their resonances locked to ensure stable outputs. Such
systems are large, complicated, and expensive which limits their potential use
outside of a laboratory environment. The proposed research will eliminate the
need of the external cavity due to the all-internal nature of the design. Here,
the fundamental field is frequency doubled in a nonlinear optical (NLO) crystal
for second harmonic generation. As the frequency doubled field is orthogonally
polarized to the fundamental, an intra-cavity polarizing beam splitter expels
this field into an alternate cavity path. While this is not a resonant cavity,
the difficulty of injecting the light into an external resonator is eliminated.
The second harmonic is generated inside this cavity and creates a large field in
which another NLO crystal can efficiently frequency double this field to the UV.
While stabilization electronics would improve the field build-up in the cavity,
the research is focused on obtaining a stable high peak power output without
additional elements.