* 1709985
* Boundary lines and linactants: Structure, function, and dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* James Gleeson, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 383,622.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops general
principles for the design of molecules that adsorb efficiently to a "line":
"linactants", in analogy to "surfactants" (soaps and lipids, for example), which
adsorb efficiently to surfaces. Surfaces are ubiquitous: cell membranes divide
the inside from the outside of the cell; oil/water mixtures push through rock
and sand. Any two surfaces meet at a line. Thus, effective linactants have
potential for enhanced oil recovery and understanding linactant principles will
enable a deeper understanding of the structure, dynamics and function of cell
membranes. This project and Kent State University (KSU) provide a rich
interdisciplinary environment for training high school, undergraduate and
graduate students for a diversity of opportunities in today's economy. They
receive personal, professional mentoring, and interact closely with Scattering
Solutions Inc., a startup company, and with industrial partners of the KSU
Liquid Crystal Institute. Further, the principle investigator, a woman, has a
deep history of involving women in research: 65% of the graduate and 50% of the
undergraduate students in her lab have been women, far above the norm in
physics. All aspects of this project both fuel and are fueled by the principle
investigator's active outreach to middle school, high school, and community
college students and their teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project uses Langmuir films, which consist of a layer of
molecules confined at the air/water interface by a delicate balance of
molecule/molecule and molecule/water attractive interactions, as a model system
to explore the structural origin of line tension (the energy per unit length of
a line) and line activity. The relationship between molecular structure and line
activity is unclear. The analogy with surfactants suggests a hybrid molecule:
two moieties with different affinities for the two surface phases. In practice,
such molecules form a third phase, with moderate affinity to the line boundary.
The contrasts between the structure of line and surface boundaries suggests a
dramatically different model of line activity that would transform the search
for line-active molecular structures. A surface boundary, away from a critical
point, is about one molecule thick. A surfactant molecule can easily span the
boundary between phases. In contrast, indirect evidence suggests that the line
boundary is ten or more molecules thick: in that case, either a linactant should
be much larger than a typical surfactant, or it should act nonlocally. This
project is three-pronged, in order to develop the connection between molecular,
mesoscopic, and macroscopic scales: (a) To test the width of the boundary both
indirectly, through measurements not just of line energy but of line entropy,
and directly, through cryoTEM and other methods. These tests concentrate on a
model system that forms liquid crystalline multilayers on the surface,
simplifying these challenging experiments and providing layer number contrast as
an additional control variable. (b) To test as linactants molecules expected to
act non-locally, through spontaneous curvature and curvature elasticities, both
in the model system and in biologically-relevant mixed lipid layers. The project
initially focuses on line-active molecules suggested by preliminary results,
followed by liquid crystalline mesogens with different shapes and lipid
molecules that have similar but opposite effective spontaneous curvatures. (c)
To explore one case where line tension is critical, nucleation dynamics within
lipid layers, with a unique combination of complementary techniques. Effective
linactant design will enable the development of self-assembled films with
domains of controllable scale as well as chemical and physical structure. Such
films are applicable to e.g. sensors. Linactants are also relevant to cell
membranes, thought to contain dynamic nano-scale domains that control
communication between the inside and outside of the cell: what controls these
domains remains a critical open question. This interdisciplinary project trains
a diverse group of high school, undergraduate and graduate students and fuels
the principle investigator's active outreach to middle school, high school, and
community college students and their teachers.