* 1709921
* Functional devices made with porous hollow nanocapsules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Evgueni Pinkhassik, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 465,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, the research group of Professor Eugene
Pinkhassik at the University of Connecticut creates functional devices based on
hollow capsules made of plastic that are no more than 1 billionth of a meter in
diameter. These tiny capsules are made of polymers (plastics) and are designed
to &lt;br/&gt;regulate the uptake and release of bioactive molecules as well as
to serve as compartments for containing chemical reactions where the products
can be released at will. Such structures are designed to mimic nature. They
function in a similar way to cells that control biological functions by housing
different enzymes and biological molecules in small specialized compartments.
Controlled catch and release functionality of the nanocapsules may lead to new
devices for the delivery of drugs and medical imaging agents. A cell-mimicking
device capable of producing a product in response to an external stimulus may
find biomedical applications, for example, regulating the production of insulin
in response to the level of glucose in the management of diabetes. To facilitate
technology transfer and to enhance the educational experience, Professor
Pinkhassik provides mentoring for graduate and undergraduate students
participating in the technology transfer of their research. In the recent years,
several graduate students from the research group have won awards in business
plan competitions. Many specific sub-goals of this project are application-
driven and suitable for students interested in product development and advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vesicle-templated polymer nanocapsules are
emerging as a viable platform for creating functional devices with superior
performance. Controlled polymerization of building blocks in the organized
environment of self-assembled bilayers enables the synthesis of nanocapsules
with nanometer-thin shells containing nanopores with controlled size and
chemical environment. The ease of synthesis coupled with the controlled
permeability of the shells and long-term stability of nanocapsules creates an
opportunity for building hybrid cell-mimicking nanodevices. With the support of
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF
Chemistry Division, this project aims to expand the utility of the nanocapsule
platform. Specifically, the Pinkhassik group investigates the reactivity and
stability of nanocapsules containing encapsulated enzymes. The researchers seek
establish through-shell communication with rotaxane-like structures. Areas of
particular interest include enzymatic cascade reactions and externally triggered
processes in nanocapsules. The educational and outreach components of this
project aim at engaging pre-college students, expanding the participation of
underrepresented groups in science, and providing mentorship and research
opportunities to students at all levels.