* 1709238
* Creating Smart Biomaterials using Engineered Bacteria that Cooperatively Reprogram Mammalian Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Warren Ruder, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 338,414.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ability to reprogram the function
of mammalian cells is critical for exploring the scientific underpinnings of
cell behavior as well as improving human health. This effort will result in the
development of smart biomaterials and experimental systems made up of
microparticles carrying engineered bacteria. These hybrid, living-nonliving
biomaterials will be used as a tool to reprogram mammalian cell signaling. One
advantage of an extendable synthetic biomaterials approach that uses engineered
bacteria to regulate mammalian calcium signaling could be the abrogation of the
need to directly alter mammalian cells to reprogram their behavior. Thus, the
need for vectors such as viruses or the creation of transgenic animal models
could be reduced. For this effort, bacteria-bound microparticles will be
developed that can deliver synthetic genetic components to mammalian cells and
reprogram calcium signaling. Calcium signaling is a ubiquitous system that
effects cells ranging from nerves to the cells that line the gut, and controls
both slow and fast cellular processes. Next, these particles will be made into
?smart? biomaterials as their living component ? the bacteria ? will be
engineered with an ability to collaborate and collectively determine when to
transmit genetic components to mammalian cells. Finally, mathematical modeling
and computational simulation will be used to explore calcium signaling dynamics
in mammalian cells in order to determine when alterations will cause the most
significant changes in cell signaling dynamics. The smart biomaterials will then
be used to reprogram this signaling. In addition, this effort will be integrated
with the development of multiple teaching modules for a bioengineering summer
camp, and the final curriculum will be widely disseminated to the broader
scientific and educational community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will result in the creation of smart
biomaterials that link to engineered intracellular networks necessary for
bacteria to cooperatively invade and then reprogram calcium signaling in
mammalian cells. First, a synthetic component will be built to enable engineered
bacteria to covalently bond to microparticles to create smart biosensing
materials that target specific mammalian cell surface markers. Second, different
bacterial lines will be programmed with engineered gene circuits that enable
them to cooperatively recognize each other and then activate mammalian cell
invasion capabilities. This cooperation further ensures that only specific
mammalian cells are targeted. Finally, both the synthetic bonding and the
cooperative invasion circuitry will be used to reprogram calcium signaling in
mammalian cells. Invading bacteria will use RNA interference to alter the
dynamics of calcium signaling by knocking down expression of calcium pathway
enzymes. Selection of these target enzymes will be informed by modeling of
single cell calcium dynamics. This effort will combine recent advances in
engineered cellular invasion, mammalian synthetic biology, cell surface display,
and engineered quorum sensing to create bacteria-laden, smart biomaterials that
reprogram mammalian cells. The proposed effort includes research to advance
discovery and understanding in the field of smart biomaterials while also
promoting teaching, training, and learning through the development of a new
activities targeted toward high school students.