* 1709655
* RUI: Biosynthesis of Diketopiperazine Natural Products from Aminoacyl-tRNAs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Rajesh Viswanathan, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2021
* USD 294,000.00

Enzymes catalyze the assembly of small molecules with diverse chemical
structures and biological functions that are found in nature. Natural products
can act as communication signals between organisms in nature. As such, natural
products are valuable as tools for the study of biological processes and are
critical in agriculture and other industries. This Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program to
Professor Amy L. Lane at the University of North Florida and collaborator,
Rajesh Viswanathan at Case Western Reserve University funds the investigation of
enzymes that catalyze the assembly of natural products known as
diketopiperazines. Diketopiperazines are recognized for a variety of biological
functions. This project may reveal details of the function of these enzymes and
offer shorter and more sustainable routes for the synthesis of novel molecules
for practical applications. Cultivation of the next generation of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics professionals is integrated into this
RUI award via the training of undergraduates in chemical biology and the
development of an inquiry-based lab for undergraduate biochemistry courses that
increase student competencies at the interface of chemistry and biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aminoacyl tRNAs (aa-tRNAs) are recognized for delivering
amino acids to the ribosome for protein assembly. A new role of aa-tRNAs as
substrates of cyclodipeptide synthases (CDPSs) was recently established. CDPSs
catalyze the assembly of bioactive 2,5-diketopiperazine (DKP) natural products
from two aa-tRNAs. Few known enzyme families use aa-tRNA substrates, making
CDPSs unique contributors to the chemistry of life. CDPSs are understudied
relative to other common biosynthetic enzymes, and it remains unclear how CDPSs
recognize specific aa-tRNAs from the pool of ~50+ different aa-tRNAs in cells.
This RUI project aims to decipher molecular determinants of aa-tRNA recognition
by CDPSs using two recently characterized CDPSs that yield cyclo(L-Trp-L-Trp)
DKP from tryptophanyl-tRNA-Trp as experimental models. A library of unnatural
aa-tRNAs featuring aminoacyl and tRNA structural variations is evaluated as CDPS
substrates, to determine the relationship between aa-tRNA structure and
recognition by these CDPSs and provide a single step synthetic biology platform
to yield novel DKPs. Molecular models of CDPSs guide the design of site-directed
mutagenesis experiments to experimentally determine CDPS residues that are
responsible for recognition of aa-tRNA substrates. Results from this study may
illuminate the molecular basis of aa-tRNA recognition by CDPSs, enable
comparison of molecular determinants of substrate recognition between CDPSs and
evolutionary relatives, and extend CDPS-catalyzed DKP chemistry. As its major
broader societal impacts, this project provides tools to enable the biological
construction of complex DKP natural products for practical applications, yields
training opportunities for future scientists, and develop sCDPSs as model
enzymes for enhancing undergraduate biochemistry course curricula.