* 1709135
* RUI: Influence of Surface Interactions of Organic Ligand-Iron Oxide/Water Interfaces on Carbon and Iron Cycling Studied by Second Harmonic and Sum Frequency Generation Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Amanda Mifflin, University of  Puget Sound
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 209,663.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Amanda Mifflin and undergraduate researchers at the University of
Puget Sound are probing the interactions between organic ligands and the
surfaces of iron oxide minerals using surface-specific laser techniques. Their
experimental studies are complemented by computational modeling carried out in
collaboration with scientists in the Molecular Science Computing group at
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). The systems under study serve as
models for geochemical systems commonly found in soils, and have important
implications for understanding the process by which elements (or their chemical
compounds) are transferred between living systems and the environment. This
project specifically considers the transfer of iron and carbon from plants and
animals and the soil and streams. The research provides undergraduate students
with opportunities to develop critical technical and communication skills that
prepare them for successful careers. Their time at PNNL shows them career paths
to government laboratories. Their presentations in regional venues also help
inform the general public about environmental
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct surface measurements of metal-surface
complexes at environmentally relevant concentrations, especially those involving
the mechanisms of surface complexation with organic ligands, are difficult to
study. The Mifflin group is probing mineral oxide/aqueous organic systems using
second harmonic generation (SHG) and sum frequency generation (SFG) to gain
molecular-level information of the surface properties and binding processes of
metal complexes. The researchers seek a more complete understanding of the
binding and redox chemistry of these systems under environmentally relevant
conditions. Specifically, the adsorption, desorption and dissolution behavior of
the aqueous siderophore desferrioxamine-B (DFO-B) at the hematite/water
interface is being studied as a model for organic-mineral geochemical systems
commonly found in soils. The computational studies aid in the interpretation of
experimental results, targeting predictive capability for other mineral surface-
organic ligand interactions. The experiments provide direct spectroscopic
evidence of surface coverage, structure and kinetics of complexation and
dissolution, and molecular orientation. This information about biogeochemical
iron and carbon cycling can in turn lead to improved global models.