* 1709272
* RUI: Glycan Characterization and Quantitative Analysis via Free-Radical Induced Dissociation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jinshan Gao, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2021
* USD 279,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Jinshan Gao and his students at Montclair State University
are pursuing research that seeks improved capabilities for glycan
characterization and quantitation. Glycans (or polysaccharides) are complex
biomolecules that play important roles in the biochemistry of living systems,
despite their low abundance. Their qualitative and quantitative analysis can be
important in identifying and distinguishing healthy and diseased cells. Dr.
Gao's group is targeting new ways to derive glycan structural information using
mass spectrometry, one of the most widely used and important tools of chemical
analysis. They are devising ways to label glycan molecules with isotopic or
other chemical "tags" to gain better insight into their fragmentation and to
facilitate their quantitation. The work seeks both improved performance and
better understanding of the methods. Impact on workforce development is enhanced
by involvement of undergraduate students, including first-generation college
students and members from under-represented groups; Montclair State University
is a Hispanic-Serving Institution. Elements of the research are integrated into
Dr. Gao's undergraduate courses, enabling students to become familiar with
modern analytical techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of the
research are to develop a novel free-radical approach for glycan
characterization and quantitation, and to investigate glycan dissociation
induced by free radicals. Combining the merits of free-radical chemistry and
mass spectrometry requires 1) development of free-radical reagents for glycan
characterization; 2) development of free-radical tags for glycan quantitation;
and 3) synthesis of model glycans for investigation of glycan dissociation
mechanisms. These tasks provide a range of synthesis opportunities for the
students engaged in the research. The free-radical reagents are employed to
generate systematic and predictable glycan dissociation, facilitating
visualization of the glycan skeleton. Free-radical tags enable simultaneous
glycan quantitation and characterization. Insights gained from the investigation
of glycan dissociation should improve understanding of the potential broader
utility of the free-radical dissociation approach. The work should advance
understanding of the roles of glycans in health and disease, including tumor
development and other glycosylation-related diseases, such as coronary heart
disease and inflammatory bowel disease.