* 1709993
* Multiphase Reactivity of Atmospheric Organic Radicals: Gas- vs. Liquid- vs. Particle-phase Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jesse Kroll, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2021
* USD 479,983.00

This award is supported by the Chemistry Division's Environmental Chemical
Sciences Program. Prof. Jesse Kroll and William Green and their graduate and
undergraduate students study the reactions of highly reactive species in the
atmosphere, called radicals, with organic compounds. Many environmental chemical
processes central to human health, ecological health, and climate occur via the
oxidation of organic compounds. This includes the chemical reactions that
control the levels of air and water pollutants. The reaction mechanisms can be
extremely complex, involving a large of number of chemical intermediates and
products. Highly reactive radical intermediates, organic peroxy radicals (RO2)
and alkoxy radicals (RO), are formed. These radicals can react via a number of
channels, and form a wide range of products. This project aims to improve our
understanding of the rates and the products of these reactions. The focus is on
how the reaction conditions may control such reactivity. This understanding can
ultimately lead to improved models of a wide range of important environmental
processes. This enables better predictions and ultimately more informed policy
decisions. &lt;br/&gt;This project involves both experimental (laboratory) and
computational (modeling) studies of RO and RO2 radical reactivity under a wide
range of environmental conditions. In the experiments, the radicals are
generated by photolysis of appropriate precursor molecules. This is done in the
gas phase (using a flow reactor), the bulk liquid phase (using a liquid batch
reactor), and within submicron aerosol particles (in an aerosol flow tube).
Products are detected primarily by two instruments, an aerosol mass spectrometer
for the condensed-phase products and a chemical ionization mass spectrometer for
the gaseous products. The laboratory studies are carried out in parallel with
the modeling work. This links rates and product distributions with detailed
chemical mechanisms. Computational tools include quantum-chemical calculations
of structures and energies, calculations of reaction rates, and chemical kinetic
modeling of complex reaction mechanisms using the Reaction Mechanism Generator.