* 1709631
* Design of Self-Assembling Triple Helices and Molecular Recognition of Collagen
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jeffrey Hartgerink, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2021
* USD 520,000.00

In humans, collagen is the most abundant protein in the body and is found in
nearly every tissue. Collagen has a huge array of functions from toughening our
bones and giving strength to our skin to playing a key role in immunity.
Collagen is constructed by a multistep sequence of self-assembly of the
molecular components. Despite collagen's ubiquity and importance, the underlying
structure, stability and mechanism of assembly are poorly understood. Prof.
Hartgerink of Rice University conducts research to determine the rules of
collagen stability and probe the assembly mechanisms. This fundamental knowledge
could lead to a better understanding of diseases associated with collagen
malfunction and also help with the design of next-generation biomaterials which
mimic collagen. This research project provides the basis for interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate education programs which combine chemical design with
biology and medicine. High school science teachers are recruited to work with
the Hartgerink group in the summer to develop exciting curriculum based on
cutting edge research that can be directly translated to their high school
chemistry and biology courses. These teachers later return with their entire
science class for demonstrations and laboratory tours. Integration of this
interdisciplinary research with secondary education science goals helps to
inspire both the students as well as their teachers toward STEM related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main goals in this project funded by
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the National
Science Foundation. The first goal is to expand our knowledge of pairwise amino
acid interactions in the triple helix, the fundamental unit of collagen self-
assembly. These pairwise interactions modulate the stability of triple helices
as well as their self-assembly. Expanding this knowledge base is helping us to
understand this important and extremely abundant protein family. In addition, it
is providing new tools for chemists to design collagen based materials which are
important for a wide variety of biomedical applications. The second goal is to
describe a rational system for the specific molecular recognition of any member
of the collagen family. These collagen targeting peptides (CTPs) use the
pairwise interactions discovered above for sequence specific molecular
recognition of a given collagen triple helix. CTPs work in highly complicated
chemical environments such as a slice of tissue where hundreds of other
competing molecules co-exist. The design of these CTPs should allow them to
specifically target any natural extracellular matrix collagens, collagens found
in the innate immune system or those found in bacteria and viruses.