* 1709119
* Collaborative Research: Polymer Single Crystal-Assisted "Grafting From": A Versatile Approach towards Multicomponent Polymer Brushes with Well-Defined Architectures and Grafting
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The surface properties of a material can be critical to its application (e.g.,
the adhesive properties of tapes, non-wetting properties of water-repellent
garments, and non-stick surface of cookware). Often, the material surface needs
to be chemically modified to tailor its properties. In this collaborative
research, Professor Bin Zhao of the University of Tennessee Knoxville and
Professor Christopher Li of Drexel University develop a viable method for
modifying a surface with a polymer containing a well-defined architecture and
thus achieving precise control of surface structures and properties. This
fundamental chemistry research is expected to advance the field of polymer
science and present new opportunities in materials and technology development.
Additional broader impacts of the project include education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students in both polymer chemistry and physics,
preparing a workforce for the polymer (plastics) industry. Polymer chemistry is
integrated in outreach activities (e.g., demonstration experiments such as "Foam
and Slime Forming" in a Drexel summer outreach program) for high school teachers
and students to arouse their interests in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports this research to develop a robust and versatile strategy for
preparing a variety of well-defined multicomponent polymer brushes on flat solid
substrates (e.g., silicon wafers and glass substrates). This research aims to
combine polymer single crystal-assisted "grafting to" and surface-initiated
"living"/controlled polymerization (i.e., "grafting from") to synthesize brushes
with complex architectures, such as Y-shape and loop, and tunable grafting
densities. Various polymerization methods (including ring-opening
polymerization, atom transfer radical polymerization, and nitroxide-mediated
radical polymerization) are used to synthesize the multicomponent polymer
brushes. A range of techniques (e.g., atomic force microscopy, x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, scanning and transmission electron microscopies,
grazing incident small-angle X-ray scattering, and wide angle X-ray diffraction)
are used to characterize the polymer brush structures and properties.