* 1709160
* Near-Infrared Fluorescent Graphene Nanomaterials for Detection of Trace Analytes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Julia Xiaojun Zhao, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2023
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program and co-funding
from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Dr. Julia Zhao and her group at the University of North Dakota are
devising a new approach to chemical imaging based on graphene-based
nanomaterials. When illuminated with light of the proper wavelength, these
materials fluoresce in the near infrared (NIR) region of the electromagnetic
spectrum. This offers lower background signals (and therefore higher
sensitivity) and deeper penetration than conventional imaging agents. This in
turns enables imaging the inner structures of biological and other, with
important potential applications in areas such as environmental science,
biology, and national security. Dr. Zhao is reaching out to engage Tribal
Colleges and Universities in North Dakota both in this work and more generally.
A key aim is to encourage students from this underrepresented group to consider
science as a career option. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of
this project are three-fold: 1) Synthesis. The development of a series of
graphene-based near-infrared fluorescent (NIRF) nanomaterials for sensitive
detection and imaging of trace analytes (especially in biosamples). The distinct
features of these NIRF nanomaterials are: a) intense fluorescence signals, b)
tunable fluorescence wavelengths, c) high water solubility, and d) large surface
area. To achieve this goal, the PI is developing new methods for making
graphene-based NIRF nanomaterials with various dimensions and reduction levels
to fine-tune the fluorescence wavelengths and intensities. 2) Fundamental study.
Study of the geometric, compositional, and dimensional effects of graphene
materials on their fluorescence properties, including fluorescence quantum
yield, lifetime and wavelengths. 3) Application. The implementation of the NIRF
nanomaterials in bioanalysis and bioimaging. The NIR region favors low
background signals and deeper penetration of radiation. Highly sensitive
detection and in vitro/vivo imaging can be accomplished using NIRF
nanomaterials. Targeted properties include high quantum yield, tunability of
excitation and emission wavelengths, minimal photo-bleaching, and minimal
overlap between excitation and emission bands.