* 1709911
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Cellular mechanisms for preferential intracellular pH regulation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jinae Roa, Roa                     Jinae          N
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Jinae Roa, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow is being
mentored by Colin Brauner at the University of British Columbia. The fellow is
investigating how animals use signals produced by individual cells to maintain
proper function of vital organs like the heart, skeletal muscle, and liver. The
research focuses on cellular mechanisms used by fish from naturally extreme
environments, and the results will provide critical information on how animals
sense and repair conditions that negatively affect organ function. During
outreach activities, the fellow is supporting the diverse local community by
volunteering as an educator for an inner-city Science 101 program and by leading
interactive hands-on activities at the Vancouver Aquarium. In addition, the
fellow is training and mentoring graduate and undergraduate students. Upon
completion of fellowship activities, the fellow will seek employment at a US
institution whose primary mission includes increasing and sustaining diversity,
where the fellow can serve as a role model and mentor for young women and
students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of
this study is to investigate for the first time the cellular mechanisms
responsible for sensing and regulating intracellular pH (pHi) in fish that
preferentially regulate tissue pHi instead of blood extracellular pH (pHe).
Limiting acid-base stress is an important function of vertebrate physiological
systems as it reduces harmful exposure to hydrogen ions (H+), which negatively
affect essential functions such as metabolism. However, information is lacking
on the mechanisms by which pHi is sensed, what ion channels are involved, and if
there is any whole-animal hormonal influence on preferentially regulated
tissues. To address these questions, the fellow is investigating acid-base
sensors in whole tissues in a fish species that is a preferential pHi regulator
(white sturgeon, Acipenser transmontanus). In addition, the fellow is creating
primary cultures of cells isolated from heart, muscle, and liver tissues of
white sturgeon to study mechanisms for acid-base sensing and regulation, testing
the following hypotheses: (1) preferential pHi regulation is facilitated by the
evolutionarily conserved acid-base sensor soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC), Na+/H+
exchanger (NHE), and Na+/HCO3- cotransporter (NBC); and (2) preferential pHi
regulation is influenced by whole-animal processes and thereby reduced in
cultured cells.