* 1709909
* Anion-driven recognition and assemblies of shape-persistent cyanostar macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Amar Flood, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 493,454.00

Molecular recognition and self-assembly are powerful approaches to fabricate
materials of complex architecture and to assemble functional systems for
applications in environmental remediation, drug delivery, and biomedical
sensing. Prof. Flood at Indiana University studies how molecules interact with
each other in order to increase our fundamental understanding of the factors
governing molecular recognition and self-assembly. This project also provides
student training, usage of 3D printed molecules to enhance scientific
understanding, and opportunities for technology transfer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry, Professor Flood
conducts research to understand the factors controlling the anion-driven
recognition and assemblies of shape-persistent macrocycles. There are three
specific aims in this project. Aim 1 focuses on examining the factors that
affect the formation of complexes between hydroxyanions and cyanostar
macrocycles in solution. Aim 2 seeks to establish the correlation between the
anion-driven binding and template-directed synthesis and create prototypes of
molecular switches. Aim 3 strives to develop the rules governing the directed
assembly of cyanostars into dodecahedra enabling their high-fidelity
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.