* 1709237
* Domain Wall Engineering for Novel Nanoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Alexei Gruverman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 338,422.00

Non-technical Description: This project provides a scientific basis for the
development of novel electronic devices for information technology. The project
utilizes a variety of microscopy techniques to investigate the relation between
the atomic structure and electrical characteristics of the structural boundaries
that separate regions with different orientations of electrical polarization
(domains). The main goal of this study is to realize new type of materials with
electrical properties determined by the domain boundaries, rather than the
domains themselves, and potential applications in new types of computer memory
devices. The project puts a strong emphasis on materials science, nanostructure
fabrication and microscopy characterization. This project offers new training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, along with various
outreach activities targeting K-12 students, teachers, minorities and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Domain
boundaries in ferroic materials, with various order parameters at play, offer a
possibility of conceptually novel devices utilizing state variables different
from those of the bulk materials. The growing role of domain walls in
progressively shrinking devices necessitates the development of new approaches
for active control of domain wall behavior and thorough investigation of their
properties. This project focuses on investigation of the interplay between the
functional and structural properties of the domain walls at a fundamental level
and their subsequent use in novel electronic devices through the right
combination of fabrication, high-resolution structural characterization and
electrical testing methods. This project involves: (1) fabrication of free-
standing single-crystalline ferroelectric mesoscale lamellae and cross-sectional
samples of thin films, (2) controlled manipulation of the domain walls and
testing of their transport properties by means of scanning probe microscopy
(SPM) techniques, and (3) high-resolution electron microscopy structural
characterization of domain walls. This research contributes to the technological
development of novel nanoelectronic devices based on the domain walls and
provides education and research training possibilities for graduate students and
young researchers in advanced areas of nanotechnology in culturally diverse
environment.