* 1709420
* Achieving High Dielectric Constant Relaxor Ferroelectric Nanocrystals via a Hybridization-Induced Nanodomain Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Zhiqun Lin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Nanostructured ferroelectric materials show great
potential for future micro- and nano-electronic applications, including wearable
medical sensors for human monitoring, non-volatile ferroelectric memory,
piezoelectric/electrostrictive actuation, second harmonic generation imaging,
energy harvesting and storage, electrocaloric cooling, and liquid crystal
displays. Unfortunately, as the dimensions of ferroelectric materials decrease
to a few tens of nanometers, their high dielectric property eventually
disappears as a result of destabilization of the ferroelectric phase. Therefore,
it is highly desirable to develop novel, high dielectric constant ferroelectric
nanocrystals with stable ferroelectric phase and nanosized domains. The
understanding of polymer defect-induced ferroelectric nanodomains within
inorganic nanocrystals paves the way to create many other intriguing
ferroelectric nanocrystals. Meanwhile, the research project is integrated with
nanoscience education through close interactions among graduate students,
undergraduate students, high school science teachers, and high school students
in a multilevel learning experience inspired by the excitement of discovery at
both Georgia Tech and Case Western Reserve University. The goals are to
stimulate the interest of high school students in the area of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and better prepare
undergraduate students for the STEM-related professions. To enhance the public
awareness of nanoscience and nanotechnology, research findings are widely
disseminated to multiple constituencies through publications in scientific
journals, presentations at national conferences and workshops.

Technical Abstract: This proposal aims to understand the effect of
organic/inorganic hybridization on the nanoscopic ferroelectric phase and domain
structures in polymer-tethered hybrid BaTiO3 nanocrystals, and extend the
underlying mechanism to other lead-free relaxor ferroelectric systems to achieve
high dielectric constants for various potential electrical applications. First,
novel amphiphilic nonlinear block copolymers are rationally designed and
synthesized. Subsequently, uniform polymer-tethered hybrid BaTiO3 nanocrystals
with precisely tailored dimensions are crafted by employing amphiphilic
nonlinear block copolymers as nanoreactors. The nanoscale ferroelectric phase
and domain structures in polymer-tethered hybrid BaTiO3 nanocrystals are
interrogated using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, and the
mechanism of their relaxor ferroelectric behavior can be unraveled. Finally, the
underlying mechanism are extended to create other lead-free relaxor
ferroelectric nanocrystals with even higher dielectric constants.