* 1709364
* Chemical and biochemical determinants of phosphorothioate stability and location in bacterial genomes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Peter Dedon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2020
* USD 510,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Prof. Peter Dedon from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Dr. James Galagan from Boston University. The project involves
the study of a newly discovered chemical modification of DNA in bacteria. This
modification involves replacement of an oxygen atom in the sugar-phosphate
backbone of the DNA with a sulfur atom. The resulting chemical structure is
known as a phosphorothioate (PT). The goal of the project is to understand the
biological chemistry that is involved in these DNA modifications. The
investigators are using chemical tools to examine the biochemistry of PT
modification to bacterial DNA. The importance of this project is two-fold.
First, the results advance the understanding of an important and fundamental new
feature of microbial physiology known as epigenetics. The studies are
significant for their practical impact as well. They contribute to understanding
the mechanisms by which DNA-modifying enzymes find their DNA targets. The
project findings can be exploited to develop new tools for biotechnology and
synthetic biology research. The new tools can be used for enhancing the
productivity of industrial microorganisms. The project provides cutting-edge
interdisciplinary training at the interface of chemistry and biology. Training
is provided for high school, undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists. The project also develops novel epigenetics educational
materials and curricula for high school science classes and teacher workshops.
The goal of this project is to understand the biological chemistry of redox-
sensitive sulfur-containing DNA modifications widespread in bacteria:
phosphorothioates (PT). As a widespread epigenetic mark in all bacterial genera,
PTs are incorporated into DNA by a 5-member dnd gene cluster (dndA-E). This gene
cluster inserts S in place of a non-bridging oxygen in the DNA backbone as a
sequence-specific PT. PTs function in restriction-modification (R-M) systems in
many bacteria with Dnd proteins F-H. They are also present in bacteria lacking
restriction genes, which suggests non-R-M epigenetic functions in gene
expression. One highly unusual feature of PTs is that only 12-14% of short
consensus sequences are modified in the genome. This fact raises questions about
how the enzymes find their targets. The studies explore PT dynamics and function
with the use of innovative sequencing, genomics, informatics and analytical
technologies. The project uses a novel chemical cleavage/nick translation
sequencing technology. Single-molecule real-time sequencing is used to quantify
changes in PT location in response to oxidative stress and cell growth. The
problem of genomic target selection is addressed by mining existing genomic maps
of PTs relative to genomic landmarks. In addition, PT location is correlated
with binding sites for Dnd proteins using ChIP-seq to map protein binding sites
in the bacterial genomes. The mechanism of target selection by Dnd restriction
enzymes is addressed by mapping restriction-induced cleavage sites in bacterial
genomes. The results have a broad impact on understanding basic microbial
physiology and epigenetics. The project is developing new enzymatic tools for
inserting nuclease-resistant PTs into DNA in biotechnology applications.