* 1709229
* Theoretical Spectroscopy and Thermodynamics of Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kristjan Haule, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2023
* USD 345,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discoveries of new functional
materials are crucial for technology advancement as well as for economic
development, and advanced computational methods are accelerating progress in
this area. This award supports research and education towards the acceleration
of progress in our understanding of complex materials, which manifest prominent
competition between quantum effects such as magnetism, superconductivity, and
strongly correlated electron behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In simpler
materials, for which model representations in terms of a system of independent
particles suffices, advanced methods have enabled large-scale simulations of the
physical properties of realistic systems. For materials exhibiting correlated
electron behavior, where the behavior of one electron is strongly dependent on
that of other electrons in the material, the Dynamical Mean Field Theory method
has enabled practical and accurate calculations of basic material properties.
This project focuses on the development of software that simulates such complex
materials with a computer, and which can predict material properties. The focus
is in improving the precision of the theory, and in developing new theoretical
spectroscopy tools, which will enable the prediction of the precise crystal
structures of correlated solids, and the prediction of actual spectroscopic
measurements made using neutron and x-ray scattering experimental
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to the development of
algorithms and software that will be incorporated in open-source code packages,
which subsequently will be made available to the wider research community. These
tools will help the materials science community to find promising material
candidates for synthesis, which should further enable theory-assisted material
discovery and design. Training and mentorship of junior researchers will also
take place as part of the project, contributing to the development of scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the search for new materials with enhanced physical
properties it is crucial to develop broad capabilities for computational
characterization. This award supports research and education towards the
development of a number of theoretical spectroscopic tools, which can be used in
combination with electronic structure tools. The latter are based on Dynamical
Mean Field Theory (developed under previous NSF support), and enable theoretical
prediction of material properties using first-principles methods. The
spectroscopic tools and methods that will be developed in this project include:
i) relaxation of complex crystal structures using forces on all atoms in the
unit cell, which will enable prediction of complex crystal structures; ii)
extension of the calculation of forces to materials with large spin-orbit
coupling; iii) developing a tool to predict phase transitions in systems with
strongly coupled crystal- and electronic structure; iv) developing a tool to
calculate phonons in correlated materials; v) developing x-ray scattering
spectroscopy that properly takes into account the core-hole
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These tools will be made available to the
broader scientific community as they will be incorporated in the PI's electronic
structure software package, which is widely used, and is distributed as open-
source; see: http://hauleweb.rutgers.edu/tutorials/. The overall goal of the
research is to build a predictive framework for describing the physical
properties of correlated materials, to experimentally validate it, by close
collaboration with material scientists to test the predictions of the
computational theory, and to improve it in the areas of disagreement. Training
and mentorship of junior researchers will also take place as part of the
project, contributing to the development of scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.