* 1709081
* Microwave-Assisted Chemical Insertion for Designing Multivalent-ion Battery Hosts
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Rapid increase in global energy use and growing
environmental concerns are prompting the development of clean, sustainable,
energy conversion and storage technologies. Renewable energy sources, offer an
appealing solution to this challenge, but efficient and economical storage of
electricity produced from renewable sources is crucial for using these
intermittent energy sources. Rechargeable batteries (today's lithium-ion
batteries) are the most viable option for the efficient storage and utilization
of electrical energy. However, the limited abundance of lithium necessitates the
development of rechargeable batteries based on earth-abundant, safer,
multivalent metal ions, such as magnesium, zinc, and aluminium, for large-scale
applications like renewable energy storage and electric vehicles. Currently, the
lack of appropriate electrode materials and electrolytes hampers the development
of such batteries. This project, which is funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, focuses on
developing and using a facile, microwave-assisted synthesis process to screen
and develop new electrode materials for multivalent-ion batteries. The insights
and scientific understanding obtained with this project can pave the way for the
design and development of next-generation of advanced rechargeable batteries. In
addition, the project provides a broad interdisciplinary training to graduate
and undergraduate students as well as community college students and teachers in
the globally important area of clean energy, encompassing materials chemistry
and electrochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Rapid
increase in global energy use and growing environmental concerns are prompting
the development of clean, sustainable, energy conversion and storage
technologies. In this regard, there is immense interest to develop rechargeable
batteries based on earth-abundant, safer, multivalent working ions, such as Mg,
Zn, Ca, and Al, but the lack of adequate electrolytes makes the development of
multivalent-ion batteries extremely challenging. This project, which is funded
by the Solid State and Materials program in the Division of Materials Research,
focuses on utilizing a facile, microwave-assisted synthesis with safer, easy-to-
handle chemicals to insert multivalent ions into host materials and develop
potential electrode materials for multivalent-ion batteries. The approach not
only serves as a fast screening platform for quickly identifying viable hosts
without the necessity of making electrochemical cells, but also offers the
accessibility of new kinetically stabilized phases/compositions that are
otherwise inaccessible by conventional high-temperature solid-state methods.
With the multivalent-ion chemical insertion technique, the project plans to (i)
identify high-performance multivalent-ion host materials, (ii) establish a
fundamental understanding of their crystal chemistry, electrochemical behavior,
and ionic and electronic transport properties, and (iii) demonstrate their
feasibility for electrical energy storage. The chemically prepared phases will
also allow a precise investigation of their structural, morphological,
electrochemical, and ionic/electronic transport properties without the added
complexity that arises when retrieving and using an electrode material from an
electrochemical cell. The insights and fundamental understanding obtained with
this project can pave the way for the design and development of next-generation
of advanced rechargeable multivalent-ion batteries. In addition, the project
provides a broad interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate
students as well as community college students and teachers in the globally
important area of clean energy, encompassing materials chemistry and
electrochemistry.