* 1709035
* CYCLODEXTRIN-CATALYZED EXCHANGE TO CONTROL LIPID COMPOSITION AND LIPID ASYMMETRY: FROM LIPOSOMES TO CELLS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Erwin London, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical Section: &lt;br/&gt;Living cells are surrounded by a thin membrane
composed of lipids (specialized fat molecules) and proteins. Artificial membrane
vesicles, called liposomes, are composed of membrane lipids and proteins which
form an envelope similar to a cell membrane. Natural membranes have two layers
of lipids and are asymmetric in terms of composition with different types of
lipids in each of the two lipid layers that form the membrane. But a key
limitation in the utility of artificial liposomes has been their lack of lipid
asymmetry. Earlier studies by the PI and group discovered a novel method on how
to prepare asymmetric liposomes. The focus of this project will be in developing
a basic understanding of materials sciences in the preparation of the asymmetric
liposomes with a variety of unnatural lipids, and then compare their functional
properties. With the knowledge gained from the proposed materials research, this
project also will define of how to adapt the methods developed to change the
lipids in biological cells, which should enable applications in which
biomaterials derived from natural cell membranes are used to delivery molecules
and other applications. With respect to broader impacts, this project will have
a strong impact on career development of future scientists, including students
from underrepresented groups, by training graduate and undergraduate students
(including via contacts with other local institutions) in the conduct of
research, experimental principles, and the specialized experimental techniques
used in membrane research. Students will also be trained in proper conduct of
scientific studies and scientific writing and speaking. This will in turn
prepare them for their professional growth and careers in research, teaching and
allied fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Section: &lt;br/&gt;Lipid
asymmetry, a difference in the lipid composition in the inner and outer leaflets
(monolayers) of a biological membrane, is a crucial property of many cell
membranes. Artificial vesicles (liposomes) containing lipid bilayers are
biomaterials that have proven invaluable models of biological membranes, and
possible use in a number of applications, but a lack of methods to prepare
liposomes with asymmetric lipid distributions has limited their utility. This
project involves developing novel methods in developing asymmetric vesicles
using modified cyclodextrins. The first goal will to prepare asymmetric
liposomes containing unnatural and positively charged cationic lipids or
polyethylene glycol derivized-lipids in only their inner or outer monolayers.
Liposomes containing these lipids have applications in delivery of biomolecules
and drugs into cells that in turn could modify cell properties or gene
expression. By restricting these unnatural lipids to only one of the two lipid
layers, these studies will maximize the amount of molecules that can be
delivered into cells by trapping them within liposomes, and tailoring these
liposomes to maximize interactions and compatibility with biological systems.
The second goal involves extending these studies to biological cells. Conditions
allowing replacement of the lipids in the outer layer of cell plasma membranes,
and how this alters membrane physical structure and membrane integrity, will be
defined. This will enable the preparation of novel biomaterials having natural
membranes as their starting point. In these studies, students will receive
specialized training in a variety of biochemical and spectroscopic techniques
used to study membrane proteins and lipids, including newly developed methods.
Students will also be trained in proper conduct of scientific studies, and
writing skills and speaking skills. This will prepare them for careers in field
of biological/biophysical research and/or teaching. This project should broadly
impact the field of membrane biology, including drug delivery and nanomaterial
applications.