* 1709784
* Smart gate membranes for highly selective removal of carbon dioxide from combustion gases
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Kirk Ziegler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of
fundamental science enabling fabrication of porous membranes for N2/CO2
separation with high selectivity and significant fluxes. High selectivity is
achieved by inducing different molecular transport mechanisms for different
components in a gas mixture. This research has a transformative impact because
no microporous membranes have been demonstrated so far where selectivity is
achieved by inducing different transport mechanisms for different components
inside a membrane. The gas transport mechanisms on microscopic length scales
will be monitored by a unique nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technique. The
separation approach developed in this project can be easily adapted for other
industrially important gas separations using the same membrane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to develop structure-property relationships that will enable the
fabrication of microporous membranes for N2/CO2 separation with high
selectivity, which are achieved by selective induction of single-file diffusion
to N2 molecules. The research effort is split between the following tasks: (1)
fabrication of membrane supports with nanopore diameters below 5 nm and (2)
characterization of the diffusion properties of gas mixtures in these membranes.
Application of a unique diffusion NMR technique enables distinguishing between
different diffusion mechanisms for different gas components inside the membrane
on the microscopic length scales. Successful completion of the proposed research
affords a transformative membrane-based technology to separate CO2 from
combustion gas mixtures. The research plan is integrated with a recruitment
program and supervised research for undergraduate students, especially students
from the underrepresented groups, as well as mentoring and outreach. The
students will be trained to use a unique diffusion NMR technique at the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory.