* 1709528
* Silicon Telluride, A 2D Material with Unique Variable Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Xiao Shen, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 392,679.00

Non-Technical Description: Two-dimensional (2D) sheet-like materials composed of
one or a few layers of atoms often display properties dramatically different
from the same materials in bulk form. This project focuses on a new two-
dimensional material, namely silicon telluride, which has unique variable
structures where Si atoms form Si-Si pairs to fill the sites between surrounding
Te atoms. Each Si pair has four possible orientations, with easily achievable
rotations between each other. The flexibility in Si dimer orientations enables
unique structural variability and opens opportunities for new phenomena,
properties, and functionalities. The research team combines theoretical and
experimental studies to develop 2D materials with desirable properties and to
achieve a fundamental understanding of the unique phenomenon in silicon
telluride, which is expected to make significant impacts on the field of low-
dimensional materials and electronic and optoelectronic industry. The research
activities are integrated with educational efforts, augmenting the undergraduate
and graduate curriculums through hands-on projects, enriched course materials,
and summer workshops on nanomaterials to inspire the students' interest in
science. Additional project activities including outreach to high school
students and teachers through summer research activities and demonstrations at
local high schools further extend the impact of this project on the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Atomically thin, two-
dimensional materials such as graphene, dichalcogenides, and black phosphorus
offer unique properties and have attracted significant attention by the
scientific community. Silicon telluride is a new 2D material, recently
demonstrated with a thickness of a few atomic layers. It has a unique crystal
structure in which the Te atoms form a hexagonal close-packed structure, and Si
atoms form Si-Si dimers to fill the two-thirds of the interstitial sites between
the Te atoms, with each Si dimer taking one of the four possible orientations:
three in-plane and one out-plane. The Si dimers can easily rotate their
orientations due to the small energy barriers and thus can enable dynamic
structural variations, such as flipped Si dimers and domain boundaries between
regions of different Si dimer orientations, which are expected to interact with
charge carriers and excitons to give rise to new electronic and optical
phenomena and properties. In this project, the team combines theoretical
investigations based on first-principles calculations and experimental
deposition and characterization approaches to develop a fundamental
understanding of how structural variations in 2D silicon telluride affect the
material properties by exploring various strain and doping optimization
strategies.