* 1709820
* Polymerization of N-carboxyanhydrides Catalyzed by Macromolecular Architecture
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Jianjun Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2021
* USD 260,000.00

Polypeptides, the structural components of proteins, is an important class of
biopolymers. Because of their structural and functional diversity, both
naturally occurring and synthetic polypeptides are used in a wide range of
applications. Professor Jianjun Cheng's research group at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign develops novel strategies to synthesize
polypeptides and investigates the factors that accelerate the rate of
polymerization. This project provides research training to students, including
members of underrepresented groups, preparing a skilled workforce for the
polymer industry. Research is integrated into various educational and outreach
endeavors, including the Discover Engineering Summer Camp Program and
Engineering Open-House Program at the University of Illinois, for undergraduates
and K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Cheng's research group aims to
develop the chain growth polymerization of N-carboxyanhydride (NCA) monomers as
an efficient approach to synthesize polypeptides with high conversion, high
degree of polymerization, and low polydispersity. To understand the mechanism of
this chemistry and the factors that control the polymerization kinetics, the
research group studies the dependence of polymerization rate on monomer
structures, helical conformation, additives, and solvent. The team further
investigates the effects of the architecture of the initiator on the rate of NCA
polymerization. The roles of architecture provided by dendrimers, micelles, and
non-covalent perylene-based pi-stacks are explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.