* 1709464
* The Vibrational Structure of Atomically-Precise Nanostructures: From Molecular Clusters to Quantum Dots
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jonathan Owen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 69,700.00

In this collaborative project, supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrew
Crowther of Barnard College, Professor Jonathan Owen of Columbia University, and
a team of their undergraduate research students are developing an understanding
of the vibrational structure of atomically precise quantum dot nanostructures.
The vibrations of atoms in molecules and materials are a fundamental type of
atomic motion related to the stretching and contracting of chemical bonds. By
understanding molecular vibrations and how these motions impact structure and
geometry, scientists can improve the performance of materials and the devices.
This research is focused on the design, synthesis and characterization of
quantum dots of cadmium selenide and cadmium sulfide. These materials are used
as photoresists in many consumer items such as camera light meters, clock
radios, alarm devices, and solar street lights. Partnerships with programs at
Barnard College, the Higher Education Opportunity Program and Collegiate Science
and Technology Entry Program, to involve low-income and underrepresented college
and K-12 students to research. Each summer an underrepresented student shadows a
current research student on this project, joining the laboratory to conduct
their own research. This research is also incorporated into a new, annual
"NanoDay" at Barnard College that exposes students and teachers from local high-
need schools to nanoscience and materials chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project Raman spectroscopy is used to determine the vibrational structure
of a diverse, yet related set of atomically precise clusters and quantum dots.
Ligand and metal cation exchange reactions probe how surface chemistry affects
the vibrational structure of a series of qadmium selenide and cadmium sulfide
quantum dots of precise size and shape. Core-shell quantum dots with
monodispersity in size and interfacial atomic distributions enable
investigations of the core, shell, and interfacial vibrational structure.
Finally, molecular clusters are linked to form dimers, trimers, and ultimately
long polymer chains to determine how the vibrational structure changes from the
zero-dimensional to the one-dimensional limit. Each summer an underrepresented
student shadows a current research student on this project and subsequently
joins the laboratory to conduct their own research. This research is also
incorporated into a new, annual "NanoDay" at Barnard College that exposes
students and teachers from local high-need schools to the study of physical and
chemical systems at the microscopic level, nanoscience, as well as their
material properties. These are key areas in the development of new science and
technology, which will power American innovation in the future.