* 1709879
* Scanned-probe Characterization of Charge Generation, Recombination, and Motion in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* John Marohn, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 434,121.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Sunlight represents a limitless source of clean energy.
How can we provide everyone with a cheap way to capture and use the sun's energy
to run their appliances and vehicles? Rooftop silicon-based photovoltaic cells
already exist for converting sunlight into electricity; however, these cells are
expensive to manufacture and install. This project's goal is to study solar
cells made from plastics and organic molecules, which could allow solar cells to
be as thin and inexpensive as a coat of paint. Plastic/organic solar-cell
materials have been studied for a long time, but how these materials convert
light into electricity at the molecular level remains poorly understood. To
better understand these materials we are developing a microscope capable of
watching charge move at the molecular level on the timescale of one nanosecond
(one billionth of a second) or faster. Such a microscope would give us a new way
to study molecular-level processes ranging from photosynthesis to industrially
important chemical reactions taking place at a metal surface. The researchers
funded by this project are using their knowledge of scientific instrumentation
and computer programming to develop experiments introducing middle and high
school students to topics ranging from the physics of music to the principles of
electrochemistry.

Technical Abstract: The goal of this project is to test molecular design rules
thought to govern how light is converted into electricity in thin-film solar
cells made from electron-accepting and electron-donating molecules, so-called
donor-acceptor blends. Localized measurements of charge recombination dynamics
and charge mobility are carried out on donor-acceptor blends prepared from
molecules with systematically varied energy levels and background charge density
to support or refute theories describing how charge is generated from sunlight
in these blends. To enable these studies, scanned-probe-microscope measurements
are developed capable of determining, with nanosecond temporal resolution and
nanometer spatial resolution, the free charge yield and subsequent recombination
dynamics in a thin film of a donor-acceptor blend following the application of a
nanosecond-duration pulse of light. A separate set of scanned-probe measurements
are developed for inferring the local charge mobility from measurements of near-
surface electric field fluctuations. The tools created during this project are
expected to ultimately have broad applications in studying industrially
important processes like photocatalysis and electrocatalysis and in naturally
important processes like photosynthesis. The researchers funded by this research
are using their knowledge of scientific instrumentation and computer programming
to develop experiments introducing middle and high school students to topics
ranging from the physics of music to the principles of electrochemistry.