* 1709939
* RAPID:  Environmental Fate and Transport of Naled for the Control of Zika
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Helena Solo-Gabriele, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2020
* USD 55,951.00

1709939&lt;br/&gt;Solo-Gabriele&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first transmission of
the mosquito-borne Zika virus in the continental U.S. was discovered August 2016
in Miami-Dade County, Florida. Efforts have been mounted to eradicate the
mosquito vectors; however, some of these efforts, including insecticide sprays,
have been viewed with skepticism by local communities due to limited knowledge
and inconsistent information concerning the fate of the insecticide and the
subsequent ecological and human health impacts. Thus, there are growing concerns
about the human health and ecological impacts of insecticide spraying,
especially Naled spraying in Miami. Those against Naled's use emphasize that
Naled has negative health and ecosystem impacts impacting honeybees and birds
and was banned by the European Union in 2012. Those proposing continued use of
Naled cite studies that suggest it is safe to use according to specifications
(in ultra-low volume). The objective of this project is to develop an
understanding of the environmental fate of Naled by conducting laboratory-
controlled experiments supplemented by full-scale opportunistic monitoring
during aerial spray activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this study
will evaluate the impact of soil and water on the persistence of Naled and its
by-product, Dichlorvos, both of which have insecticidal properties. The
laboratory study will be supplemented with sampling conducted before and after
the spray of Naled in the coming summer season, to identify potential areas of
accumulation within the coastal intertidal zone. The PI's team will evaluate the
persistence of environmental insecticides; specifically, they will evaluate the
impacts of sediment properties on the fate of Naled and Dichlorvos and assess
whether the intertidal zone serves as a reservoir of insecticide accumulation.
The existing literature sheds little light on the fate of Naled and degradation
by-products in natural settings. Moreover, scant data are available on the
impacts of environmental matrices, especially sediments, on the persistence of
Naled. The PI will evaluate Naled as a model organophosphate insecticide which
is currently the insecticide of choice for Zika larvae eradication. They
hypothesize that the persistence of Naled in the environment varies across
environmental media, e.g., shorter persistence in beach sands than the soils
with higher organic content. They further hypothesize that Naled from the aerial
sprays in coastal areas will accumulate in the intertidal zone, allowing for
potential exposures nearshore. Results from this study can be used to quantify
decay rates for Naled under different soil conditions. These decay rates will be
validated against measurements collected during full-scale spray activities.
Results can be incorporated into fate and transport models that simulate Naled
persistence in the environment. The Miami-Dade community will benefit from the
translation of the knowledge gained from this project to mosquito control
decisions by Miami-Dade County's Mosquito Control Division, and from assessments
of human health risks by the Miami-Dade Department of Health.