* 1709255
* Controlling Magnetism, Metal-Insulator Transitions, and Superconductivity in Ruthenate Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Kyle Shen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 12/31/2021
* USD 477,952.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The electronic and magnetic properties of
materials form the backbone of modern technologies, including computer
processors, telecommunications, information storage, and displays. Moreover, the
ability to deterministically control these properties, for instance, in
semiconductor transistors, is one of the crowning achievements of materials
physics in the past fifty years and has had enormous societal and economic
impacts. However, the end of Moore's Law and the increasing need for smaller,
faster, and more power efficient electronics demands the search for new
electronic materials that can ultimately replace existing materials such as
silicon and copper which have been in use for nearly half a century. This
project aims to investigate one class of electronic materials comprised of
ruthenium oxides which exhibit a tremendous variety of electronic and magnetic
properties, some of which could be potentially important for a wide range of
applications including quantum computing, non-volatile memories, and sensing.
These materials are synthesized as thin films which are only a few atoms thick,
and their properties are manipulated by controlling the thickness of the film or
stretching the bonds between atoms. Advanced spectroscopic tools allow for a
more detailed understanding of how to better optimize and control their desired
properties. Finally, this project provides crucial training to young scientists
in materials synthesis and characterization, and the samples fabricated in these
studies support a number of scientific collaborations both nationwide and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;A major
challenge in condensed matter physics is to control the many-body interactions
in correlated quantum materials with the objective of being able to engineer
their properties in a deterministic fashion. The potential for quantum materials
as platforms for future technologies such as topological quantum computation or
memories has motivated an effort to discover new avenues to measure and
manipulate their electronic and magnetic structure. The strategy outlined in
this proposal is to use the family of layered ruthenates which exhibit a range
of emergent electronic and magnetic phenomena, including spin-triplet
superconductivity, electronic nematicity, quantum criticality, and metal-
insulator transitions, as a platform for manipulating electronic and magnetic
properties through epitaxial strain, particularly since the properties of
ruthenates are particularly responsive to small perturbations. This project
combines oxide molecular beam epitaxy growth and in situ high-resolution angle-
resolved photoemission to investigate the electronic structure of the
ruthenates, and how the band structure and Fermi surfaces responds to strain.
Graduate students involved in this project are trained in molecular beam epitaxy
growth, photoemission spectroscopy, and a multitude of sample characterization
techniques. Some specific objectives of this work include increasing the
superconducting Tc of Sr2RuO4 via epitaxial strain, and gaining insight into the
mechanism of spin-triplet superconductivity by correlating Tc with changes in
the Fermi surface topology. Another goal is to control the magnetic field driven
quantum phase transition in Sr3Ru2O7 by changing the RuO6 octahedral rotation
angles through epitaxial strain, and correlating these behaviors with changes in
the electronic structure.