* 1709746
* EAGER: Revisiting Vibrational Control Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Haithem Taha, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 09/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to
deepen and extend the analytical tools available for vibrational control.
Vibrational control offers unique capabilities for controlling unstable systems
without the need for feedback. Consider an upside-down pendulum with a movable
base. By measuring the pendulum position, a control system can command side-to-
side movement of the base in order to keep it upright. But if position
measurements are not available, the pendulum will topple over. Similarly, a
person may balance a broomstick on their hand by watching it move. However, if
that person were made to wear a blindfold and thick gloves, the task would be
impossible. Using vibrational control allows the upside-down pendulum to be kept
balanced with no feedback, by moving the base up and down at the right frequency
and amplitude. There are no other known methods to accomplish this. Many
important applications could benefit from a systematic application of
vibrational control, including chemical reactions, material processing, and
flexible structures. However the only currently developed tool for vibrational
control -- a mathematical technique called first-order averaging -- is very
poorly suited to engineering design. Therefore this project will explore three
promising alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to explore and resolve competing approaches to the analysis and
design of vibrational control systems. Vibrational control has the potential to
fundamentally transform control applications characterized by underlying
instability, limited processing speed, high degrees of freedom, limited
actuation, and little or no sensing. First-order averaging is the mathematical
technique currently used almost exclusively to analyze and design vibrational
controllers. This project considers three promising alternatives to first-order
averaging, namely higher-order averaging using power series, higher-order
averaging using Volterra series (the "chronological calculus"), and stability
maps based on Floquet theory. This project will resolve discrepancies between
these approaches, and derive the fundamental benefits and drawbacks of each. The
results of this project will change vibrational control from a mathematical
curiosity to a powerful and practical engineering tool. The project includes
validation on models of flapping-wing micro air vehicles, and ion confinement
and filtering.