* 1709515
* Towards a Scientific Understanding of Fatigue Damage Tolerance in Shape Memory Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 389,413.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys can
"remember" their original shape and return to their pre-deformed shape when
heated. They are utilized mainly in biomedical applications. They undergo a
structural transformation under the application of temperature or stress. Under
repeated transformations or cyclic loadings, shape memory alloys can undergo
mechanical fatigue. Fatigue is the progressive deterioration of metals under
cyclic loading, resulting in damage due to cracking and ultimately failure. This
can negatively affect the actuation performance in many applications. Therefore,
the purpose of this project is to advance the science-based knowledge of fatigue
progression in such alloys by developing a fundamental approach to estimate the
fatigue threshold stress intensity as a function of key material parameters. The
work will address how the material variables affect the macroscopic fatigue
parameters such controlling crack advance. &lt;br/&gt;The impact of this work is
to remove the empiricism associated with fatigue threshold determination in
shape memory materials. The proposed modeling will reveal understanding that can
advance prediction of fatigue damage. This research will examine the most
important shape memory material NiTi which is not well understood, and then
consider new classes of promising alloys that currently remain untested. The
proposed research recognizes the need for revamping education in this field with
outreach efforts to high school students. A novel project is proposed to build a
small fatigue machine using rapid prototyping methodology. The students will
learn how to build the machine during the summer camp and observe the failure of
alloy wires under fatigue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understanding of shape memory alloy
(SMA) fatigue damage tolerance has not been established despite the significance
of these alloys. The lack of understanding of fatigue hinders the widespread use
of SMAs and has confined SMA utilization to very few compositions. This project
is an effort on modeling from atomistic to micro- mechanical scales to develop a
superior understanding of fatigue thresholds in shape memory alloys (SMAs). This
science-based methodology of fatigue-damage prediction is one of the challenges
that the shape memory community faces especially under varying stress in
endovascular stents and potential applications such as elastocaloric cooling
where the SMAs could see thousands of cycles. The work requires deep knowledge
of several fields- physics of fatigue, atomistic models and shape memory
behavior. The proposal will utilize modeling at atomic scale via ab-initio
calculations as well as molecular dynamics to understand: (i) the role of
elastic anisotropy (including cubic, tetragonal and monoclinic lattices), (ii)
the role of dislocation-mediated slip resulting in irreversibility, residual
martensite, and residual austenites, and their role in producing crack closure
forces. The alloys to be considered such as NiTi and CoNiAl exhibit different
crystal lattices, ordering and transformation stresses as a function of
composition and heat treatment. To verify the models at various length scales,
electron microscopy in meso-scale fatigue experiments will be utilized. Only the
confluence of these techniques can provide the needed insight to advance the
current knowledge of mechanical fatigue of SMAs. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
evaluate two shape memory alloy systems with experiments (NiTi and Co-Ni-Al with
varying compositions). The proposed experiments consider very fine measurements
of displacements at crack tips allowing determination of crack advance.
Concurrently, the focus will be on theoretical developments to compute the crack
closure forces due to transformation strains which will account for the elastic
moduli tensors, anisotropy of internal tractions, and transformation and
plasticity zones. The proposal plans to predict the fatigue crack advance under
three different material conditions: (i) monolithic austenitic state (ii)
martensitic state (detwinned and self-accommodated cases) and (iii) stress-
induced transformation (austenite to martensite) conditions. The study of these
three material conditions will provide a complete spectrum of understanding of
SMA fatigue behavior. &lt;br/&gt;A novel project is proposed for students to
build a small fatigue machine using rapid prototyping methodology and test SMA
wires under high-speed rotation. The curvature of the wire dictates the strain
amplitude and the rotation of the wire generates cyclic loading that alternates
between tension and compression and ultimately results in fatigue failure. The
students will learn how to build the machine during the summer camp and observe
the failure of SMA wires under fatigue.