* 1709626
* Collaborative Proposal: INFEWS N/P/H2O: Supramolecular Recognition in the Biocatalytic Transformation of Organic Phosphorus-Containing Environmental Matrices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Ludmilla Aristilde, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2022
* USD 304,763.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program in the
Division of Chemistry. It supports Dr. Ludmilla Aristilde of Cornell University
and Dr. Deb Jaisi of the University of Delaware to investigate the cycling of
phosphorus in the environment. Phosphorus (P) is an essential component of
fertilizers, but in excess, a pollutant. Inorganic phosphorus is the form
required by plants. Animals can use either organic or inorganic phosphorus. Both
organic and inorganic phosphorus can be dissolved or suspended in water. The
transformation of organic P to inorganic P is poorly understood. The key
research objective is to better understand the chemical controls of this
transformation. Outreach activities are carried out on the topic of the fate of
organic P including fertilizers, organic wastes, and organic matter in soils.
The outreach is aimed at increasing public literacy, from inner-city middle
school students to farmers. Both investigators are involved in educational
activities for farmers in New York and Delaware, respectively. Different
stakeholders gain valuable knowledge regarding nutrient and fertilizer
management on agricultural lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies a
multidisciplinary approach. The research activities combine tools from molecular
biology, analytical chemistry, and computational modeling. Molecular-level
insights are obtained on the chemical factors that control the enzymatic release
of inorganic P from complex organic assemblages. The project has three main
objectives. First, it studies the activities of phosphatase enzymes with organic
assemblages. Second, it addresses the effects of mineral surfaces on enzyme-
substrate recognition. Third, the catalytic dynamics in response to external
chemical stimuli is modeled. Metabolomics profiling enables the monitoring of
catalytic hydrolysis of different organic P assemblages. Isotopes are used to
track enzyme catalysis. This provides information on the role of different
enzymes in recycling organic P in response to the chemistry of the environmental
matrix. Molecular dynamics simulations in concert with the experimental studies
illustrate the supramolecular framework responsible for the environmental
biotransformation of organic P. The research findings shed light on how
biogeochemical factors control phosphatase-mediated inorganic P generation from
organic P assemblages. This addresses a long-standing knowledge gap in the
environmental mapping of P species and their fate in soils and waters.