* 1709418
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Regulation of microtubule structure and function by post-translational modifications
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Sarah Schreiner, Schreiner               Sarah          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Sarah Schreiner, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Jeffrey Moore at the University of Colorado Denver Anschutz
Medical Campus. The fellow aims to uncover how cells build a diverse set of
structures and transport networks out of the same protein building blocks called
microtubules. If a city highway is built improperly, it causes traffic jams that
can disrupt the basic functioning of the city. Similarly, if microtubule
networks are built improperly, it can disrupt basic biological functions
including cell division and tissue development. The results of this proposal
will improve our understanding of how cells build microtubule networks into
diverse structures and transport networks, and how these contribute to normal
cell function. Additionally, the fellow is broadening participation of
underrepresented groups by developing and delivering a public lecture series for
local libraries and high schools.

The research goals of this proposal are to determine how specific tubulin
subunits are selectively targeted for post-translational modifications (PTMs)
and the effect that these PTMs have on microtubule assembly and network
organization. In order to study PTMs on microtubules, a source of unmodified
tubulin is necessary; however, there are currently no methods to produce
unmodified tubulin in an in vivo setting. The project aims to create a new
experimental system in which PTMs can be studied on microtubules in a 'clean
slate' system in yeast to study the targeting and effect of PTMs on
microtubules. The proposed research is starting to tease apart the very complex
process of how the cell can differentially regulate the same building blocks to
accomplish many diverse and essential biological processes. The lecture series
is providing the public with a better understanding of the current issues they
hear today by de-mystifying the science behind them, and training young
scientists on how to communicate complex scientific issues in a fun and engaging
way to a public audience.