* 1709372
* Magnetic Ionic Liquids as Tunable Solvents for Sample Preparation and Chemical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jared Anderson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 742,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in
the Division of Chemistry. Professor Jared L. Anderson of Iowa State University
is developing new separation media based on magnetic ionic liquids for sample
preparation and chromatography methods. Magnetic ionic liquids are non-molecular
solvents that possess low melting points, high stability, and can be controlled
by an applied magnetic field. The proposed work will develop new advancements in
nucleic acid analysis and have a major impact in various interdisciplinary
fields including clinical diagnostics, biomedicine, and forensics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three areas where magnetic ionic
liquids are studied and used in chemical measurement. Magnetic ionic liquids are
designed and incorporated into chromatographic separations; new approaches are
developed to achieve sequence specific extraction of deoxyribonucleic acid; and
the preservation of ribonucleic acid structure is studied using magnetic ionic
liquids as solvents. This research provides fundamental new knowledge about
these materials and catalyzes the development of new approaches for achieving
rapid and selective nucleic acid analysis. Graduate and undergraduate students
acquire training in separation science and bioanalytical chemistry. High school
students participate in the research through the American Chemical Society
Project SEED program. A social networking program is used to disseminate
scientific videos to young children and the general public.