* 1709265
* CBMS Regional Research Conferences in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Thomas Barr, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The NSF/CBMS series of Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical
Sciences is an ongoing project administered by the Conference Board of the
Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) and supported continuously by NSF for over 40
years. Each conference features a distinguished lecturer who delivers a sequence
of ten lectures on a topic of important current research in one sharply focused
area of the mathematical sciences. This award to the American Mathematical
Society, with subcontract to CBMS, supports CBMS in its efforts to publicize
conferences and administer the resulting publications, fostering greater
dissemination of material related to cutting edge-topics and increasing the
impact of the conferences in the community. Participation in the individual
conferences is supported through separate NSF awards to host
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the NSF/CBMS conference series
is to promote research in areas of the mathematical sciences that have recently
seen significant new results and that hold promise for continued significant
development. A conference achieves that purpose by having the principal
lecturer, who is both a major researcher in the area of the conference and an
excellent expositor, deliver ten lectures over a five-day period to the
participants. The lectures typically cover the recent development of the field
and chart possible new directions and open problems. Thus the format of the
conferences is primarily educational, but at the research level. Approximately
one-half of the participants at these conferences are graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers; the conferences give them a good perspective on both
the current research and interesting open problems in an important area of the
mathematical sciences. The lecturer agrees to prepare a substantial expository
monograph based upon his or her lectures. The resulting monograph reaches a
broader audience and provides an introduction to readers who wish to begin
research in the field. Moreover, the conferences provide host institutions an
opportunity to enhance their local research activity.