* 1709544
* Elliptic and Parabolic Partial Differential Equations on Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Benjamin Weinkove, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2020
* USD 207,000.00

The principal mathematical objects we use to understand physical theories are
partial differential equations (PDEs). There are many such equations, and the
behavior of their solutions reflects the different kinds of phenomena we observe
including the dispersion of heat, the effect of gravity, the motion of fluids
and the movement of subatomic particles. Moreover, mathematicians use PDEs to
understand geometric spaces and the possible structures that can exist on them.
This project investigates the use of PDEs in two kinds of geometric problems.
The first concerns the Calabi-Yau equation: this is a PDE used as a model in
string theory and has wide-ranging applications in the study of geometric spaces
defined by algebraic equations. A goal of this project is to generalize and
solve the Calabi-Yau equation on spaces with much less structure, with a long
term aim of classifying all such spaces. The second kind of geometric problem
concerns a phenomenon known as collapsing. This occurs in the study of geometric
heat equations where a geometric space evolves in time and may collapse in some
directions to yield a lower dimensional object. This collapsing can reveal the
structure of the original space. In order to carry out these investigations, the
PI will need to develop new technical tools. The PI will take advantage of
techniques which have been developed for classical equations such as the heat
equation, and will adapt them to the study of non-linear PDEs occurring in
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate nonlinear elliptic
and parabolic equations, with applications to complex and almost geometry. In
particular, the PI will study the problem of prescribing volume forms on
manifolds, extending the well-known theorem of Yau for compact Kahler manifolds.
Building on the PI's work on Hermitian and Gauduchon manifolds, the PI will
investigate the question of prescribing volume forms for balanced metrics, and
for almost Kahler metrics on four-manifolds. Another major goal of this project
is to understand the phenomenon of collapsing along geometric flows. Collapsing
for the Kahler-Ricci flow at infinite time is now quite well-understood. The PI
will focus on the difficult problem of finite time collapse. This occurs for the
Kahler-Ricci flow on Fano manifolds and also for the Chern-Ricci flow (a flow of
Hermitian metrics) on non-Kahler complex manifolds such as the Hopf surface. To
accomplish these goals, the PI will develop new tools for the study of nonlinear
PDE. In particular, the PI will consider new second order estimates exploiting
the convexity of the largest eigenvalue of Hessian. These kinds of estimates
have already been used successfully to establish constant rank theorems for a
general class of PDEs and optimal regularity results for the degenerate complex
Monge-Ampere equation. The PI will also develop multi-point maximum principles,
which have a long history in the study of convexity properties of solutions to
PDEs, in the context of complex geometry.