* 1709524
* Reaction Specificity in Pyridoxal Phosphate Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Michael Toney, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2021
* USD 480,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division funds this
award. Professor Michael Toney of the University of California-Davis
investigates vitamin B6 dependent enzymes. Enzymes catalyze the chemical
reactions of living systems, enhancing the rates of reaction by enormous
amounts. A large class of metabolically-important enzymes use vitamin B6
(pyridoxal phosphate) to catalyze reactions for nitrogen utilization. As a
class, these enzymes also have excellent potential for the synthesis and
commercial production of high-value chemicals (such as herbicides). The goal of
this research is to understand the basis for the specific production of certain
chemicals by vitamin B6 dependent enzymes. To achieve this goal, a combination
of studies on altered versions of vitamin B6, and laboratory enzyme evolution is
underway. This funding contributes to the professional development of
undergraduate and graduate students, and allows the development of an
undergraduate course focused on preparing under-represented minority
undergraduate students for laboratory research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyridoxal phosphate (also called PLP or vitamin
B6) dependent enzymes are central to nitrogen metabolism in all organisms. As a
group, they catalyze more than a dozen different reaction types, with each
reaction type having multiple substrate specificities. Approximately 230
different PLP enzyme activities have been identified to date. The fundamental
organic chemistry used to catalyze these different reactions is generally
understood, but the mechanisms by which substrate and reaction specificity are
achieved are not. This research has two major components: the first employs
coenzyme analogues to determine the influence of coenzyme electrophilicity on
reaction specificity, and the second involves laboratory reconstruction of
ancestral, non-specific enzymes and recapitulation of their evolution to present
day enzymes via a minimal number of critical mutations. These studies help to
define the electronic and structural determinants of reaction specificity in
pyridoxal phosphate dependent enzymes. This funding also contributes to
professional development of undergraduate and graduate students, and allows for
the development of an undergraduate course focused on preparing under-
represented minority undergraduate students for laboratory research.