* 1709714
* Collaborative Research: Air-Oxidation of Biomass Chars - Structural Changes and Implications for Retention and Reactions of Contaminants
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jingdong Mao, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 86,999.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation. It represents a
collaboration between Dr. Joseph Pignatello at the Connecticut Agricultural
Experiment Station, Professor Klaus Schmidt-Rohr at Brandeis University, and
Professor Jingdong Mao at Old Dominion University. Together with their postdocs
and graduate students, they investigate properties and behavior of biomass chars
in the environment. Biochar particles are partially burned plant matter with
blackened surfaces. Char results from natural and deliberately-set fires and are
common components of soil and aquatic sediments. Activated carbon (a form of
charcoal) and biochar can be beneficial soil additives for use in agricultural
processes. Important attributes of chars include their ability to strongly bind
pollutant and to change the identity of the pollutant molecules. Air may be
present or absent during the charring process. It is usually present during the
weathering of chars in the environment. The oxygen in air can have major effects
on the physical and chemical properties of chars and can impact their functions
as materials that absorb and change pollutants. This research examines the
absorption and change in pollutants on biochar surfaces using carefully
controlled experiments at both room temperatures and higher temperatures. This
project provides benefits to society by studying how biomass chars affect the
fate of pollutants in the environment. It also provides valuable information
that may be useful in efforts to clean up contaminated sites, as well as in
agricultural applications. In addition to fostering the training of students and
postdoctoral fellows, this project incorporates a visiting scholars program for
PhD students and professors, an internship program for undergraduate students,
an Honors College program to foster involvement of undergraduate students in
active research, and mentorship programs for high school students. The project
has strong outreach and education components directed at engaging prospective
scientists among historically disadvantaged groups, especially at Old Dominion
University, which is an urban campus with a significant minority
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomass chars are ubiquitous components of soil
and sediment from fires and also have attracted interest as soil amendments in
agriculture and environmental remediation. Important attributes of chars include
their ability to effectively adsorb organic and inorganic compounds and to
mediate electron transfer reactions to/from or between organic species. Air
present during or after pyrolysis can have major effects on the physical-
chemical properties of chars that impact these functions, yet this subject has
received&lt;br/&gt;little attention. The objectives of this project are to
determine the underlying structural and chemical alterations of char caused by
both thermal and ambient air oxidation (AO), and to determine the effects of
these alterations critical to their interactions with emerging pollutants. In
the laboratory chars are made from wood and switchgrass. The test compounds are
phosphate, arsenate, arsenite, selenite, aquatic herbicides (diquat and
paraquat), and model organic compounds. Advanced solid-state nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is employed to identify and quantify changes in
functional group composition and fused aromatic ring size. This also allows
detection of signals coming from exceptionally strong hydrogen bonds formed
between surface groups and weak acid adsorbates. NMR sensitivities are enhanced
by using 13C-enriched switchgrass as the biomass precursor and 13C-labelled
compounds as adsorbates. The project investigates the consequences of air
oxidation on the formation of exceptionally strong hydrogen bonds. It also
addresses cation exchange interactions, dissolved organic matter competition for
adsorption sites, oxidation-reduction reactions mediated by chars, and the
concentrations of persistent free radicals formed by the pyrolysis process. The
findings are expected to provide novel insights for char structure and weak acid
solute behavior in the environment. The project has outreach and education
components and aims to engage students among historically disadvantaged groups.