* 1709946
* Investigation of quantum materials using tunable pump-probe Raman scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Dmitry Reznik, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 483,288.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;In quantum materials such as superconductors
and topological insulators quantum physics underlies most important properties.
Unraveling the puzzles posed by these materials is one of the main scientific
challenges of the 21st century, with direct relevance to new generations of
electronic, energy, and medical technologies. This project is devoted to
observing how these materials evolve in time after being hit by a short laser
pulse. Using a new experimental technique, pump-probe Raman spectroscopy, the
researchers make movies of how quantum materials evolve in time taking frames
every 0.00000000000001 sec. Light travels a fraction of a millimeter during
these time intervals, so very fast processes can be detected in slow motion. A
weak laser pulse may kick some electrons out of their orbits. These will hit
atoms and other electrons revealing interactions between electrons and the
atomic lattice. If the laser pulse is strong, the material can briefly go into a
different state, e.g. a superconductor will lose superconductivity. Observing
how it comes back to the original state reveals otherwise hidden mechanisms.
This knowledge is used to test fundamental theories and helps to harness quantum
materials for practical applications in electronics, photonics, and energy. The
work is carried out at the ultrafast laser spectroscopy laboratory at the
University of Colorado (CU)-Boulder built with the funds provided previously by
the National Science Foundation (NSF). It is be a part of a Ph.D. thesis of two
graduate students and contributes to undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on groundbreaking measurements of materials where quantum physics
underlies most important physical properties. The general goal is to understand
how these materials behave away from thermal equilibrium: The investigated
sample is driven out of equilibrium by a short laser pulse, and another time-
delayed laser pulse probes its relaxation by serving as the excitation laser for
Raman spectroscopy. The work is carried out at the new ultrafast laser
spectroscopy laboratory at the University of Colorado (CU)-Boulder built with
the funds provided previously by National Science Foundation (NSF). The laser
system at the heart of this laboratory is one of the most advanced of its kind
in the world. It is utilized for pump-probe angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy and pump-probe Raman spectroscopy. This project represents the
Raman component of this effort. All Raman active excitations are tracked during
relaxation. These include phonons, magnons, and some electronic excitations
across gaps of up to 5eV. Raman scattering can directly probe the energies,
lifetimes, and population of excited states (e.g. phonon occupation numbers).
The time-resolved Raman scattering measurements are on charge density wave (CDW)
systems, different types of superconductors, Mott insulators, and novel spin-
orbit materials. They display diverse and often still enigmatic physical
phenomena of great interest and the principal investigator already investigated
them by other related techniques. It is a part of a Ph.D. thesis of two graduate
students and contributes to undergraduate education.