* 1709310
* Rapid Solvation Thermodynamics Calculations for Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* B. Montgomery Pettitt, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 452,148.00

Montgomery Pettitt of The University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) is supported
by an award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division to create a new set of computational tools for simulating and
understanding the fundamental properties of proteins in solution, with
application to protein design and the development of new materials and
biotechnologies. Some of the most challenging systems in biotechnology
applications are those involving liquids, particularly mixtures of biopolymers
in water. Professor Pettitt is developing a new computational framework for the
molecular design of proteins based on current theories of how liquids behave.
Solutions of proteins, which serve as structural components and perform
catalytic chemistry, are central to much of biotechnology. This study will
enable the rapid screening of proposed protein modifications computationally
with greatly improved accuracy compared to existing methods. Codes, scripts, and
documentation developed in this project are being made freely-available to the
simulation community, and can be interfaced to widely-used molecular dynamics
simulation codes. The project is recruiting several students each year for a
10-week internship in computational biology in Professor Pettitt's laboratory,
through outreach efforts at local HBCU and Hispanic-serving institutions and the
ACS SEED and R. A. Welch Summer Scholar high school programs. There is close
cooperation with the UTMB Sealy Center for Structural Biology, which provides a
venue for student research presentations at research symposia and conferences,
and opportunities for research collaborations using the new methodology and to
provide feedback on future enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms
governing recognition between proteins, ligands and the transition of proteins
from their unfolded state to their native state remain as fundamental chemical
questions. Those equilibria are governed by free energy differences in solution.
The calculation of solvation free energies by explicit computer simulations can
be accurate, but is computationally expensive and essentially prohibitive for
entire proteins, even on large supercomputing systems. This project is
developing precomputed solvent distributions ("proximal (radial) distribution
functions", or pDFs) extracted from benchmark all-atom molecular dynamics
simulations to produce a near neighbor approximation to the solvation density
profile about arbitrary protein solutes. The initial libraries of pDFs are being
developed for the widely-used CHARMM force field. The principal goals of the
research are to (1) generate pDF libraries for all naturally-occurring amino
acids and additional important functional groups, (2) develop efficient methods
based on the pDFs to compute total and relative solvation free energies, and (3)
extend the method to multicomponent solutions. The third goal includes
experimental collaboration to test the methodology against solution
thermodynamic measurements. Given the precomputed nature of the pDFs, the
evaluation of thermodynamic averages as integrals over the precomputed
distribution is computationally very efficient. These fast and accurate methods
can be generally applied to protein systems where the understanding of the
recognition, self-recognition, or folding process is essential. This results of
this project have far-reaching applications to the fields of computer-aided
molecular design, structural analysis, and biotechnology. The code and scripts
developed for the research are being disseminated as open source and can be
readily extended to interface to widely-used molecular dynamics simulation codes
and force fields.