* 1709640
* RUI : Investigation into dynamic-covalent linkages through the use of Diels-Alder chemistry and controlled radical polymerization techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,09/30/2020
* Philip Costanzo, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 09/30/2020
* USD 209,087.00

Synthetic polymers (plastics) are widely used in our daily life. The properties
of polymers are governed by their chemical structures and can be tailored for
different applications. In this research project, Professor Costanzo of
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, develops synthetic
approaches to prepare novel polymers with properties that can be changed
reversibly with temperature. The polymer strands are designed to have chemical
structures that can be pulled apart at one temperature and snapped back together
at a different temperature. The opportunity to engage undergraduates in
fundamental research helps shape and create the next generation of scientists.
Additionally, outreach programs help intertwine undergraduate research and
teaching. These educational programs provide opportunities for professional
development for K-12 teachers and for undergraduate students to be involved in
the development of inquiry-based teaching modules for elementary and middle
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program supports the research group of Prof. Costanzo to
investigate how dynamic-covalent linkages can be incorporated into polymer
systems to enable switchability in polymer topology and bestow thermal
responsive properties. The specific objectives of this project are: 1) to
synthesize new Diels-Alder chemistry components, including fulvenes and
dicyanoalkenes; 2) to develop polymerization strategies for precise placement of
the new Diels-Alder linkages within polymer matrices for investigating the
dissociation and reassembly processes; and 3) to demonstrate the use of
interchangeable Diels-Alder linkages to invert compositional components of
polymeric structures.