* 1709912
* Size-Selective Electrochemical Sensing via Metal-Organic Supercontainers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Zhenqiang Wang, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical sensing of ions has a critical
role in various fields including clinical analysis, environmental monitoring,
and industrial process control. One particularly important subgroup of
electrochemical sensors are ion-selective electrodes (ISEs), which detect target
ions by electrical signals. Although a variety of organic molecules have been
used in ISEs as ion-carriers (known as "ionophores") to improve the selectivity
in ion sensing, the scope of applications for these ionophore-based ISEs remains
restricted due to the chemical limitations of the organic ionophores. The
project led by Dr. Zhenqiang Wang at the University of South Dakota and Dr.
Nathan Netzer at Peru State College addresses this challenge by integrating into
the ISEs a family of complex host molecules as a new class of ionophores. These
hosts exhibit highly unique and tunable chemical structures, making it feasible
to achieve size-selective and predetermined ion sensing. This new approach not
only significantly expands the scope of ISEs, but has the potential to transform
the design of ionophore-based ISEs. This project contains a strong educational
and outreach component that aims to promote science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education among two specific groups of underrepresented
student populations, namely, tribal college students and students from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs). Undergraduates at Peru State College, a small
rural PUI in Peru, Nebraska, are part of the team to perform cutting-edge
research in the field of electrochemical sensing. The team also plans to conduct
chemistry workshops at regional tribal colleges and host tribal student-faculty
pairs to perform summer research at the University of South
Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Designing new
ionophores in ISEs for the specific task of molecular ion sensing continues to
present significant challenges. The new class of ionophores utilized in this
project represents a unique family of synthetic receptors known as metal-organic
supercontainers (MOSCs). The favorable chemical and structural characteristics
of the MOSCs, including their compositional versatility, structural modularity,
and multi-pore architecture distinguish them from other synthetic ionophores and
provide unprecedented opportunities for functionalizing ISEs and engineering new
electrochemical sensing applications. This two-year project focuses on three
specific aims: 1) incorporation of MOSCs into various polymeric mixed-matrix
membranes; 2) fundamental studies of MOSC integrated ISEs; 3) tuning the
specificity of ISEs by incorporating target-specific MOSCs. By participating in
this research activity, graduate students, and undergraduate researchers are
exposed to a diverse set of experimental techniques ranging from materials
synthesis and electrochemical analysis to device fabrication.