* 1709247
* Magnetocaloric Effect in Alloys with Distributed Exchange Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Laughlin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 473,161.00

Non Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetocaloric effect is the
temperature change a magnetic material undergoes on application or removal of a
magnetic field. Materials exhibiting a large magnetocaloric effect are of
interest for refrigeration applications because magnetocaloric refrigeration
does not use ozone depleting gases necessary in conventional gas compression
refrigerators. Magnetic refrigeration is up to 20% more efficient than
conventional refrigeration and has potential to lessen environmental impact and
decrease energy demands of cooling, that is a significant portion of US yearly
energy usage, Magnetocaloric cooling refrigerators have been announced for
consumer products as early as 2020. Magnetocaloric cooling could also be used
for thermal management, resulting in more efficient motors both for commercial
and military defense vehicles. The materials to be studied are new alloys that
fit applications requiring durable materials, as they have previously been
studied for use in extreme temperature and pressure environments making them
viable for active cooling and thermal management of engines. The project will
engage outreach programs at Florida Polytechnic University and mentor high
school science students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetocaloric effect (MCE) refers to the
temperature change of a magnetic material on application of a magnetic field, H.
Materials with a large magnetocaloric response near room temperature can be used
for magnetic cooling. Critical rare earths metals (REs)compounds were first
studied because of large magnetocaloric effects near room temperature. However,
the increasing cost and scarcity of REs limits their use for commercial
refrigeration, so transition metal-based replacementss have been investigated.
Magnetocaloric materials are classified by undergoing: (1) a 1st order magneto-
structural phase transition, or (2) a 2nd order magnetic transition. 1st order
transitions have a large, narrow peak magnetic entropy changes in a magneto-
structural phase transition, but this is accompanied by thermal hysteresis
making them less desirable for multi-cycle cooling. 2nd order phase transitions
have a small but broad magnetic entropy change. The broad entropy change gives
these 2nd order phase transition materials a larger working temperature range
increasing their refrigeration capacity, RC. Optimal magnetocaloric materials
require a relatively large peak entropy change, a large RC and working
temperature range, low thermal hysteresis, and resistance to thermomechanical
fatigue. &lt;br/&gt; The studies will focus on the role of crystallographic
disorder and pressure on exchange interactions in multi-component high entropy
alloys to assess the maximum magnetocaloric effect in these materials. These
multi-component alloys have tunable Curie temperatures, Tc, magnetocaloric
response, and refrigeration capacity. We will model how positional disorder
affects the magnetic phase transition and magnetocaloric response of the system.
Quaternary and quinternary Fe-Co-Ni-based alloys are of interest because
distributed J(R) allows Tc tuning and control of RCs, through the breadth of the
2nd order transition, while the Fe-Co-Ni basis allows for a larger average
magnetic moment of the system, which increases the magnetocaloric response. We
will (1) observe structure under pressure, P, at Argonne National Lab with
pressure cells that can reach P &gt; 6 GPa.; (2) extend random exchange models
with band theory to understand Tc tuning in multicomponent systems and
P-dependence of the Bethe-Slater curve; (3) investigate pairwise exchange
interactions using band theory that includes spin-orbit interactions in fully
relativistic formalisms to confirm J(R)'s predicted by the Bethe-Slater curve;
(4) study pressure dependent atomic spacing in fcc-based HEA?s, measured at
synchrotron facilities, to be used with calculated J(R)'s to predict T-dependent
magnetization and MCE; (5) confirm M(T) predictions by P-dependent
susceptibility measurements; and (6) measure magnetic hyperfine field
distributions using Mossbauer spectroscopy below Tc in technologically relevant
alloys. The project will engage outreach programs at Florida Polytechnic
University and mentor high school science students.