* 1709526
* Infrared Laser Ablation Microsampling for Mass Spectrometry Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kermit Murray, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 348,425.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division. Professors Kermit Murray of Louisiana State University (LSU)
and Professor Touradj Solouki of Baylor University are developing techniques for
looking at (imaging) biological tissue in order to identify and quantify the
biomolecules in the samples. Tissue imaging is often limited to the most
abundant compounds and cannot identify important but less abundant molecules
that may be key factors for biological function and disease diagnostics. This
project uses lasers for direct sampling of tissue as well as precision
microdissection for detailed analysis. The ability to localize, identify, and
quantify biomolecules in tissue is important to fundamental research and to
clinical diagnostics - especially when it is important to monitor the progress
of treatment. The outreach program includes a novel, open education initiative
creating Web-based resources for education using the visualization tools
developed in this research. Educational opportunities are provided to high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students. LSU has a strong history of
quality mentorship for underrepresented students, especially African Americans.
That quality mentorship is continued and advanced in this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at the development of a
comprehensive approach to mass spectrometry imaging that is quantitative and
capable of biomolecule identification. Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization mass spectrometry imaging is combined with infrared laser ablation
sample transfer for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis. The
objectives are construction of an infrared laser ablation tissue microprobe,
combining MALDI imaging with laser ablation sample transfer, and investigation
of the fundamental processes of tissue laser ablation for technique
optimization. The educational goals support graduate student training at LSU and
Baylor and is promoting collaborative interactions between these institutions.
This work has societal benefits through the development of a broadly applicable
approach to biological imaging at the molecular level with applications.
Education and outreach components of this project involve the development of
open resources for mass spectrometry education and research. These components
include creating collaborative resources for mass spectrometry on Wikipedia and
integration of Human Proteome Organization (HUPO) controlled vocabulary with
terminology developed by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry.