* 1709176
* CDS&amp;E: New Algorithms to Enable Faster, More Accurate Analysis of Hydrogen Exchange Mass Spectrometry Data
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* David Weis, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2022
* USD 340,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor David Weis at the University of Kansas, Lawrence, is
developing new tools for improved analysis of proteins. Proteins are key
participants and indicators of healthy and diseased biochemical processes.
Specifically, Professor Weis and his team are studying how proteins degrade
during long-term storage. The team is working to make data analysis faster and
to improve the predictive power of the technique. This cross-disciplinary
project provides advanced training to undergraduate and graduate students at the
interface of chemistry, mathematics, and biology. Better understanding of
degradation and the ability to predict long-term stability of proteins is
important for basic research, in commerce, and in human health. For example,
protein-based pharmaceuticals are the fastest growing and most expensive class
of drugs. The tools and methods developed in this research may ultimately
contribute to faster development of drugs delivered at lower
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen exchange-mass spectrometry (HX-MS) is now
widely used to probe the structure and dynamics of proteins in fields ranging
from basic biological research to the development of pharmaceuticals. Better
informatics tools are needed to analyze and interpret HX-MS. The overall goal of
this research is to develop new algorithms to analyze and interpret data
obtained from HX-MS measurements made on proteins. The project seeks to develop
an improved algorithm for global data analysis and methods to predict protein
stability using HX-MS measurements. The global data analysis approach rapidly
focuses computational and human resources directly on key differences between
the protein states compared, substantially accelerating data analysis. The
research establishes structural fingerprints of proteins that can help establish
comparability or biosimiarlity, relieving a major bottleneck in the development
of pharmaceuticals. This research is assessing whether HX-MS measurements can be
used to rapidly predict stability under storage conditions, making stability
assessment faster and more accurate. Ultimately, this research may lead to an
approach that can enable the rapid prediction of long-term storage stability of
proteins and the high-resolution mapping of their failure points.