* 1709945
* Coupled Electronic and Lattice Structures in Thin Crystalline Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Tai Chiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 646,360.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Electronic effects and phenomena in materials
underlie many applications; notable examples include the wide variety of
semiconductors and metals employed in modern electronics, where ultrathin films
and micro/nano crystals are often used as the basic building blocks. This
research project focuses on experimentation at modifying, improving, and
creating novel properties of these basic device building blocks by subjecting
them to strain realized by controlled stretching or compression. The aim is to
establish a basic understanding of strain effects and thereby to establish the
guiding principles needed for building superior devices and new classes of
systems for applications. The experimental work utilizes cutting-edge
instruments at national facilities and offers rigorous training to graduate
students and postdoctoral research associates in the science and art of
materials preparation, fabrication, characterization, and optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ultrathin films and
micro/nano crystals are key building blocks for modern devices; their advantages
include minimal usage of material resources, ease of fabrication and
integration, reduction of electronic scattering and dissipation, and tailorable
and emergent properties amenable to functionalization through layering and
quantum coherence and confinement. This project examines the electronic
structure and atomistic behavior of selected model systems, with a focus on the
effects of stress/strain upon these systems that may alter the detailed
electronic structure near the Fermi surface and transform the overall symmetry
of the lattice with important consequences. Cases of special interest include
nontrivial electronic states in films of topological insulators, Dirac/Weyl
semimetals, etc., transition temperatures of superconductors and charge density
wave materials, and surface chemical and catalytic properties of metallic
microcrystals. Strain is introduced experimentally by mechanical means.
Experimental techniques for the measurements of the electronic structure and
atomic displacements include angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and x-ray
diffraction both in the home laboratories and at synchrotron radiation
facilities.