* 1709029
* Revealing the role of inhomogeneities and disorder in 2D materials: Correlating transport with spatial and electronic topography
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Shawna Hollen, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 476,129.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional crystals form a new
class of materials with robust mechanical and electrical properties, primed to
change the way we build electronic devices for computers, optical detectors, and
chemical or biological sensors. However, because they are only a single
crystalline layer (1-3 atoms thick), their properties are more sensitive to
their immediate environment than their three-dimensional counterparts.
Substrates that support the 2D crystal, and impurities introduced by processing
or adsorbed from the air degrade the performance of the material, and threaten
the success of applications. 2D crystals also present a challenge to our
fundamental understanding of electronic transport in 2D: many of these materials
clearly show metallic behavior, but this is in contradiction with a very well-
known theory of 2D electron transport called weak localization. The goals of
this project are to understand the impact of defects and disorder on device
performance and to investigate the roots of metallic behavior in 2D crystals.
The research team will use a combination of electronic transport measurements
and atomic-scale imaging to determine how electrons behave in the presence of
disorder in 2D crystals. This project is supporting the education and training
of two graduate students and a number of undergraduate students. It also
supports the development of the next generation of researchers through summer
workshops at University of New Hampshire for high school through graduate
students. The goal of the workshops is to lower the barrier to success in
research through topics that give new researchers practical information and
advice, opportunities to hear about the diversity of research happening on
campus, and a chance to personally connect with peers and principle
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2D
crystals are very attractive for use in next-generation electronics because they
are as thin as physically possible, mechanically flexible, and still have robust
electronic properties including, in several cases, high carrier mobility. They
also present an opportunity to reexamine our expectations for electronic
transport in 2D: many of these materials clearly show metallic behavior, but
localization theory predicts weak localization universally in 2D. This project
investigates the existence and properties of a metal-insulator quantum phase
transitions in 2D materials, specifically focusing on the role of disorder and
inhomogeneities. The research team is using scanning tunneling
microscopy/spectroscopy coupled with device-scale transport measurements to
correlate transport properties with spatial inhomogeneities in 2D materials as
they are driven into the insulating phase by tuning disorder and carrier
concentration. The team aims to uncover the role of disorder and inhomogeneities
in quantum metal-insulator transitions and also the importance of different
types of disorder in 2D crystal-based devices.