* 1709318
* Deformation, Strength, Fatigue and Fracture of Gradient Nanostructured Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Huajian Gao, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 479,166.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metals play essential roles in
infrastructural and overall economic developments of our society, as reflected
by the fact that the annual global market value of metals is close to a trillion
US dollars. During the last five years, a new class of nano materials called
gradient nanostructured metals have emerged as a material class which exhibits
an unusual combination of ultrahigh strength, good tensile ductility, enhanced
strain hardening, superior fracture toughness and fatigue resistance. However,
the current lack of understanding of the underlying mechanisms that control the
properties of these materials severely limits our ability to tailor or optimize
their properties for specific applications. On the other hand, recent advances
in computational modeling and simulation capabilities are providing
unprecedented opportunities to advance the knowledge frontier in our
understanding of mechanical properties of materials at micro- and nano-scales.
The proposed research will take advantage of the cutting-edge multiscale
modeling and simulation methods to address the fundamental issues with regard to
the mechanical properties and behavior of gradient nanostructured metals.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will train graduate and undergraduate students in state
of the art computational techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address the following
questions: What are the deformation mechanisms that control the mechanical
properties of gradient nanostructured metals? How to design the gradient micro-
and nanostructures to optimize the mechanical responses of gradient
nanostructured metals? The problems under study will be tackled via a multiscale
modeling approach that combines finite element method, strain gradient
plasticity, cohesive modeling, crystal plasticity, dislocation dynamics and
molecular dynamics simulations will be used to investigate the deformation and
failure mechanisms of gradient nanostructured metals. The technical approach
will be based on the experience and theoretical/simulation capabilities
developed by the PI. The proposed work will clarify the controlling deformation
mechanisms through ultra-large-scale and high-resolution atomistic and
dislocation dynamics simulations, interpret the experimental data and phenomena
through continuum strain gradient plasticity and cohesive modeling of fatigue
and fracture behavior, and guide further research in structural optimization and
processing. The ultra-large scale simulations in the proposed work will be
performed on the National Institute for Computational Sciences, and the rest of
the proposed computational work will be performed at the Center for Computing
and Visualization at Brown University. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate students in state of the art computational techniques.