* 1709270
* The Nonlinear Stability of Black Holes and the Structure of Spacetime Singularities in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Igor Rodnianski, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2020
* USD 451,980.00

This project strives to answer fundamental questions about black holes and the
structure of spacetime. The research is a mathematical investigation of
properties of solutions to Einstein's equations of general relativity that
focuses on spacetime singularities. The project aims to advance rigorous
mathematics to deepen understanding of the aspects of the physical world that
are described by this remarkable theory of gravitation, which include the
gravitational lensing of light from distant galaxies, the corrections to
satellite clocks necessary for global positioning systems, and the gravitational
waves observed from binary black hole collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to mathematically prove the nonlinear stability of black holes and
answer fundamental questions concerning the nature of spacetime singularities in
general relativity. The first major objective in this project is to provide a
mathematical proof of the nonlinear stability conjecture for the Kerr metric.
The other two major objectives of this research concern understanding the
structure of various spacetimes with singularities. A series of projects will
focus on showing that singularities do indeed exist in black holes, but they are
not as "ferocious" as previously expected. Another class of spacetimes with
singularities arise in analogy to a construction first done in the context of
pure mathematics that has also attracted interest from theoretical physics. A
second series of projects will concentrate on implementation of this
construction in general relativity and analyze the precise nature of the
resulting singularities.