* 1709822
* Nano-spectroscopic imaging and control of coupled dynamics in local molecular environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Markus Raschke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 411,746.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Raschke of the University of Colorado, Boulder, plans to
develop a series of close-up ("near field") spectroscopic and imaging techniques
to study the behavior of molecules and how they interact with their environment.
He and his group use a combination of creative approaches to measure fast events
(i.e. at the femtosecond time scale) at high resolution (i.e. with nanometer
spatial resolution). The experiment outcomes provide information about different
quantum states of a molecule, which will help to understand a molecule's
properties and function at the most elemental level. The knowledge will
eventually help to understand and then make new materials as catalysts,
electronics, and other photonic materials. This interdisciplinary project
provides broad research training for graduate and undergraduate students in
Professor Raschke's lab. They will also have the opportunity to participate in
community outreach and experience technology transfer to industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to gain the spectroscopic access into the nano-
to molecular length scales and their dynamics, a combination of novel near-field
optical scanning probe microscopy modalities is developed and applied. In
nonlinear and ultrafast nano-imaging using femtosecond four-wave mixing and
photo-current spectroscopy the coupled electronic and vibrational quantum
dynamics is studied in quantum dots, quantum plasmonic, and strongly coupled
plasmon-exciton systems, using femtosecond adiabatic nano-focusing. In variable
temperature single molecule nano-Raman spectroscopy, with nano-mechanical tip-
sample probing, and tunneling transport conditions, in polyaromatic hydrocarbons
and self-assembled monolayer, spectra diffusion, intramolecular vibrational
energy redistribution, orientational dynamics, and plasmon hot-electron
processes are investigated. This research is advancing basic science while being
technology enabling simultaneously providing for the understanding of molecular
materials as chemical nano-imaging as the enabling technique is refined. With
its interdisciplinary nature this project provides for broad research training
for graduate and undergraduate students including their participation in
community outreach and technology transfer to industry.