* 1709061
* The Role of Grafting Mechanism on the Self-Assembly and Properties of Polymer Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2023
* USD 908,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The addition of inorganic
nanoparticles (NPs) to a polymer (i.e. a plastic material) can result in hybrid
materials with highly improved properties. A classic example is that, while
rubber (as e.g. in an eraser) has extremely poor wear resistance, the addition
of silica nanoparticles causes the wear resistance to go up so much that a car
can drive with tires that last over 50,000 miles. While such property
improvements are what drive developments in the field of polymer nanocomposites,
the inherent problem is that the nanoparticles are chemically so different from
the polymer (a hydrocarbon material) and thus have a strong tendency to separate
from each other akin to a water-oil suspension. Thus, the desirable, favorable
property improvements that can only be realized by the intimate mixing of the
polymer and the NPs become hard to realize on a routine basis. The work here
proposes to remedy this problem by chemically grafting polymer chains onto the
NPs so that the inorganic particle surface can be "shielded" from the polymer,
thus allowing miscibility to be obtained. In particular, the work focuses on two
strategies for this grafting: either grafting fully formed chains to the
surfaces, or growing the chains piece-by-piece from the surface. Which of these
strategies allows better control over particle-polymer miscibility and therefore
improve properties the most is the focus of this research. In addition to this
technical emphasis, the proposed work will also stress the broad,
interdisciplinary education of students and the recruitment and retention of
women and minority students into STEM programs by attracting high-school and
undergraduate students into engineering research activities in the PI's
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is on the self-assembly of
polymer-grafted nanoparticles (NPs) in a polymer matrix with the goal of
impacting the behavior of the resulting hybrid (or composite) material. This
physical situation has relevance to improved performance in, for example, rubber
tires and epoxies (which are used in electronic packaging and computer chip
applications). This underpinning question will be studied through the
exploration of three test-beds by judiciously combining theory and experiments.
In particular, emphasis will be placed on role of the mechanism by which chains
are grafted onto NP surfaces on the final material properties, i.e., whether the
chains are preformed and attached to the surface or if the chains are grown
link-by-link from the surface. It is expected that the former mechanism will
yield a more uniform polymer coverage on the NP surface. The consequence of
these differences in surface coverage on the assemblies formed and the resulting
properties is the ultimate focus of this work. These research activities are
coupled to extensive education and outreach activities. A major focus will be to
recruit underrepresented students (both women and minorities) at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. It is planned to grow both the current summer
high-school research program, and also the research-experiences-for-
undergraduates program during the schoolyear, with the goal of recruiting (and
hopefully retaining) women and minorities into STEM efforts.