* 1709552
* Novel Methods to Study Metastable Biomolecular Systems with Native LC/MS
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Igor Kaltashov, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Igor Kaltashov and his group at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst are developing powerful analytical tools to study
processes such as protein/receptor recognition and enzymatic reactions. These
new tools will advance understanding of the mechanisms of complex biological
processes at the molecular level, ultimately facilitating manipulation of these
processes to achieve desired outcomes. Thus, the new tools can have significant
impact not only in chemistry, but also in biotechnology and medicine. Elements
of the research involve close interaction with industrial collaborators, adding
a valuable dimension to the educational experience of the graduate and
undergraduate students involved. Dr. Kaltashov and his group are also engaging
in outreach activities which seek to expose local high school students to the
state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation at UMass-
Amherst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of biopolymer dynamics and
architecture (conformations of individual biopolymer chains and assemblies of
multi-unit systems) is both challenging and important for improved understanding
of biochemical processes. There is particular need for tools capable of probing
transient systems, which are encountered in processes such as protein
aggregation, assembly and evolution of quaternary structures, interaction with
physiological partners, and enzyme catalysis and transport phenomena. Improved
understanding of these phenomena requires reliable kinetics data and knowledge
of conformational changes that accompany transitions. In order to improve on
existing characterization capabilities, the Kaltashov group is developing a new
robust, sensitive, and highly selective experimental strategy that uses a
combination of liquid chromatography (LC) run under native conditions (e.g.,
size-exclusion chromatography) with on-line detection by native electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (MS). The new LC/MS platform incorporates ion
manipulation in the gas phase to enable studies of highly heterogeneous systems
(e.g., protein-polymer conjugates). Incorporation of on-column H/D exchange and
chemical reduction reactions enables top-down HDX MS/MS characterization of
higher order structure and conformational dynamics of proteins.