* 1709307
* Thermoelectric-Plasmonic Hybrid Infrared Sensor for Uncooled Multispectral Application
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Minhee Yun, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 06/30/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: A photodetector is at the heart of modern
sensing and imaging technology. A very well-known application of photodetectors
is an imaging sensor of a digital camera. Compared with the well-established
photo-detection methods of visible light, the sensing of near- and mid-infrared
light with high sensitivity at room temperature is still challenging. An
advanced infrared light photodetector requires cooling of the device below
-100oC. Conversion of infrared light-heat-electric signal is a useful way to
detect IR light. However, this approach (called as a thermoelectric effect) has
several inherent problems which prevent a miniaturization of the device and
limit an ability to resolve infrared light with different wavelengths. Also,
existing thermoelectric materials exhibit a low efficiency in converting light
energy to electric energy at room temperature. It is difficult to address
weaknesses of current technology by improving only a single aspect of devices.
In this project, multidisciplinary research will be performed for new materials
design, theoretical performance evaluation and novel electric device
fabrication. The photodetector from this project will efficiently collect
infrared light of different wavelengths at room temperature. The nature of the
multidisciplinary research will be beneficial in integrating the technical
research with education and outreach. Basic science, technology and prototype
product of the project will be used in "Nanotechnology" workshop for the
Pittsburgh Junior Academy of Science (PJAS) and "Science Research" course for
Pittsburgh local high school students. In addition, The PI and co-PIs will
integrate outcomes of the project into undergraduate and graduate courses in
materials science, mechanical engineering and electrical engineering programs at
the University of Pittsburgh.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop a thermoelectric infrared sensor that has a multispectral
resolution capability and operates without cryogenic cooling. This will be
accomplished using hybrid structures of 2-dimensional materials, such as
graphene and molybdenum sulfide, and plasmonic metal Nano-shells. The hypotheses
underlying the proposed structure are as follows. First, unlike conventional
bulk thermoelectric materials, graphene and molybdenum Nano sheets have an
extremely large surface area to volume ratio. This feature can provide an
opportunity to improve the Seebeck coefficient through modifying or doping the
surface. Second, high and wavelength-dependent absorption of infrared light can
be enabled by the surface plasmons of dielectric core - metal Nano-shell
particles with tunable characteristic wavelengths. Third, a thin free-standing
silicon nitride membrane with low heat capacity and low thermal conductivity can
allow faster and larger increase of local temperature upon IR light absorption.
This will improve dynamic response and the signal-to-noise ratio of an IR
sensor. The low thermal conductivity of silicon nitride can be further reduced
by increasing structural and mass disorder. The major intellectual merit of the
proposed research lies in the fundamental understanding of the heat and charge
transport properties at nanoscale. Through integrated research of simulation and
experiment, the principal investigators will develop a model to predict how
physical properties (e.g. Seebeck coefficient, thermal conductivity and heat
capacity) of a free standing membrane affect important performance factors of
the thermoelectric IR sensor, such as output signal, response time and signal-
to-noise ratio. Moreover, enhancement of selective light absorption by the metal
Nano-shells and subsequent energy dissipation will show a novel way to resolve
the wavelength of incident infrared light and create a temperature gradient
through local heating.