* 1709207
* Electrically Pumped Full-Color and White-Color InGaN/GaN Surface-Emitting Lasers Monolithically Integrated on a Single Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Zetian Mi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 04/30/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract title: Full-Color and White-Color Surface-Emitting Lasers for Lighting
and Display Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:
This project is related to the demonstration of white-color and full-color
surface-emitting lasers, which have the potential to revolutionize next-
generation lighting, display, sensing, and communication technologies. To date,
there are no efficient semiconductor lasers operating in the deep visible (green
and yellow) spectral range, which has been limited by the presence of large
densities of defects in gallium nitride based materials. Consequently, the
current commercial green lasers generally rely on the use of nonlinear optical
conversion. Such devices, however, are bulky, heavy and expensive, and are not
suitable for on-chip integration. Moreover, there has been no established
manufacturable technology to spatially vary alloy compositions to achieve multi-
color emission on the same substrate. As a result, the current solid-state lamps
rely on the use of rare earth doped phosphors to down-convert the blue emission
of a gallium nitride based light emitting diode (LED) to generate white-light,
which limits the flexibility to tune the spectral power distribution and to
achieve color-tunable emission. In this project, by using gallium nitride based
nanostructures, the applicant will address these fundamental challenges and
demonstrate small size, high efficiency multi-color lasers. This project will
address the "green gap" in semiconductor light emitters and will enable
phosphor-free solid-state lighting, thereby significantly enhancing the
efficiency, reducing the manufacturing cost, and improving the light quality.
The broader impacts of this research also include the highly interdisciplinary
nature of the proposed research and the outreach to undergraduate,
underrepresented minorities, and K-12. This project also provides the
opportunity to educate the students involved in the research and to involve high
school students on the science and technology of nanostructured materials, LED
lighting, and photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The applicant proposes
to demonstrate white-color and full-color surface-emitting lasers through
innovations in epitaxy, quantum-confined nanostructures, nanophotonics, and
device engineering. Full-color emission will be achieved on a single chip by
varying the nanowire diameters through selective area epitaxy, which was not
previously possible for gallium nitride based quantum wells. Moreover,
nonradiative surface recombination, one of the primary limiting factors for
nanowire devices, will be addressed by using dot-in-nanowire core-shell
heterostructures. In this project, surface-emitting lasers will be achieved by
exploiting the two-dimensional band-edge resonant effect of a nanowire photonic
crystal, instead of using conventional thick and resistive distributed Bragg
reflectors. The unique approach will also enable the monolithic integration of
red, green and blue emitters on a single chip, thereby leading to full-color and
white-color laser diodes that were not previously possible. The device
characteristics, including threshold, wall-plug efficiency, near and far-field
profile, and modulation characteristics will be investigated.