* 1709787
* RUI:  Protein Tyrosine Oxidations to Maintain Cellular Redox State
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Benson, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2022
* USD 249,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. David Benson from Calvin College to investigate how and
why some proteins become antioxidants. Antioxidants, in a variety of
nutritionally valuable foods, are small molecules that get oxidized rather than
cellular components such as proteins, membranes, or DNA. A new class of
antioxidants-proteins modified to contain antioxidants while still being
attached to the protein-dramatically decreases the oxidation of the modified
protein. The experimental procedures will detail how these protein modifications
form and function in minimizing oxygen addition to themselves or other proteins
by using a variety of biochemical, ultraviolet absorbance, fluorescence, and
mass spectrometric detection methods. This work will be performed while training
undergraduates, at Calvin College and Grand Rapids Community College, on how to
perform research in preparation for working in a highly skilled technical
workforce. The findings of this work will contribute to better understanding the
resilience of biological systems while also preparing the next generation of the
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will focus on tyrosine
post-translational modifications that can be reversibly oxidized under
physiological conditions. These modified tyrosines are best known to participate
in redox catalysis. The role of one modified tyrosine, 3'-(S-cysteinyl)-tyrosine
(Cys-Tyr), will be studied in aerotolerance of a gut bacterium (Bacteroides
fragilis), minimizing protein oxidation of a protein that regulates cellular
cysteine concentrations (rat cysteine dioxyngease), and potentially modulating
ubiquitination of proteins. A recently developed fluorescence assay will be used
to rapidly determine Cys-Tyr reaction yield under a variety of conditions and
correlate changes in protein function with Cys-Tyr formation. Due to the
reversible oxidation chemistry displayed by Cys-Tyr, and other modified
tyrosines, the hypothesis is that an anti-oxidant role for Cys-Tyr may be
established. This role would be important as covalent-attachment localizes anti-
oxidant function to a protein and provides a new protein function in response to
oxidative stress.