* 1709660
* Effect of Stress Relief and Ionic Charge on Polyelectrolyte Brush Behavior
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nicolay Tsarevsky
* 07/31/2020
* USD 389,139.00

Polymers are large molecules formed by linking together hundreds of small
molecular sub-units called monomers into long chains. Depending upon on the
chemical structure of the monomer, the polymer can either be slippery (like
Teflon) or sticky (like tape). By changing the monomer, one can create surfaces
that prevent adhesion of cells, making them better for medical uses. Nature
accomplishes this by attaching charged polymer segments to surfaces, forming
structures that resemble brushes. While these brush polymers offer unique
properties that could have substantive societal impacts, they also pose
significant challenges. The dense packing of the charged groups can stretch the
chemical bonds and, in extreme cases, the bonds can break. With the support of
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Ober at Cornell University is creating and studying new
polymer brushes that are effective coatings but also have long lifetimes (i.e.,
do not have bonds that easily break). Collaborators, Professor Ryan (University
of Sheffield) and Professor Ruehe (University of Freiburg), are helping to
characterize the polymer structures. In addition to its scientific impact, the
project benefits society by educating undergraduate and graduate students to
become globally aware, interdisciplinary scientists. Surface-bound bottlebrush
polymers are potentially synthetic mimics for shock absorbing components in the
human body, thus, the broader scientific impact of this project outside of
macromolecular chemistry is potentially quite large. Insights into the
polyelectrolyte brush behavior may also help in the understanding the attachment
of biomolecules, cells and microorganisms to surfaces and thus be used to
control into unwanted adhesions on ships for the marine
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is creating and studying a
series of stable model polymer brushes with carefully tailored placement of
ionic groups in both single strand and bottlebrush architectures. Physical
phenomena associated with charge, binding and attachment of soluble species, and
the rather unusual case of mechanochemistry that leads to brush breakage are
being investigated. Professor Ober and his collaborators are preparing specially
tailored polyelectrolyte brushes with selected vertical and horizontal brush
architectures and studying their physical properties. Ionic groups are attached
directly to the acrylate or methacrylate polymer backbone or through tailored
sequences of peptoid units of precise ionic group spacing and location.
Confinement is controlled by the use of nanopatterning in which the pattern
sizes are comparable to brush height (tens of nanometers). The effect of cation
charge is studied using a range of mono- and multivalent cations.
Characterization activities include: X-ray scattering studies of brush swelling
and shrinkage under a range of wetting and electrolyte conditions and neutron
reflectivity studies using labeled polymer chains to separately gather
information about the different components (backbone, sidearm, ions) to develop
a detailed picture of the charged polymer brush. Graduate students serve as
mentors and role models to undergraduate students, while at the same time
gaining supervisory skills. Undergraduates from Cornell University take part
during the academic year while REU students from other schools with an emphasis
on&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented students participate in research during the summer
months. Lessons learned from these research programs are integrated into lessons
for high school teachers in a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program
and in teachers' workshops.