* 1709865
* Experimental Characterization of Deformation Mechanisms in Magnesium Rare Earth Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 528,702.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall versatility,
deployability and energy efficiency of modern manned and autonomous vehicles are
inversely related to their weight. Magnesium (Mg) is nearly four times lighter
than steel and its ultra-low density and high specific strength make Mg alloys
attractive lightweighting materials for commercial and defense platforms.
However, the use of Mg has been inhibited by its limited ductility and
formability, which is attributed to strong plastic anisotropy that results from
its hexagonal crystal structure. Recent gains in formability have been achieved
through rare earth alloying, and this project will provide a detailed
understanding of the influence that these rare earth elements have on the
atomic-scale mechanisms that govern ductility and formability. The insights
obtained from this experimental study will accelerate alloy development and help
promote cost-effective lightweighting in a wide variety of automotive, military
and aerospace applications. Collaborations will provide meaningful STEM
educational and career advancement opportunities, and participation in SABES
will offer JHU researchers a chance to personally interact with and give
Baltimore elementary school students a unique perspective on STEM activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
merit of this study is predicated in our desire to see and understand the
deformation mechanisms that underpin the mechanical response of Mg alloys and to
elucidate the fundamental role that rare earth elements have in increasing
ductility and improving formability. The experimental tasks to be undertaken
include: (i) identification of active slip systems in Mg-RE alloys, (ii) meso-
scale characterization of dislocation morphologies and microstructures, (iii)
atomic-scale characterization of dislocation cores, and (iv) identification of
the factors influencing twin nucleation and growth. SEM-based EBSD mapping and
STEM observations and TEM-based bright field, weak-beam dark field, HREM, and
STEM imaging and nanoscale orientation and elastic strain mapping will be
employed. The experimental data collected will be digitally archived and used to
promote Integrated Computational Materials Science and Engineering (ICMSE) as
envisaged by the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI).