* 1709349
* Bioorigami Hydrogels composed of Natural and Synthetic Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* David Gracias, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 05/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;A common geometric architecture for naturally occurring
biomaterials is a hierarchical curvature and folding design that can be observed
in a wide range of living systems such as the gyri in the brain or the
microvilli on intestinal cells or the curved sporangia in fungi. Yet a
fundamental understanding of the behavior of cells in relationship to this
curvature and folding is lacking. This award seeks to self-assemble and
characterize both synthetic and cell-derived composite hydrogels in biomimetic
curved and folded geometries and characterize the behavior of the biomaterials
and of the cells in these environments. Insights gained through this work may
inform efforts to understand, support, and enhance development and recovery from
injury in both the plant and the animal kingdoms. In addition to research, an
emphasis will also be made on augmenting graduate education through curriculum
changes, undergraduate and K-12 education through research experiences, as well
as outreach to the local school system and enhancing excitement of biomaterials
and tissue engineering to the broader public and society through lecture-
demonstrations and joint projects with educators in the creative arts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the creation and
characterization of model bio-origami hydrogels composed of synthetic and cell-
derived biomaterials, elucidation of the mechanisms for elevated activity of
biochemical and small molecule production by cells in these geometries and
investigation of the role of layering and fluidic gradients in curved and folded
geometries during development, healing, and homeostasis. In the project, model
hydrogel systems will be created so that the roles of folding pitch, curvature,
three-dimensionality, and strain on cellular behavior can be individually
isolated and interrogated. The methods used in this investigation will include
the following: micro- and nano-patterning, three-dimensional structuring, strain
engineering, material characterization, biochemical and cellular assays
including in vitro reporters of signaling pathway activation and cytoskeletal
reorganization, quantitative 3D image analysis and optical slicing, lattice
light sheet microscopy, statistical design of experiments, and finite element
modeling. This research program will catalyze multidisciplinary collaborative
endeavor integrating cell biology and engineering, and create avenues for unique
combinatorial training for graduate students in techniques and study designs
that challenge the current state of the art.