* 1709344
* Elucidating Grain Boundary Complexion Transitions and their Role on Grain Growth in Granular Block Copolymer Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Michael Bockstaller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 230,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers are materials that
are capable of self-organizing into functional nanostructures that are of
technological relevance in applications ranging from membranes for water
purification to next-generation lithium ion batteries to high-performance
polymer photovoltaics. The realization of these technologies is hindered by
defects in block copolymer nanostructures that form during the self-organization
process and that reduce the properties of materials. The goal of this project is
to establish a transformative new process to control and reduce the number of
defects in block copolymer nanostructures. This will promote the development of
scalable and economic fabrication processes for materials with improved
properties. The program will support the teaching of a new laboratory course on
polymer materials and provide training for one graduate student and several
undergraduate student researchers. Ongoing collaborations with educators at
minority serving institutions will be leveraged to support the participation of
minority students. Finally, the potential of novel educational technologies
based on 'haptic human-computer interactions' as a means to engage and attract
middle and high school students to the study of science and engineering will be
established. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fabrication of large-grained microstructures
with reduced defect densities presents a prerequisite to the application of
block copolymer (BCP) materials across a wide range of innovative material
technologies. Understanding of the mechanism of grain growth and the evolution
of defect structures during the annealing process is therefore a subject that is
of fundamental relevance to both the science and engineering of BCP-based
materials. The objective of this project is to elucidate the role of filler-
matrix interactions on grain coarsening in miscible BCP/homopolymer blends and
to test the hypothesis that grain boundary complexion transitions -- i.e.
transitions within the phase of filler that is segregated to grain boundary
interfaces -- increase the driving pressure for grain growth and hence the rate
of grain coarsening. In a first part, the program will be focused on
establishing the miscibility range and (equilibrium) microdomain formation in
BCP/homopolymer blends systems in which the homopolymer forms a LCST blend with
the host copolymer domain. In a second part, the project will focus on
establishing the effect of filler/matrix interactions on the energy of grain
boundary interfaces in quiescent organized films. If successful, this project
will provide a basis for the development of novel processing strategies towards
low defect-density BCP materials that harness the 'catalytic' effect of designed
filler additives on grain coarsening to efficiently organize BCPs into desired
large-grained microstructures. The program will enhance the teaching of a new
class on "Soft Material Microstructure and Properties" and provide training for
one graduate and several undergraduate researchers in the critical area of
polymer and nanoscale materials. Finally, the benefits of kinesthetic
experiments to the teaching of polymer and material science will be evaluated.