* 1709800
* Beyond the Shockley-Queisser Limit: Understanding and Controlling Carrier Multiplication in Carbon Nanotube PN Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ethan Minot, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 399,858.00

Non-technical Description: Solar cells built from traditional materials convert
sunlight into a mixture of electrical energy and unwanted thermal energy. The
fraction of thermal energy is significant, because sunlight-excited electrons
transfer some of their excess energy into vibrations in the material's crystal.
To improve the performance of solar cells, researchers seek a new class of
materials in which sunlight-excited electrons transfer excess energy to other
electrons, rather than to vibrations in the crystal lattice. Semiconducting
carbon nanotubes are a promising material for this new generation of solar cell
design. The electrons in carbon nanotubes interact very strongly with each
other, suggesting that energy can be efficiently transferred from one electron
to another. This research project addresses the challenge of optimizing a
photovoltaic device to understand the physics of strongly interacting electrons
in these materials. The project has a public-engagement component, with the PI
working as a Science Communication Fellow associated with the Oregon Museum of
Science and Industry and leading the physics outreach team at Oregon State
University. The project includes summer research experience for young scientists
from under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: In low-dimensional materials, Coulomb interactions between charge
carriers are enhanced, thereby enhancing the phenomena of carrier
multiplication. Carrier multiplication can increase the energy conversion
efficiency of solar cell devices because multiple electron-hole pairs can be
excited by a single photon when photon energy exceeds twice the band gap.
Previous experiments on zero-dimensional quantum dots have shown that carrier
extraction is a major obstacle to harnessing carrier multiplication. This
project focuses on carrier multiplication in a semiconducting carbon nanotube, a
one-dimensional system in which carriers can be efficiently extracted. The
experiments utilize individual carbon nanotube pn junctions to reveal the effect
of temperature, electric field, and dielectric screening on the carrier
multiplication process. The research addresses the exciton dissociation
mechanism, carrier multiplication efficiency, and the fundamental limits of
photocurrent quantum yield in semiconducting carbon nanotubes. By furthering our
understanding of carrier multiplication in a strongly-interacting electronic
system, the project supports the development of solar cell devices that beat the
Schockley-Queisser limit.