* 1709382
* Crystal Chemistry and Properties of Zintl Phases: Towards Efficient New Thermoelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

PART 1:   NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The synthesis of new compounds and crystal
structures remains an extremely important fundamental research endeavor in the
pursuit of new technologically relevant materials. This research, funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program targets the synthesis of new
compounds with technological applications, specifically thermoelectric
applications. Thermoelectric materials can convert a heat gradient into
electricity. The design of efficient thermoelectric devices is a major goal for
energy conversion technologies. Zintl phases, which are a subset of
intermetallics are ideal candidates for thermoelectric applications as they are
semiconductors with complex structures which provide low thermal conductivity,
which allows for precise tuning of carrier concentration. In this structure-
property relationship study specific Zintl structures will be targeted to test
ideas for property outcomes based on atomic-level modifications. The long-term
goal is to discover new highly efficient thermoelectric materials. Short term
goals include building an understanding of best Zintl structures for efficient
thermoelectric energy conversion and discovery of new magnetic and electronic
properties for other technological applications. With this NSF grant the
principal investigator helps educate the next generation of the STEM workforce.
Students from high school through graduate school are provided hands-on training
and their scientific and social skills are developed through workshops and
individual mentorship. The next generation of scientists is trained to consider
novel materials and their impact on technology for our future energy needs and
specifically thermoelectrics.

PART 2:   TECHNICAL SUMMARY This grant supports fundamental research efforts to
prepare new Zintl phase compounds and measure their properties with a goal of
discovering new thermoelectric materials and enhancing their thermoelectric
properties. The research focuses on studying a) new variants of 14-1-11 Zintl
phases for which high zT is expected at high temperatures, and b) novel
Europium-based materials exhibiting low thermal conductivity. New compounds are
synthesized as single crystals, high purity powders and pellets via flux,
metallurgical routes, and spark plasma sintering. A suite of physical
characterization techniques is utilized, including single crystal and powder
X-ray diffraction, electron microprobe, electrical and magnetic measurements.
Structure and phase composition is subsequently correlated with electronic and
thermal transport properties. With this NSF grant the principal investigator
mentors science students starting their science careers in high school to
undergraduates in partnerships with graduate students, ultimately providing
professional training for scientific careers. Students are provided hands-on
training and their scientific and social skills are developed through workshops
and individual mentorship. The research is presented at national and
international meetings and the findings published in peer-review journals.