* 1709987
* Fermi Surface Topology and the Superconducting Proximity Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Kenneth Burch, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 454,235.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Unconventional superconductivity and the
conditions under which associated physical phenomena may be observed have
remained one of the most active areas of condensed matter physics. This search,
began nearly 60 years ago with Meissner's original discovery of the proximity
effect (induction of superconductivity into a normal material via direct
contact). Interest in the proximity effect was reinvigorated by predictions of
new phases and their associated particles (non-abelian anyons) that can be used
for next generation topological quantum computing. The PI was the first to
demonstrate a proximity effect between a high Tc, unconventional superconductor
(cuprates) and a semiconductor. Building on recent success with a range of
superconductors, the PI pursues the emergence of new superconducting states.
Specific focus is on the role of the electronic configuration of both materials
in generating proximity effects and developing new methods to probe the
interface and emergent particles. Emphasis is given to diversification of the
STEM workforce, including informing K-12 about 2D materials and topology via the
Lynch School of Education's "Science Educators for Urban Schools" program;
creating hands-on demonstrations for BC's Making Science a Fan-Tastic
Experience, increasing participation of women, first generation and
underrepresented minorities by partnering with BC's McNair, National Research
Mentoring Network and Women in Science and Technology
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The proposal aims
to understand the role of the Fermi surface of the normal and superconducting
materials in the proximity effect. It is based on the success of the PI's
mechanical bonding technique in generating a proximity effect between various
superconductors and Dirac materials. The PI pursues the emergence of new
unconventional/topological superconducting states. Coordinated fabrication and
spectroscopic efforts provide answers to several questions in the field of
proximity induced topological superconductivity: What is the role of the
superconductor's Fermi surface? Does proximity induced superconductivity emerge
in Weyl semimetals? Is the resulting superconductivity unconventional? Can we
detect and manipulate the bound states that emerge at edges? Bound states and
the proximity effect are explored as the superconductor's Fermi surface is tuned
in FeTe1-xSex. Next the proximity effect are searched for in the WSM, MoTe2. The
last stages employs spectroscopic probes to uncover the
unconventional/topological nature of the superconductivity, along with the
resulting excitations.