* 1709149
* Breaking the efficiency barrier of GaN laser diodes by nanoporous engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Jung Han, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 380,000.00

Title: BREAKING THE EFFICIENCY BARRIER OF GAN LASER DIODES BY NANOPOROUS
ENGINEERING &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description:
&lt;br/&gt;In this project we will study the possibility of dramatically
improving the performance (efficiency) of GaN blue laser diodes. GaN-based blue
laser diodes are widely used in optical information storage, in display, and in
automobile lighting. However, to this day all the commercial blue laser diodes
have relatively low efficiencies; in the best scenario only 1/3 of the input
electricity is converted to optical laser output. A major and frequently
overlooked issue is that the optical waves (or modes) within these laser diodes
are not adequately confined for laser operation. In order to confine the optical
modes effectively, layers with a sufficiently low optical index are needed to
clad the emitted light, which has been very difficult to achieve. We propose to
use a porous GaN layer, with a foam- or cheese-like nanostructure, as an
effective confinement layer in laser diodes. Simulation results indicate that,
due to a much-enhanced optical field inside the laser cavity, the threshold of
blue laser diodes can be reduced by a factor of 3, and the overall efficiency
can be boosted up to 60% or higher. Such an improvement will greatly extend the
usage of blue (and near UV) laser diodes in applications such as chemical
sensing, theater projections, and high-intensity
lighting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this proposal is to provide a detailed analysis of GaN laser diodes (LDs), to
overcome inherent material constraints through innovative nanoporous (NP)
engineering, and to break the efficiency barrier of the state of the art (SOTA)
GaN LDs. The efficiency barrier of the SOTA blue LDs (~30%) originates from
fundamental constraints of the III-Nitride material system. In the III-Nitride
material system, forming an effective waveguide with AlGaN cladding layers has
proven to be a daunting task. The difficulties stem from (1) large lattice
mismatches among III-N compounds for heteroepitaxy, (2) a low contrast in
optical indices among III-nitride compounds, and (3) the tendency for layers to
become electrically insulating as the Al-content increases. In this proposal a
new, nanoporous form of GaN is exploited to address the aforementioned
difficulties simultaneously. By using the NP GaN as cladding layers with an
unprecedented tunability in optical index, a new degree of freedom becomes
possible in optical waveguide design in an edge-emitting laser diode. The goal
of this project is to demonstrate clear technological pathways to high
performance blue laser diodes. The use of NP GaN introduces a new paradigm in LD
design with (1) an enhanced optical confinement and therefore stimulated
emission efficiency, (2) a reduced electrical impedance and an improved Joule
efficiency, and (3) an enhanced light extraction efficiency. In principle, the
enhancement of these three efficiency components will advance the state-of-the-
art (SOTA) LD to a power conversion efficiency of greater than 60%.