* 1709132
* Understanding Local Dynamical Gradients Near Dissimilar Polymer-Polymer Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Connie Roth, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 266,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of new materials
necessary for technologies such as drug delivery, advanced filtration, ion
conduction for batteries, or photoelectric generation for solar cells requires
the understanding of how localized properties at the nanoscale are affected near
interfaces between different components. This research aims to address the
fundamental understanding behind why dynamical gradients in local properties may
be particularly long-ranged near interfaces of dissimilar polymers. Experiments
measuring the local temperature at which the material solidifies from a liquid
to a glass using a localized fluorescence method will be performed as a function
of depth on several systems designed to separate, isolate, and test several
factors that may make such polymer-polymer interfaces unique. Additional methods
to probe this effect will also be explored. The research efforts will be carried
out by graduate and undergraduate students who will be exposed to this
interdisciplinary field bridging physics, chemistry, and materials science. The
PI fosters training and scientific growth in these students by engaging them in
various educational and outreach activities designed to promote science,
research, and participation of women and minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the properties of materials are
perturbed by interfacial interactions is an issue that has widespread impact
across numerous nanostructured polymeric materials such as thin films,
nanocomposites, nanostructured blends, and block copolymers. Existing studies
have shown that interfacial perturbations can propagate anywhere from a few
nanometers to tens and even hundreds of nanometers from the interface depending
on the material property in question, with glassy materials appearing to be
particularly sensitive to interfacial perturbations. This research aims to build
on our understanding of how the local properties of polymer materials change as
a function of distance from a given interface to try to address why interfaces
between two dissimilar polymers show dynamical gradients that can span hundreds
of nanometers and are unexpectedly asymmetric with respect to the composition
profile. Experiments will focus on testing the underlying causes for this
unexpected behavior by measuring detailed dynamical profiles of local glass
transition temperature as a function of depth near various interfaces via
fluorescence that can be used to test current theoretical efforts in the field,
as well as assessing such long range behavior with other experimental
techniques. Direct comparisons will be made between several different systems
designed to separate, isolate, and test several factors that may make such
polymer-polymer interfaces unique: molecular chain connectivity across the
interface, breadth of interface, interfacial roughness, modulus, domain size and
cooling rate. Such efforts should be able to deconvolve various factors believed
to be responsible for how interfaces alter local material properties and
dynamics.