* 1709711
* RUI: Activity-based Mapping of Cellular Cathepsins B and L - An introduction to Chemical Biology in Undergraduate Curriculum
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sanjai Pathak, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2021
* USD 282,487.00

With this RUI award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Sanjai Kumar to investigate the function of two
important enzymes found in human cells. A cell is a complex yet highly organized
system where thousands of events are coordinated with great precision at any
given moment. These processes are elegantly orchestrated by proteins, the main
centers of activity of the cell. It is estimated that the total number of
proteins in a human cell is between 250,000 to one million. Assigning individual
functions to the various proteins is a challenging endeavor, especially since a
protein may be active or inactive depending on the status of the cell. This
status of a protein is often controlled by a group of enzymes known as
proteases. The human genome has the capacity to produce about 550 proteases.
How, why, and where these proteases function in the complex cellular environment
remains poorly understood. This project involves examining two closely-related
proteases of the cysteine cathepsin family of enzymes; cathepsin B and L.
Selective probes are made to target these cathepsins so that their function can
be understood. This research endeavor provides educational opportunities with
hands-on research experience to graduate and undergraduate students. The
laboratory environment is structured for an enhanced interdisciplinary
experience for both undergraduate and graduate students. Additionally, there are
outreach activities incorporating research training for students from
Queensborough Community College and Bard High School Early College in New York.
Special emphasis is given to include students from underrepresented groups in
science disciplines, women, and veterans.

Human cysteine cathepsins comprise a small group of eleven enzymes that are
important in maintaining cell homeostasis, growth, differentiation, and
survival. One of the main challenges of cathepsin biology is in assigning
specific function to individual enzymes in a given cellular context. This is
mainly because several functional redundancies and overlapping substrate
specificities have been shown to exist in individual cell types. Since newly
synthesized cellular cathepsins are subject to post-translational modifications,
thereby leading to alteration of their activities (and hence function), specific
investigative tools are needed for activity-based interrogation of cellular
function in live cells. This project is developing selective tagless activity-
based probes (TABPs) of two closely related cysteine cathepsins; cathepsin L and
B. The developed TABPs are used in differential and quantitative mapping of
cathepsin B and L activities in live pancreatic and neuronal cells. The
knowledge gained from these studies significantly advances the functional
understanding of cellular processes involving human cathepsin B and L.