* 1709996
* Collaborative Research:   OP-Interface States and Excitons at Heterojunctions Between Two and Three Dimensional Materials Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Vinod Menon, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 220,000.00

Non-technical abstract: We are reaching the inevitable end of Moore's Law: the
scaling law that says the number of transistors on a dense integrated circuit
will double every 18 months to 2 years. This trend has been the engine of
productivity growth of modern technological societies for at least 50 years. To
extend this trend, an exciting class of two-dimensional materials is emerging as
a major opportunity. Atomically thin layered materials, often called two
dimensional materials, represent a radical departure from conventional
semiconductors such as silicon that comprise current electronic devices,
mimicking sheets of paper as opposed to large three dimensional blocks. This two
dimensionality leads to unusual properties such as exceptionally low resistance
along the sheet, yet poor conduction perpendicular to it. This makes it ideal
for use in extremely high performance optical and electrical circuits. But, as
in all electronic devices, junctions between materials play a central role in
the overall functioning of the optical and electronic devices out of which they
are made. In fact the junction is often the weakest link in the device
performance chain. In this project, the research team is investigating the
photophysics and energy transport at interfaces of dissimilar materials with
different dimensionality. Specifically, the team explores junctions between
organic semiconductors, traditional inorganic semiconductors such as silicon and
gallium arsenide, and the new class of two dimensional compounds. The goal is to
understand and enhance the energy and charge transport across the junctions,
ultimately with the goal of vastly improving the performance of electronic and
optical circuits. The potential applications of such hybrid materials include
solar energy harvesting, light emitting diodes and secure quantum information
technologies. This research project has a strong educational component that
involves graduate and undergraduate student training, as well as summer research
opportunities for underrepresented minority high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Understanding energy and charge
transfer across interfaces between widely dissimilar semiconductor materials is
key to realizing devices that exploit the unique advantages of the different
contacting materials. The properties of interest that can be shared, or
optimized in such materials combinations include ultrahigh optical oscillator
strengths and mechanical flexibility of organics, along with the very large
charge mobilities and quantum delocalization found in limited dimensional
inorganic semiconductors. It is precisely these aspects that make organic
molecules, two dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides and inorganic
quantum wells attractive for optoelectronic applications. However, much less is
known about interfaces that form between these material systems and their
emergent properties. The fundamental nature of three dimensional organic and
inorganic semiconductors forming junctions with two dimensional van der Waals
solids presents an ideal platform to investigate interface physics. The team
investigates three unique classes of heterointerfaces between systems of
different composition and dimensionality: (i) organic semiconductor - two
dimensional materials, (ii) inorganic semiconductor - two dimensional materials
and (iii) lateral heterojunctions between dissimilar two dimensional materials.
The combination of steady state and time resolved spectroscopic measurements
including near field microscopies along with transport measurements are used to
gain a fundamental appreciation of the physics governing the interplay of
photons and electrons at these largely unexplored interfaces with the goal to
develop quantum mechanical models grounded on observation of the energy and
charge transfer processes across the interfaces, the formation of hybrid excited
states and their transport as well as nonlinear optical properties. The
anticipated outcomes include the ultimate exploitation of combinations of
materials and dimensionalities through engineering of materials, interface
properties, structures, and film morphologies and their tuning to achieve
optimized performance for a particular application.