* 1709641
* BRAIN: Brain-Inspired Memristive Nanofiber Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Juan Nino, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2020
* USD 323,660.00

The human brain is currently the most powerful information processor known to
man. Recent advances in neural networks and network science indicate that in
order to match the power and efficiency of the brain, there is a need for a
brand-new type of neuromorphic hardware that is able to connect physically
independent neurons with dedicated, modifiable synapses. The PI and coworkers
have developed a brain-inspired concept where, preliminary theoretical and
experimental results show that a mat of memristive nanofibers is anticipated to
yield neural networks with enhanced connectivity, functionality, and overall
performance. This project aims at assessing the potential of this concept and it
is guided by the overarching fundamental question can these brain-inspired
memristive nanofiber neural network (MN3) architectures be effectively used for
advanced neuromorphic computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project stems from its goal to investigate the potential of MN3
architectures as the basis for novel neural network architectures that emulate
the brain's computational abilities. This BRAIN project has three main
objectives: 1) Manufacture MN3 architectures based on connective matrices of
conductive-core, memristive-shell nanofibers and electrically characterize the
networks in order to compare their characteristics to theoretical simulations;
2) Develop a simulation framework for modeling the proposed MN3 architectures in
order to investigate and predict the signal behavior and computational
properties of the networks; and 3) Investigate methods for implementing and
training the networks as artificial neural networks, and evaluate the resulting
networks on a set of benchmark machine learning tasks to determine performance
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project can be
summarized in four main areas: a) investigation of a new brain-inspired design
paradigm for fabricating neural networks that, if successful, can potentially
transform the broad fields of neuromorphic hardware and machine learning; b)
advancement of the discovery and understanding of neural network architectures
while training undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields; c)
dissemination of the gained scientific and technological understanding of
memristive networks through professional conferences, peer-review publications,
and online hubs; and d) dissemination of tutorials and workshops on Artificial
Intelligence targeting the general population in collaboration with the Cade
Museum.