* 1709616
* Thiol-based redox switch in plant flavonoid biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Jing-Ke Weng, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division funds this
award. Dr. Jing-Ke Weng from the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
investigates the impact of a chemical reactions with oxygen in regulating a
plant enzyme. All land plants produce a class of molecules called flavonoids,
using the enzyme known as chalcone synthase. Flavonoids are important for plants
to survive on land and play many roles such as protection against ultraviolet
light, defense against herbivores, and attraction of pollinators. Using high
resolution techniques for the determination of structure, chalcone synthase was
observed to have evolved a regulatory switch that affects its activity when it
reacts with oxygen. By comparing chalcone synthase from a variety of plants such
as simple land plants to flowering plants, this research helps characterize how
flavonoid biosynthesis has evolved to help plants adapt to life in a wide
variety of terrestrial habitats. This knowledge has the potential to improve
plant traits in the future. This project allows graduate students to acquire
hands-on training in multidisciplinary cutting-edge techniques. This project
also integrates middle-school and high-school outreach programs to introduce
students to plant physiology and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidation of
the cysteinyl side chain in proteins occurs widely in all living organisms,
often as a result of increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The goal
of this research is to gain a mechanistic understanding of how the activity of
chalcone synthase (CHS), the first committed enzyme in plant flavonoid
biosynthesis, is controlled by oxidative inactivation of its catalytic cysteine
at both the enzyme and systems levels. CHS orthologs from diverse land plant
lineages are characterized in vitro using X-ray crystallography and enzyme
activity assays to examine how the redox potential of the catalytic cysteine is
impacted by nearby amino acid differences between orthologs. In vivo studies
involving metabolic tracing and proteomics on transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana
expressing different CHS orthologs and subjected to various oxidative stress
conditions examine the impact of CHS oxidation on flavonoid biosynthesis, and
provide insight into its functional impact on the evolution of land plants.
Because CHSs are homologous to, and evolutionarily derived from, theÂ beta-
ketoacyl-(acyl-carrier-protein) synthases, the proposed research has far-
reaching impact for understanding how fatty acid biosynthesis may be influenced
by fluctuating cellular redox status, which is an underexplored research topic
relevant to diverse disciplines, e.g. oil production in seed crops under stress
conditions.