* 1709719
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Cobalt-catalyzed Defluorination of Branched Perfluorinated Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jinyong Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 325,000.00

This award is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program in the
Division of Chemistry. It is a collaboration between Professors Jinyong Liu and
David Volz at the University of California, Riverside, and Prof. Yujie Men at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Together with their graduate
students they study perfluorinated compounds (PFCs). PFCs are a family of
chemicals that have the same carbon backbone as hydrocarbons but all atoms
attached to the carbon backbone are fluorine instead of hydrogen. Carbon-
fluorine (C-F) bonds are highly stable. Surfaces modified with PFCs are
resistant to both water and oil. Thus, PFCs are widely used in fire-fighting
foams, electronics, lubricants, outdoor apparel and equipment, and on-sticking
cooking ware. The stability of C-F bonds makes PFCs also very difficult to
degrade in the natural environment. Synthetic PFCs have been globally detected
in the environment and living organisms. Bioaccumulation of PFCs has been
connected to a variety of human health problems. However, current technologies
are not effective in PFC degradation via breaking the C-F bonds (i.e.,
defluorination). Therefore, it is desired to develop both new PFCs that can be
degraded more easily and new strategies for removing these compounds from the
environment. This research investigates the structure-activity relationships,
reaction mechanisms, and products of cobalt-catalyzed removal of fluorine from
of PFCs in abiotic and microbial environments. Outcomes may contribute to
solving PFC pollution challenges by providing fundamental guidelines to the
design of novel degradable PFCs and microbial remediation in natural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs a multi-faceted
approach combining chemical and biological tools to investigate cobalt
(Co)-catalyzed defluorination of PFCs. The team investigates the product of PFC
defluorination after Co-catalyzed reactions. The structure-activity relationship
between the Co coordination sphere in chemically and biologically synthesized
complexes and the defluorination activity is investigated. The redox environment
enabling abiotic and microbial defluorination reactions is determined. Three PhD
students receive interdisciplinary training. Undergraduate and high school
researchers from a diverse student population are exposed to interdisciplinary
training, specifically topics related of sustainability. The broad community is
reached via a public-oriented science conference and other events. Results may
be applied to biomimetic catalyst system design, synthesis of novel fluoro-
pharmaceuticals, and toxicology evaluation of novel fluorochemicals. Outcomes of
this project have broad impacts on transforming industrial fluorochemical
design. Research efforts are coupled with educational and outreach plans
designed to broaden participation from underrepresented minorities in Chemistry,
Environmental Science, and Chemical / Environmental Engineering.