* 1709803
* Determining Grain Boundary Solute Segregation Specificity in Nanocrystalline Stability
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Gregory Thompson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 498,396.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the grain size of a material
is reduced, the strength of a material increases. Unfortunately, these small
grain sizes are energetically unfavorable as compared to larger sized grains.
Upon heating, the smaller grains will grow to reduce this energy difference
which results in the loss of strength. In recent years, the development of
specific types of alloys has shown that the lower concentration atom type, or
solute, can stabilize these grains against this growth. An outcome of these
observations has been various models to explain the grain size stabilization.
However, these models have several fundamental scientific gaps that still remain
to be solved. For example, the modeled grain boundaries are considered
equivalent wherein reality grain boundaries are diverse in their structure,
energy, and mobility. The lack of experimental verification of this solute
specific segregation to grain boundaries has hindered further model development.
This research will overcome these prior limitations by combining electron
microscopy and atom probe tomography to detect solute segregation to those
specific boundaries. These results will then be forward fed to atomics models
that explain this diversity of behavior. This research will be integrated into
various outreach activities, including a summer materials camp for secondary
education teachers to introduce materials science into the middle/high school
classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-
crystalline materials is an area of active research owing to their unique size
dependent properties. Since interfaces (boundaries) constitute a large fraction
of the entire structure, the corresponding interfacial energy from those
boundaries can make these grains inherently unstable. Solute partitioning to
these boundaries has been devised as a means to stabilize these grains against
growth with concepts of kinetic solute drag effects and thermodynamic reduction
of interfacial energy being suggested mechanisms for stabilization. To date,
these models assume all the grain boundaries are isotropic and equivalent to
each other; in reality grain boundaries are diverse in energy, structure, and
mobility with solute partitioning being a function of that variability. Using
cross-correlative precession electron diffraction and atom probe tomography,
this research will elucidate the solute specificity to grain boundaries that
leads to stabilization. The experimental findings will be linked to hydride
Monte Carlo-Molecular Dynamics atomistic models that will elucidate the
mechanisms of stabilization to specific boundary types. In addition, real-time
experimental quantification of those boundaries during annealing will be
measured to ascertain mobility and kinetic contributors to stability. The
collective results will bridge outstanding and fundamental knowledge gaps in
revealing how thermodynamic and kinetic considerations for specific grain
boundaries leads to grain size stability. This research will be seamlessly
integrated to various outreach activities to strengthen the STEM disciplines
including a summer materials camp for secondary education teachers to introduce
materials science into middle/high school classrooms.