* 1709888
* Allosterically Regulated Supramolecular Capsules and Receptors Assembled via the WLA
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 710,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
program, Professor Chad A. Mirkin of Northwestern University is developing
design rules for the synthesis of special molecules that can serve as capsules
with controllable size and recognition properties for applications in detectors,
molecular separations, and catalysis. The rational design and synthesis of these
capsules, is a significant challenge in the field of the assembly of
supramolecular structures, could lead to significant advances related to the
purification of pharmaceuticals essential in clinical medicine, the conversion
of low-value to high-value chemical feedstocks important to the chemical and
petroleum industries, and the development of chemical sensors critical to the
environmental testing and food packaging fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project focuses on the development of
stimuli-responsive heterodimeric capsules, using robust and generalizable
chemistry that can be implemented in a wide variety of settings. Various
capsules are being synthesized and studied in the context of the Weak-Link
approach, and the most promising are being characterized further using X-ray
crystallography, multinuclear NMR spectroscopy, isothermal titration
calorimetry, mass spectrometry, and UV-vis spectroscopy. The chemical and
physical properties of these novel heterodimeric capsules are being defined
through collaborative efforts with core facilities, such as the Integrated
Molecular Structure Education and Research Center (IMSERC), at Northwestern
University. Outreach programs aimed at engaging local high school students and
undergraduates from around the world have been established by Mirkin. These
programs focus on mentoring students, teaching them technical aspects of
laboratory research, and preparing them for the next stage of their academic
careers. These young students are learning about scientific research at the
forefront of the field and interacting with leading scientists, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers. This work provides a training ground for
young students, including underrepresented minorities, and equips them with
basic science knowledge essential for developing technologies that can
significantly improve the lives of many Americans.