* 1709740
* RUI: Miniaturized Paper as a Low-Cost, Patternable, Shapable and Degradable Scaffold for Cell Culture and Tissue Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Andres Martinez, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division
of Materials Research to the California Polytechnic State University, San Luis
Obispo will support the development and characterization of a new biomaterial
intended to facilitate the growth of 3-Dimensional tissues in a laboratory
setting. An initial application of the new material will include the development
of tissue-engineered blood vessels, which could have important implications for
future medically-relevant applications. The primary objective of this project is
to demonstrate the use of an inexpensive, chemically-modified paper as a
scaffold for sustaining the growth of cells in culture. Importantly, paper can
be readily patterned, and it can be easily shaped into two-dimensional and
three-dimensional structures, allowing for the preparation of intricate tissue
shapes. The chemical modification process results in the miniaturization of the
paper-scaffold and it also imparts a unique property to the paper, a tunable
degradation of the scaffold in aqueous solutions. This award will support the
training of the next generation of STEM field scientists through active
undergraduate and graduate participation, allowing these students to engage in
basic science and engineering research with real-world applications. This
project will increase the public awareness of science through the development of
visually appealing experiments and structures that are easy to understand on a
basic level, yet have compelling
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Scaffolds are a key
component for tissue engineering, and have been shown to have a significant
effect on the morphology of cells cultured in-vitro. The research objective of
this proposal is to develop and characterize a new biomaterial that is
inexpensive to produce, that can be patterned with reagents, that can be shaped
easily into two-dimensional and three-dimensional structures, that degrades in
aqueous solutions at a tunable rate, and that could be used as a scaffold for 3D
cell culture and tissue engineering. The biomaterial will be made by the
oxidation of cellulose-based paper with periodate, to produce 2,3-dialdehyde
cellulose via the Malaprade reaction. This chemical modification of cellulose
results in the miniaturization of the tissue scaffold and allows for its tunable
dissolution in aqueous media. Wax patterning of this dialdehyde paper will allow
for subsequent deposition of cellular growth factors and seeding of discrete
cell cultures in two-dimensions. Stacking layers of dialdehyde paper in turn
allows for three-dimensional tissue engineering, as is required for engineered
blood vessels, such as coronary arteries. The proposed work will also advance
the understanding of dialdehyde cellulose as a biomaterial, as well as the
relationships between the degree of oxidation of paper and the mechanical
properties of paper. Undergraduate and graduate students, many of whom are
under-represented minorities, will play a prominent role with this project,
allowing them to engage in basic science and engineering research with real-
world applications, while learning important interdisciplinary scientific
techniques that will prepare them to be the scientists of the future.