* 1709480
* Groups and Topological Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Volodymyr Nekrashevych, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2020
* USD 220,977.00

This project explores newly discovered connections between two branches of
Mathematics: the theory of dynamical systems and group theory. The former
studies behavior of complex and chaotic systems, while the latter usually
studies groups of symmetries of (for example geometric) structures. It has
become clear that interesting groups of symmetries are naturally associated with
many chaotic dynamical systems. This connection makes it possible to answer some
longstanding open questions in group theory, as well as in the theory of
dynamical systems. For example, it was shown that dynamical systems of low
complexity can be used to construct simple groups of sub-exponential growth, the
existence of which was an open question for 30 years. The principal investigator
plans to use the methods of the theory of chaotic dynamical systems to solve
problems in group theory and to use group theory to better understand dynamical
systems. A direction which will be explored in this project is the study of
relations between different measures of complexity of dynamical systems and
groups: rates of growth, entropy, pattern complexity, "finite type" conditions,
etc.

This project will study groups naturally associated with dynamical systems:
topological full groups of dynamical systems and etale groupoids, iterated
monodromy groups of self-coverings of topological spaces, holonomy groups of
laminations, etc. They are often exotic from the point of view of "classical"
group theory and are good sources of interesting examples, especially from the
point of view of asymptotic properties of groups (for example amenability and
growth). New topological and dynamical methods have proven to be effective tools
in the study of such groups. For instance, almost all currently known examples
of non-elementary amenable groups are constructed and studied using topological
dynamical systems. This research program aims to shed new light on several group
theoretic questions using topological dynamics and etale groupoids, and to work
on some long-standing open questions (for example, on possible slow intermediate
word growth, amenability of groups, new examples of torsion groups, constructing
finitely presented groups with exotic properties, studying growth of iterated
monodromy groups of quadratic polynomials, etc.). The PI also anticipate that
group theory will be effective in studying problems in dynamical systems.