* 1709897
* Active Hyaluronan Polymer Brushes for Tunable Biointerfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jennifer Curtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2021
* USD 367,552.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program in the
Division of Materials Research to Georgia Institute of Technology is for the
synthesis and characterization of a specific type of sugar-based polymers called
hyaluronans, which would have tunable, programmable and dynamic functional
properties. These brush polymers are widely distributed, and function as
biointerfaces between cells and surrounding matrix called extra cellular matrix.
The interactions of hyaluronans are highly directional, specific, and
reversible, and these interactions are the foundation of all living systems.
Biomaterials that are both programmable and regenerative are rare, and
reproduction of some of these properties are yet to be made by synthetic means.
Inspired by the exquisite interface control realized by cells, this award would
synthesize large macromolecules of hyaluronan using biocatalysts called
hyaluronan synthese on the cell surface. These dynamic and regrowable interfaces
are expected in generating dense arrays of the biocatalysts, which in turn will
produce hyaluronan on surfaces. These interfacial materials are unique for a
number of reasons: they can regenerate; and they are tunable in thickness from
100 nm to 20 microns, making them as one of the thickest polymer brushes ever
reported. For these reasons, the polymers synthesized are considered a
completely distinct class of HA material; and are comprised of a ubiquitous
biopolymer with properties that make it particularly attractive for different
biomaterials applications and interfaces including tissue repair, healing and
regeneration, drug delivery, immunotherapy among others. As part of this
project, interdisciplinary training will be provided to undergraduate and
graduate students, and will expose elementary school students to the creative
aspect of science and engineering new materials, as inspired by
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interfaces are crucial in many biomedical
applications from biosensing to protein purification to antibacterial coatings
to tissue repair and regeneration to bioengineering. In particular, polymer
brushes are an attractive strategy for designing functional surfaces, as they
would allow the control of a number of important architectural features that
allows tuning of interfacial properties. The investigator had already
established a strategy to produce tunable, self-healing extremely thick
hyaluronan (HA) polymer brushes using a grafting approach. This is achieved
using dense arrays of the biocatalyst hyaluronan synthase (HA synthase), which
synthesizes and extrudes HA through the cells' membranes with sizes as large as
20 microns. Active HA synthase brush interfaces are a fascinating system with
many potential applications. This award will fully characterize the structural
properties of these brushes and their response to changes in environmental
parameters such as solvent quality, pH, and ionic strength. Further, this award
will investigate the dynamical aspect of the brush, and will address important
questions about its regenerative capacity including: 1) how does the brush age
once the enzyme synthesis is stopped?; 2) if enzyme synthesis is never halted,
how long can a brush be maintained?; and 3) how many times can a brush be
regrown after its removal?; and 4) what are the functions of the enzyme
interfaces in confined geometries, like those realized on devices inserted into
tissues (as well as those found at cell-cell and cell-extra cellular matrix
interfaces in the body). A better understanding of HA synthase enzyme function
and HA brush formation in confinement are relevant to both biomaterials
applications as well as a broader understanding of HA-rich glycocalyx in
integrating and orchestrating adhesion and interactions of cells to their
surroundings. The scientific broader impacts of this award are in different
biomaterial applications including tissue repair and healing, drug delivery,
immunotherapy, biosensing, protein purification, antibacterial coatings and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the Biomaterials
Program and BioMaPS funds of the Division of Materials Research in the
Directorate for Physical and Mathematical Sciences, and the Catalysis Program of
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
in the Directorate for Engineering.