* 1709391
* Understanding the Reactive Evolution of Ion-Battery Interfaces through a Versatile Single-Site Ionic Interrogation and Imaging Toolset
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Joaquin Rodriguez Lopez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Imaging Program of the Chemistry
Division. Professor Joaquin Rodriguez Lopez of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign is developing new tools and techniques for imaging chemical
reactions occurring on energy-dense battery electrodes with the intention of
improving their performance and safety. To meet the challenge of exploring
complex reactions on battery interfaces, the project utilizes a powerful
approach to independently address redox and ionic reactivity. Advanced concepts
on battery materials are fully integrated into an educational and outreach plan
that introduces the local undergraduate and K-12 Hispanic population to learning
opportunities in energy science. The results of this project inform guidelines
for designing better batteries and respond to the NSF?s mission of serving the
national interest by advancing the progress of energy sciences and by allowing
the USA to remain at the forefront of battery technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on elucidating the early signs,
evolution, and consequences of uneven chemical reactivity on carbon and silicon
battery interfaces as these strongly impact cycling performance, materials
utilization, and risk of catastrophic failure. In situ methods for the localized
measurement of ion insertion reactions and of interfacial redox reactivity are
being developed. Correlating these two aspects helps to identify and address the
factors that lead to battery underperformance at the level of single sites and
nanostructures. An educational and outreach plan developed by Prof. Rodriguez
Lopez takes each contribution towards the research goals as a teaching and
learning opportunity. Undergraduate students participate in the development of
demonstration kits and computational tools related to electrochemical energy
that are delivered to local high school and to K-12 Hispanic students through
collaborations with teacher and student organizations. This project has a broad
societal impact as it addresses the discovery of phenomena that lead to real-
world performance concerns on everyday energy technologies and involves the
future workforce in the solution of these energy-related challenges.