* 1709099
* Uncovering the Biophysical Mechanism of Receptor for Advanced Glycation Endproducts Molecular Function
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Emily Smith, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 11/30/2020
* USD 465,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Emily Smith from Iowa State University to investigate
the chemical species that allow a class of membrane proteins to function, and to
develop a detailed understanding of how the proteins organize and move in a cell
membrane. Proteins in the cell membrane have a critical role in how cells get
information about their surroundings as well as respond to their environment.
One way these proteins function is by moving throughout the cell membrane to
facilitate interactions with other proteins and cells. This project is providing
information, through optical spectroscopy and microscopy measurements that would
advance the understanding of two important membrane proteins associated with
many aspects of cellular function. Broader impact activities target middle
school, high school, undergraduate and graduate students to meet the societal
goals of cultivating a scientifically literate public; increasing the number of
students pursuing science degrees including students from underrepresented
groups in science; and promoting a strong, diverse and capable scientific
workforce to increase America's global competitiveness. These activities are
being accomplished in partnership with Science Bound, a pre-college program to
increase the number of ethnically diverse Iowa students who pursue science
degrees, and the local American Chemical Society SEED program that provides
summer research opportunities for economically disadvantaged students.

The overarching objective of this work is to measure the clustering, diffusion,
and nanoscale organization of a class of cell membrane proteins termed pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs). These receptors are part of the innate immune
system that recognizes several pathogen-associated molecular patterns and
damage-associated molecular patterns. The molecular mechanism of clustering and
diffusion within the membrane upon chemically-defined ligand binding events will
be measured for two PRRs: receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) and
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Both PRRs share a subset of ligands, and have been
shown to exhibit receptor "cross talk," as evidenced by downstream protein
phosphorylation (i.e., signaling). The project is using single particle tracking
methods to measure the diffusion of TLR4 and elucidate the role of chemically-
characterized ligands in affecting the diffusion of RAGE and TLR4. The RAGE and
TLR4 association in the cell membrane is measured by fluorescence resonance
energy transfer. Evidence for an association of these two receptors within the
membrane has not been reported. It is hypothesized that a direct interaction
between RAGE and TLR4 may be an important mechanism of their function, and that
diffusion is an important regulator of these interactions. The proposed work is
generating a foundation for understanding the molecular biophysical aspects of
PRRs' molecular function that will add to the available data on the downstream
signaling of these receptors.