* 1709991
* Developing anisotropic media for transformation optics by using dielectric photonic crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Elena Semouchkina, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 337,217.00

Title: Novel media for transformation optics using dielectric photonic
crystals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;Transformation optics (TO) is based on coordinate transformations,
which require proper spatial dispersions of the media parameters. Such media
force electromagnetic (EM) waves, moving in the original coordinate system, to
behave as if they propagate in a transformed coordinate system. Thus TO
introduces a new powerful technique for designing advanced EM devices with
superior functionalities. Coordinate transformations can be derived for
compressing, expanding, bending, or twisting space, enabling designs of
invisibility cloaks, field concentrators, perfect lenses, beam shifters, etc.,
that may bring advances to various areas of human life. Realization of these
devices depends on the possibility of creating media with prescribed EM
properties, in particular, directional refractive indices to provide wave
propagation with superluminal phase velocities and high refractive indices in
the normal direction to cause wave movement along curvilinear paths. Originally,
artificial metamaterials (MMs) composed of tiny metallic resonators were chosen
for building transformation media. However, a number of serious challenges were
encountered, such as extremely narrow frequency band of operation and the high
losses in metal elements. The proposed approach is to use dielectric photonic
crystals to overcome these major limitations of MM media. This project will
allow graduate and undergraduate students, especially women in engineering, to
participate in theoretical and experimental EM research. Outreach activities
include lectures and hands-on projects in several youth programs to K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a platform for engineering photonic crystal (PhC)-based media that
are free from the major limitations of metamaterial media. The project aims to
control wave propagation in media along orthogonal crystallographic directions
and relies upon self-collimation phenomena at formulating TO-based prescriptions
for refractive indices. For realizing directional dispersions of both
superluminal and ordinary indices along desired axes of crystals, proper
variations of their lattice parameters will be used. Accurate control of index
values will be provided by building the media from crystal fragments with
optimized dimensions. Microwave experiments using a parallel-plate waveguide
chamber will be performed to record wave propagation and to verify computational
results. Technologies developed earlier for fabricating low-loss PhCs will help
to implement the practical devices. This interdisciplinary research will
integrate electromagnetics, physics, optics, and materials science concepts;
employ full-wave computational modeling and design; engineer complex materials
architectures; and master characterization techniques for complex structures.
The project will open up perspectives for TO by developing new approaches for
media engineering and by solving fundamental problems, including integration of
self-collimation. This research will integrate electromagnetics, physics,
optics, and materials science concepts and will advance the potential of PhCs.