* 1709394
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Toward Structure-Based Models of Chiral Recognition by Amino Acid Based Macromolecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kevin Morris, Carthage College
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 80,981.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in
the Division of Chemistry. Professors Billiot and Billiot of Texas A&amp;M
University - Corpus Christi, Kevin Morris of Carthage College, and Yayin Fang of
Howard University form a multi-institutional collaboration. The work focuses on
the investigation and elucidation of the factors responsible for molecular self-
assembly, and how these factors affect the ability of the self-assembled
molecular structures to interact and recognize other molecules of biological
importance. A variety of experimental and computational methods are used to
developed Quantitative Structure Enantioselective Retention Relationships
(QSERR). QSERR is then used to evaluate and compare the effectiveness of
different chiral selectors for capillary electrophoretic separations. Two of the
three institutions are primarily undergraduate institutions that currently do
not have a master's program in chemistry. Thus, the research will be conducted
at these two schools exclusively by undergraduate students. One of these is also
a Hispanic Serving Institution. The third university involved in the research is
an HBCU. The research serves as a tool for the PIs to recruit, train, and mentor
students from underrepresented and economically challenged backgrounds and to
encourage these students to pursue post baccalaureate degrees in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is part of an ongoing, long-term
multi-faceted study focusing on investigating and elucidating the factors
responsible for (a) self-assembly, (b) function, (c) higher ordered structure
and (d) molecular recognition of amino acid based macromolecular assemblies
(AABMAs). In particular, the research will focus on examining the effects that
pH, ionic strength, surfactant concentration, and type of counter-ion have on
the factors mentioned above. These AABMAs are being utilized in this study as
chiral pseudostationary phases in capillary electrophoresis. Thus, the major
focus of these studies is to gain insights into the factors responsible for
chiral recognition with this class of chiral selector. A deeper understanding of
these factors will lead to enhanced chiral separations and improved
pseudostationary phases. Understanding such interactions is not only important
in the development of chiral recognition media but also in the optimization of
the separation conditions. In addition, since enantiorecognition of the systems
under study are amino acids, the knowledge gained from these studies will be
potentially transferable to other amino acid based systems such as proteins.