* 1709327
* Surface-Based Point Defect Manipulation in Semiconducting Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Edmund Seebauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Although ceramic semiconductors such as titanium
dioxide and zinc oxide often find use in consumer sunscreens, they also have
other important applications such as ultraviolet-emitting optical devices and
gas sensors. For device and sensor applications, the material's performance is
strongly influenced by defects in the regularly-ordered atomic structure. These
defects can be mobile, and nearby surfaces can inject or withdraw them from the
solid bulk. Experiments and computations are being combined to examine how this
chemistry is affected by the inherent tendency of the surface to accumulate
excess positive or negative charge, and by the presence of liquids such as
water. Experiments entail the exposure of titanium dioxide or zinc oxide to a
gas or liquid containing isotopically-labeled atoms specially by weight, and
subsequent measurement of the buildup of the label within the solid.
Computations employ a range of modeling techniques rooted in quantum
calculations. The project opens rich new possibilities for manipulating defect
behavior in applications. Using liquids near room temperature is especially
exciting because of greatly reduced cost and ease of material manufacturing
compared to conventional methods that often employ gases and heating to hundreds
of degrees. The project also develops educational materials for middle school
and high school students. A significant number of undergraduate researchers
participate in the research, and several activities to promote the importance of
ethics in science and engineering are being pursued.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Reactions of ceramic semiconductor
surfaces with bulk point defects such as interstitial atoms exhibit rich
chemistry that is poorly understood despite that it helps to regulate defect
types and concentrations. Experiments and computations are combined to examine
how that chemistry is affected by surface polarity, which describes the tendency
of the surface to accumulate excess positive or negative charge. The project
also examines liquid-enhanced defect injection from the surface into the bulk.
Investigations include zinc oxide of varying polar and nonpolar crystallographic
orientations as well as nonpolar titanium dioxide. Experiments entail exposure
of the solid to a gas or liquid containing isotopically labeled atoms, and
subsequent measurement of the spatial distribution of the label within the
solid. For gaseous ambients, interstitial atoms of both oxygen and titanium or
zinc are being examined in the presence of foreign adsorbates such as nitrogen,
sulfur and chlorine. For aqueous liquids, oxygen interstitial defects are being
examined under varying pH, photostimulation intensity and solution additives.
Computations employ a hierarchy of mathematical modeling rooted in quantum
calculations to provide useful atomistic insights. The project opens a rich new
domain of surface behavior, and provides new means for manipulating defect
behavior to improve photocatalysts, ultraviolet emitters and gas sensors.