* 1709179
* Chemically Defined and Biologically Active Microcarriers for Cell Expansion
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Padma Gopalan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2022
* USD 419,576.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;Over the past three decades, a variety of
fundamental scientific discoveries have identified cells that can be used in
medical research and therapy. However, in order to be effectively used, these
cells must be manufactured efficiently, controllably, and reproducibly.
Culturing and expanding cells while enhancing their desired function is
essential for biomanufacturing, and critical for ultimate use of cells to
understand and treat human disease. This proposal focuses on biomanufacturing
two important cell types, namely human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) that have
been used in over 500 human clinical trials, and endothelial cells (ECs) that
form human blood vessels. Developing a better in vitro understanding and control
over regulation of hMSC and EC behaviors such as adhesion, proliferation, and
differentiation may facilitate their efficient manufacturing and increased
success as cell therapies. This research program will lead to understanding of
cell behaviour, and to more effective manufacturing of therapeutic cells, by
developing biomaterials to mimic parts of the native extracellular matrix (ECM).
These biomaterials in the form of polymer coatings will aid in answering key
fundamental questions in cell biology and provide an efficient, well-defined
platform for cell biomanufacturing. The resulting polymer-coated "microcarriers"
for 3D cell expansion can be delivered to cell biologists and bioengineers, who
can then customize them to probe key biological questions. Hands-on exhibits
developed on Stem Cells and Tissue Engineering through this research will be
disseminated nationally by the PI's and the graduate students. The research
program will serve to inspire and involve undergraduate students in polymer
science and engineering research, by working with graduate student
mentors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This research
program will study the synthesis of polymer coatings to answer key fundamental
questions in cell biology using 2D coatings, and to develop polymer-coated
microcarriers that provide an efficient, well-defined platform for cell
biomanufacturing. These key fundamental goals include: i) understanding the
influence of local and global coating compositions on cellular behaviors; ii)
understanding the role of substrate-mediated growth factor (GF) sequestering on
GF-dependent cell expansion; and iii) exploring the influence of controlled,
divalent presentation of receptor-binding peptides on receptor activation and
associated cell behavior. These studies will result in the design of an
efficient copolymer coating and ligation chemistry to present receptor-
coreceptor clusters with controlled spacing to study their influence on GF
signaling and associated cell behaviors. To quantitatively characterize the
functionality of the surface, this research will develop Time of Flight-
Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) in conjunction with X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and assess the local and global
heterogeneities in surface composition. The outcome of this research will be the
synthesis of chemically defined microcarriers via a copolymer chemistry that is
customizable to different cell types and culture media with relevant bio-
inspired peptides that regulate cell adhesion and GF sequestering. We envision a
new class of microcarriers that use customizable polymer coatings, lower the
currently intractable cost of media formulations, and achieve efficient, xeno-
free expansion of functional therapeutic cells. The ability to tailor
microcarriers to support adhesion and receptor activation of specific cell types
without using complex and expensive media would be transformative in
biomanufacturing, which is a rapidly growing segment of health care in cell and
tissue therapy.