* 1709612
* Directional Superradiant Light Emission from Epsilon-Near-Zero Plasmonic Nanochannels
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Christos Argyropoulos, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 361,177.00

Nontechnical description: This project advances understanding about how
interactions between nanoscale materials and light can be manipulated, leading
to optical materials with unique properties and functionalities. The research
team utilizes experimental and computational approaches to help realize new
materials and structures that enable controlled light emission for use in next
generation energy efficient electronics, such as nanoscale lasers, as well as
advanced optical communications and sensing technologies. The project supports
undergraduate and graduate student involvement in research as a means of
encouraging pursuit of advanced study and research careers in nanophotonics. The
team extends the impact of this research to introduce concepts in quantum
science and electromagnetism to middle school, high school and undergraduate
students. The latter include activities focused on photonics during Physics Days
at the University of Memphis, and the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
programs at the Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience. Further, the
investigators leverage their research findings to implement an online teaching
resource encompassing a broad range of topics addressing electromagnetic
materials for use in undergraduate and graduate
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Recent advances in
nanofabrication techniques have enabled the integration of nanomaterials into
plasmonic nanocavities with sizes much smaller than the diffraction limit,
paving the way for optical studies and control of light-matter interaction at
the nanoscale. Current research strategies typically require accurate
positioning of quantum emitters at nanocavity-localized hotspots, to benefit
from increased photonic density of states. In this project, the research team
employs both experimental and computational approaches to advance fundamental
knowledge of the directional, superradiant coherent light emission from a
collection of quantum emitters embedded in unique epsilon-near-zero plasmonic
nanochannels. The in-phase plasmonic field confined in an epsilon-near-zero
nanochannel provides a path to overcome the localized hotspot dependence and
allows emitters to radiate coherently and collaboratively over long distances.
The team elucidates fundamental properties of coherent light emission by
addressing Dicke superradiance, the Purcell effect and Förster resonance energy
transfer in a plasmonic epsilon-near-zero material. In so doing, the team fills
gaps in foundational physics understanding, allowing the creation of new
nanostructures with unique properties and functionalities. This new knowledge is
expected to lead to novel on-chip optical components and coherent light sources
for nanophotonic applications, quantum information processing and sensing.