* 1709959
* Mechanical Activation Enhanced Solid-State Reaction and Electrochemical Properties of NaCrO2
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Leon Shaw, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 479,977.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy ball milling is widely
used to produce nickel- and iron-based superalloys for applications in the
aerospace industry. In recent years, the technique has been adopted for
fabrication of battery electrode materials as well. Through this award by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program, the principle investigator seeks to
understand how mechanical activation induced by high-energy ball milling at room
temperature alters structural defects in NaCrO2 - the product of solid-state
reactions at high temperature - and how the structural defects in NaCrO2 affect
the electrochemical properties of NaCrO2. Through seamless integration of
experiments and theoretical modeling and simulation, this project develops
mechanistic understandings at the atomic level. The newly created knowledge is
used to guide rational design and synthesis of NaCrO2 with mechanical activation
to obtain controlled structural defects and desired dopants that yield superior
capacity retention, high round trip energy efficiency and long cycle life for
Na-ion batteries. Such Na-ion batteries can play a critical role in grid-scale
electric energy storage for widespread integration of renewable energy, making
clean energy affordable to Americans and the technology greener and more energy
efficient. Through this project, undergraduate students are offered
opportunities to participate in research through a semester long "Inter-
professional Project" at the Illinois Institute of Technology. Presentations on
"Roles of Chemistry in Lithium-ion Batteries" with hands-on demonstrations are
given in the science classes of high schools with a high percentage of under-
represented minority students to inspire them to pursue careers in science,
engineering and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Solid State and Materials Chemistry-funded
project constitutes the first investigation of relationships among the degree of
mechanical activation, solid-state reaction conditions and the structural
defects in the reaction product NaCrO2. This project investigates the dependence
of capacity retention of NaCrO2 over electrochemical charge/discharge cycles on
the structural defects and dopants in NaCrO2. In-situ high-energy X-ray
diffraction (HEXRD) are conducted to unravel the reaction pathway and kinetics,
effects of mechanical activation, and structural defect evolution in NaCrO2
during synthesis. In-situ HEXRD and in-situ X-ray absorption (XAS) are also
performed during electrochemical cycling to define the crystal structure change
and structural defect evolution of NaCrO2 and the local structure and oxidation
state of Cr ions, while density functional theory (DFT) calculations help
interpret experimental results at the atomic level and suggest pathways to
improve capacity retention over charge/discharge cycles. Additionally, high-
throughput first-principles calculations are carried out to guide doping
experiments to further enhance the stability of the NaCrO2 electrode with the
desired structural defects. As the first step in translating the scientific
discovery made in this project towards a viable technology, near the end of the
project the best NaCrO2 will be used to fabricate half cells to demonstrate the
superior capacity retention up to 2,000 cycles with high round trip energy
efficiency (&gt; 90%). To expedite the dissemination of the newly created
knowledge in scientific community and industry, the principle investigators plan
to predict the long-term properties (10,000 cycles) using the data derived from
2,000 cycle experiments.