* 1709521
* RUI: Acoustic Phonons in Nanostructures: Surface Waves, Thermal Transport, and Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Brian Daly, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 283,278.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Can laser generated high frequency ultrasound
be used to make images of nanostructures buried inside semiconductor devices? It
is taken as a given that progress in nanoscale science and technology relies on
continuing progress in our ability to make nanoscale images. This project will
employ ultrafast lasers that generate light pulses that are less than a
millionth of a millionth of a second in duration in order to generate and detect
ultrasound that is over 1000 times higher in frequency than medical or
industrial ultrasound. The research will entail the use of new 2-Dimensional
materials to enhance our ability to detect these ultrasonic waves, and will also
broaden our understanding of how such high frequency waves behave as they travel
around inside solid semiconductor materials. The project will involve a wide
range of undergraduate students in summer research and independent research
courses for credit during the semester. It will also enhance a program for
incoming freshmen who are under-represented minorities or first-generation
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project
will seek to demonstrate that coherent acoustic phonons can be used to image
buried nanostructures. Previous work on this has shown promise, but issues of
low signal to noise due to high attenuation of phonons in the 0.1 to 1 THz range
have proved daunting. The work will investigate whether 2-D materials such as
transition metal dichalcogenides or graphene could prove to be effective
transducer layers for a picosecond laser ultrasonic imaging experiment. A second
investigation will explore high frequency surface acoustic wave generation and
detection by ultrafast optical pump-probe experiments on periodically patterned
layered nanostructures. Ultrafast optics has produced the highest surface
acoustic wave frequencies ever detected, but a complete understanding of the
optical generation and detection is lacking. The work will compare the optical
data with computer simulations of the mechanical displacements and the
incident/reflected electromagnetic waves. The final component of the project
will be a study of phonon attenuation and thermal transport in thin amorphous
films and crystals. Time-domain thermoreflectance measurements will be combined
with coherent phonon attenuation measurements to form a complete picture of the
contribution of long wavelength vibrational modes to thermal transport.
Similarly, the measurement of coherent phonon attenuation in crystalline
materials, where the thermal conductivity is already well known, will supply
important data that may help answer the question of what the behavior of sub-THz
phonons says about a material's thermal conductivity.