* 1709881
* Collaborative Research: N-Heterocyclic Carbene Functionalized Metal Films and Nanoparticles for Next-Generation Surface-Enhanced Spectroscopy and Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Marya Lieberman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Jon Camden and Marya Lieberman of
the University of Notre Dame and Professor David Jenkins of the University of
Tennessee are developing robust, reusable, and highly specific nanoparticles for
ultrasensitive detection of chemical species in complex biological and chemical
systems. To meet this challenge, special and unique chemical modification of the
surface of these nanoparticles is done. After modification of the surfaces,
these particles can be applied to serve as sensors for specific molecules. This
effort is also focusing on devising new methods of analysis that can be used in
low-resource environments and drug testing. The highly collaborative nature will
benefit students working in these labs. The success of this research has the
potential to impact a wide range of sensor applications such as imaging cells,
detecting trace contaminants, and analyzing samples outside of a laboratory
setting.

The unique optical properties of plasmonic nanoparticles and plasmonic
assemblies has driven an explosion of new sensing and imaging modalities over
the past several decades. The wide-reaching impact of functionalized metallic
nanostructures is evidenced by studies which range from fundamental research to
commercial applications. In this work, a transformative functionalization
approach based on N-heterocyclic carbenes is employed for surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (SERS). This collaborative effort specifically targets a
regenerative sensor for hydrogen peroxide and an in vitro pH sensor with
expanded range. Additionally, procedures are established that make NHC
functionalized films and colloids available to a non-specialist audience by
proposing a "one-pot" synthesis of modified surfaces from conventional
imidazoliums. These demonstrations will showcase how effective this new
technology is for the broader chemical sensing community.