* 1709785
* Statistical Mechanics of soft low dimensional structures and dynamical phases of neuronal networks
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Alexander Levine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 345,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education into the behavior of a variety of complex biological systems including
the mechanics of bundles of biopolymer filaments, cell membranes, and small
networks of interacting neurons. The PI will explore the interplay of random
fluctuations and shape on soft, elastic structures in the cell, e.g. on the
mechanics of bundles of biopolymer filaments. These bundles are integral to the
mechanics of our cells. In addition, the PI and his research team will explore
the interaction of cell membrane undulations with the cell's underlying
geometry. The complex geometry of the cellular membranes redirects and focuses
these undulations, leading to cells having a spatially complex pattern of
fluctuations. This award will support research into the underlying physical
principles that govern these patterns and on how they affect membrane
interactions. Finally, the researchers will explore how the complex connectivity
of small networks of interacting neurons controls their collective electrical
response and signal generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports
the education of undergraduate, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars at
UCLA. It will also contribute to the UCLA/California State University Dominguez
Hills (CSUDH) scientific exchange program, which provides an opportunity for
physics students at CSUDH to gain research experience at UCLA. The broader
impacts of this research into the interplay of geometry, connectivity, and
fluctuations in biological systems should include a deeper understanding of the
principles of cellular mechanics and force generation. The work on membranes may
also inform our understanding of undulations in graphene sheets and ribbons,
which might play an important role in developing nanotechnologies. Finally, the
work on neuronal networks should have direct impact on studies of respiratory
rhythm generation in mammals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports research and education on the
interaction of fluctuations on soft, low-dimensional structures with an emphasis
on biologically derived systems. These include: 1) filament bundles with
transient cross linking, and 2) membranes with complex geometry. Another aspect
of the project involves studying the collective dynamics of neurons interacting
on quenched random networks. All three aims of the research are related by the
study of biologically relevant fluctuations interacting with quenched random
variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the focus of this project
can be broken down into three parts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The study of
bundles of semiflexible biopolymer filaments (e.g., F-actin) linked by transient
cross linkers. These linkers exhibit long-ranged Casimir interactions resulting
in their behaving within the bundle as a strongly-interacting linker fluid. In
this project, the researchers will explore how that linker fluid affects the
bundling/unbundling transition, and how it affects the dynamics of the bundle
under the application of various forms of deformation. They will also study the
driven dynamics of such systems in response to endogenous molecular
motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The research team will study the mechanics of
undulations on curved filaments to address how bending modifies the Casimir
interaction. They will expand these studies to explore the scattering of
undulatory waves on elastic membranes from local changes in curvature. Using
these results, they will explore the localization of undulatory waves on shells
with quenched random geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) The team will address the
effect of quenched random connectivity in interacting neuronal networks by
continuing their studies of the effect of certain topological structure called
k-cores on the collective dynamics of central pattern
generators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the education of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars at UCLA. It will
also contribute to the UCLA/California State University Dominguez Hills (CSUDH)
scientific exchange program. The broader impacts of this research into the
interplay of geometry, connectivity, and fluctuations in biological systems
should include a deeper understanding of the principles of cellular mechanics
and force generation. The work on membranes may also have a broader impact on
understanding undulations in graphene sheets and ribbons. Finally, the work on
neuronal networks should have direct impact on studies of respiratory rhythm
generation in mammals and possibly provide new insight into the basic principles
controlling the stability of this essential central pattern generator.