* 1709789
* Thermochemistry of Noncovalent Interactions and Metal-Ligand Bonds of Biological Relevance
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mary Rodgers, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2022
* USD 570,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Mary T. Rodgers of
Wayne State University is using mass spectrometry techniques to obtain
information about the weak interactions that hold two or more molecules together
without the formation of a strong "covalent" bond. Covalent bonds involve the
actual sharing of electrons between the two molecules. "Non-covalent"
interactions are generally weaker than covalent bonds. They play roles such
things as the boiling point of liquids and the ability of insects to stick to
walls. Professor Rodgers' research focuses on non-covalent interactions relevant
to living systems, for example metal atom binding with nucleic molecules (these
are constituents of DNA) and the binding of peptide molecules (constituents of
proteins). The results of this research may advance our understanding of the
chemical basis for biological processes and aid in the design of new
technologies for sensing biologically relevant molecules. Graduate and
undergraduate students involved in this project are gaining valuable experience
in a multidisciplinary research environment encompassing chemistry,
biochemistry, chemical physics and mass spectrometry. The resulting
thermochemical data are being compiled and made available to the community via a
web-based thermochemical database, the National Institutes of Standards and
Technology (NIST) Chemistry Webbook and the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, experimental measurements and
theoretical calculations are synergistically combined to elucidate quantitative
thermochemical data and dynamical and structural information regarding
noncovalent interactions and metal-ligand bonds of biological relevance. Guided
ion beam tandem mass spectrometry (GIBMS) experiments are employed to probe the
energy-resolved collision-induced dissociation (CID) behavior of the species of
interest. Electronic structure calculations characterize the structures and
energetics of the species of interest and their CID pathways. Thermochemical
analysis of the experimental data are yielding energetic and structural
information on the noncovalent interactions or metal-ligand bonds that are
cleaved upon CID and on the mechanisms and energetic barrier(s) for the observed
activated dissociation pathways. Continued development of the custom-built GIBMS
instrument and associated data analysis procedures is an expected outcome of
this work that may enable future studies on increasingly complex systems.