* 1709776
* Establishing a Chemical Toolbox for Programmed Assembly of Metal Chalcogenide Nanoparticles into "Wired" Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Stephanie Brock, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2020
* USD 310,000.00

Energy is all around us, but much of it is not very useful. Scientists are
interested in ways to take wasted energy, and convert it into useful energy
supplies. Dr. Stephanie Brock is investigating how to convert plentiful solar
energy into electricity or chemical fuels. She is particularly interested in the
challenging problem of how to harvest "light". Quantum dots are very small
particles that have dimensions on the order of 1/1000th of a red blood cell and
are great at absorbing solar radiation and producing charged particles.
Accordingly, Dr. Brock is developing techniques that enable these sub-
microscopic quantum dot particles to be assembled into films and 3 dimensional
porous structures with millimeter to centimeter dimensions. Dr. Brock is
developing methods that enable quantum dots with different chemical potentials
to attach to each other, thereby creating a voltage difference that can move an
electrical current within the structure. She is also working to understand how
the chemical nature of the inter-particle bonding affects the ability to rapidly
move the charges, and how these charges can sometimes get "trapped" and resist
extraction. This fundamental knowledge helps in the design of efficient solar
cells and photochemical water-splitting (hydrogen fuel generation) systems. Dr.
Brock's research is attractive to graduate and undergraduate students alike, who
are exposed to cutting-edge science through participation in her lab. Dr. Brock
is also developing science modules aimed at middle-to-high school students to
give them hands-on experiences in the lab. She is implementing these through the
Wayne State University's GO-GIRLs outreach program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research program, Dr. Stephanie Brock of Wayne State University is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
to develop a chemical toolbox to (1) enable the rate of assembly of different
metal chalcogenide nanoparticle components to be varied. This ability may
dictate the degree of phase-segregation in multicomponent systems; (2) provide
post- and pre-assembly chemical modifications of the interfaces to facilitate
electron transport. The kinetic parameters dictating oxidative assembly of
nanoparticles (made of MQ where M = cadmium, lead, zinc; Q = sulfur, selenium,
tellurium) are studied as a function of the redox properties of Q, the
solubility of M, the crystal structure of MQ, the facet energetics and the
surface ligand group. In parallel, methods for replacement of oxidized
interfaces with metal-ion crosslinks by post-gelation oxidative addition
reactions or (pre-gelation) assembly of sulfide or halide-capped nanoparticles
via metal cations, are evaluated. The ability to control the rate of solution-
phase assembly of metal chalcogenide nanoparticles, thereby enabling
programmable assembly of disparate nanoparticle components into 2- and 3-D
"wired" architectures with specified degrees of heterogeneity, enable design of
multicomponent assemblies for applications that benefit from rapid injection of
charges over short distances (e.g., photocatalysts prepared from homogeneous
assembly of photosensitizer + catalyst) or require extraction over large
distances (e.g., bulk nanoheterojunction solar cells comprising p + n
semiconductors). Chemical principles are also employed to tune the nature of the
interparticle interfaces, thereby augmenting interparticle transport and the
overall stability of the assembly. Dr. Brock involves graduate and undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary collaborative research and modern characterization
techniques. She introduces Detroit-area adolescent girls, many of whom are
minorities, to chemistry through the GO-GIRLs outreach program.