* 1709084
* Membrane Structure Analysis by Enhanced Raman Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Jason Hafner, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2023
* USD 362,176.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Hafner at Rice develops a new way to measure the
structure of biomolecules in the membranes that surround cells. In biology, a
biomolecule's structure drives its function, so measuring structures is an
important step in understanding life at the molecular scale. Molecules that are
components of membranes are not soluble in water so it is a challenging task to
solve their structures. Hafner and his group attach these molecules to gold
nanoparticles and analyze light that is scattered from them. The nanoparticles
focus light to the molecular scale. By monitoring how light scattered, a
molecular structure can be determined. This new methodology will be applied to
open questions in understanding the function of membranes in biology, as well as
helping to understand the effects of molecular probes and drugs widely used in
chemical and biological research. Professor Hafner also works on developing
course materials on three fundamental scientific concepts behind this research:
light waves, light scattering, and molecular vibrations. The developed materials
are to be used in the high school teacher professional development programs
offered by Rice University where most teachers are coming from Houston
Independent School District (HISD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher team
develops a new method for biomembrane molecular structure analysis that they
have recently concept-proofed. Specifically, lipid membranes is applied to the
surface of gold nanorods in solution, and their surface enhanced Raman
scattering (SERS) is recorded. The electromagnetic near field of the gold
nanorods (responsible for enhancement) and the Raman scattering tensors of the
molecules of interest are calculated by the finite element method (FEM) and time
dependent density functional theory (TDDFT), respectively. Unenhanced Raman
spectra in the absence of gold nanorods are also recorded. Due to the alignment
and rapid decay of the near field enhancement, these experimental and
theoretical results are then combined through a ratiometric analysis to yield
the position and orientation of molecular constituents responsible for specific
vibrations. The researchers have recently demonstrated this by measuring the
position and orientation of tryptophan in dioleoylphosphatidylcholine lipid
membranes. The specific research objectives include: (1) Vibrational markers
will be established to further analyze lipid membrane structure as well as the
variety of lipids that can be included; (2) The effect of nanorod curvature on
the lipid membrane structure will be evaluated; (3) Photothermal heating of the
membrane due to laser excitation will be calculated based on the ratio of Stokes
and anti-Stokes Raman scattering; (4) The position of tryptophan residues in a
model alpha helix will be studied, as well as the peptide chain and the effect
on membrane structure; and (5) The membrane position and orientation of
polyunsaturated fatty acids and fluorescent membrane probes, and their impact on
membrane structure, will be determined.