* 1709282
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Acoustic Study of  Lattice Dynamics and Elastic Properties in Perovskite Dielectrics and Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Lee, Gordon College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 203,528.00

Non-technical Summary: Research teams at Gordon College and Towson University
are collaborating in this project to carry out a comprehensive study of
structural, electrical and elastic/acoustic properties of two technologically
important materials, Strontium Titanate and Potassium Tantalum Niobate, with a
focus on how their properties change when bulk (large size scales common in
everyday uses) material is progressively thinned to layers approaching atomic
scale sizes. These materials demonstrate unique and novel properties when grown
in microscopic volumes in the form of atomically thin layers. The project
enhances the knowledge base for a new generation of novel nano-electromechanical
devices that can be integrated on microchips in future electronics, including
radiofrequency and optical signal processing circuits useful for numerous
technologies serving both civil and defense sectors. This collaboration brings
together faculty and students in two predominantly undergraduate institutions to
engage in experimental and theoretical research at the frontiers of materials
physics. Through the integration of research and education, the proposed effort
positively impacts the educational experience of undergraduate physics students
at both institutions and graduate students in the Applied Physics Master?s
program at Towson University. Students are expected to participate in the
planning, developing equipment and theoretical models, performing measurements
and computer simulations, presenting results of their work at scientific
conferences and publishing in scientific journals. Such educational experiences
integrated with research are key to developing a globally competent science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) work
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description. This project investigates
spontaneous and electric-field induced phase transitions in perovskites by using
a combination of ultrasound pulse-echo probing of acoustic phonons, along with
dielectric and Raman spectroscopies. The experimental studies are complemented
by theoretical inquiry using first principle density functional theory
calculations and Monte Carlo-based simulations of phonon transport.
Investigations begin by carefully extending models for single crystals of
ferroelectric potassium tantalum niobate to para-electric strontium titanate
single crystals. Models are then further developed for reduced-dimensional
systems, including strontium titanate films and microbridge devices. The thin
film samples for the experiments are grown by pulsed laser deposition which
allows for the careful manipulation of a wide range of parameters that can be
used to control the films strain state, stoichiometry and defect structure. The
structural quality of the films is monitored using X-ray diffraction, while the
films morphology and defect structure studies are performed by scanning electron
microscopy and atomic force microscopy. The cation stoichiometry is determined
using electron energy dispersive spectroscopy. The reduced dimensionality
effects are explored in connection with lattice mismatch strain, which is
engineered by choosing substrates that cause bi-axial tensile or compressive
stresses. Acoustic measurements in the films are performed using specially
designed surface acoustic wave devices. In order to exclude the influence of
substrate, microbridges of free standing thin films are employed. The results of
this research open up new approaches to exploring phase transition phenomena.
Systematic investigation of ferroelectricity in thin films is of significance
for technological applications in electro-mechanical, electro-optical and
acousto-optical devices.