* 1709159
* Self-Assembly of Multinuclear Catalysts for the Direct Synthesis of Functionalized Polyolefins
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Richard Jordan, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 780,000.00

Polyethylene, a plastic that is ubiquitous in everyday life, is used in
innumerable applications ranging from packaging films and milk jugs to machine
parts and artificial joints. Polyethylene is made by linking small 2-carbon-unit
gas molecules (ethylene) together into long chains with the aid of metal
catalysts in a process known as polymerization. The research group of Professor
Richard Jordan is developing a new generation of metal catalysts that can
incorporate other kinds of small molecules into the polyethylene chains, to
produce plastics with improved properties, including increased toughness,
superior resistance to penetration by gases and chemicals, and enhanced
biodegradability. This project is contributing to the development of human
resources in science, technology, engineering and mathematics through the
education of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, undergraduates and high
school students. This project is also providing summer research opportunities to
high school students from the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) system through the
University of Chicago Collegiate Scholars Program and mentoring and other
support to CPS high school students through the Neighborhood Schools
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the chemistry of
palladium alkyl complexes with phosphine-bis-arenesulfonate ligands (OPO2-) that
self-assemble into tetrameric structures in which four (OPO-Li)PdR units are
arranged around the periphery of a cubic Li-sulfonate cage. "Pd cage" catalysts
polymerize ethylene to ultra-high-molecular-weight linear polyethylene (MW &gt;
10^6 Da) and copolymerize ethylene with vinyl fluoride with tenfold-higher
comonomer incorporation than can be achieved with mononuclear catalysts. This
research is harnessing the power of programmed molecular self-assembly to
synthesize exceptionally robust Pd cage structures that maintain their integrity
at high temperature and function as single-site polymerization catalysts. The
targets include assemblies based on OPO2- ligands that contain sulfonate groups
with enhanced basicity to strengthen the Li&amp;#9472;O interactions in the
cage, "expanded" cages that incorporate additional ions to provide supplementary
bonding interactions, "strapped" cages in which covalent links between OPO2-
ligands provide high stability, and catalysts based on Zn-phosphonate cages that
are inherently more robust than Li-sulfonate cages. The research team is
establishing the factors that control the self-assembly of cage catalysts and
the key mechanistic features of ethylene polymerization by these catalysts, and
is exploiting this knowledge to develop high-performance catalysts for
ethylene/vinyl-fluoride copolymerization.