* 1709566
* Analytical Applications of Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jon Camden, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 05/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Camden and Svarovsky of the University of Notre Dame
will undertake a study of the analytical applications of the surface-enhanced
hyper-Raman scattering (SEHRS) effect and implement a student-driven program to
monitor the concentration of uranium in ground water sources. SEHRS is a
technique provide unique information about molecules adsorbed on a surface. The
success of this work has the potential to impact a wide range of studies,
especially the geometry of a molecule adsorbed on a surface differs in complex
environments. It can also make a difference in deep-tissue imaging. Furthermore,
Professors Camden and Svarovsky and their groups also work on ways to reduce the
cost of SEHRS spectrometers, making SEHRS accessible to a wide range of
researchers and analytical problems. Students working in these two labs have a
great opportunity to learn different skills through collaboration. As a way to
engage a new and national K-12 audience in outreach efforts, Professors Camden
and Svarovsky also plan to work with the University of Notre Dame's Center for
STEM Education together and launch a new Citizen Science project called U-Watch.
The program will bring the benefits of surface-based spectroscopy research
supported by this grant to a broad audience and could identify potentially
dangerous levels of contamination, such as uranium, in ground water drinking
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, SEHRS is used to provide information
that is not available via other techniques. New methods for single-molecule
SEHRS are used to probe nanoparticle-adsorbate interactions at the level of
single molecules in complex chemical environments. SEHRS nanoparticles also
serve as a platform for near-infrared and short-wave-infrared (SWIR) (0.8-2.5
Pm) sensing, imaging, and authentication. The Notre Dame groups also plan to
develop the characterization methods needed to pursue the rational design of
SWIR tags and apply them to deep-tissue imaging studies. A comparison of SEHRS
and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) shows that SEHRS can be more
sensitive than SERS in certain situations. Lastly, they explore the potential
for hand-held, field-portable devices capable of recording SEHRS spectra with
continuous-wave lasers. Through the supported research, the groups will
demonstrate SEHRS as a powerful and practical analytical approach to
ultrasensitive detection, imaging, and the elucidation of surface structure and
environment.