* 1709428
* Protein Vesicles: Understanding Self-Assembly of Fusion Proteins into Vesicles to Engineer Structures and Biofunctional Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Julie Champion, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 393,605.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the study and development of
vesicles made from functional proteins. Vesicles are micro or nano-scale hollow
containers that can be loaded with cargo and used for drug delivery, bioimaging,
or as tiny bioreactors. Functional proteins can be therapeutic or perform
reactions, and vesicles made from these proteins gain their function. The
proposed studies are expected in developing an understanding on how the
properties of the proteins and the fabrication conditions affect the size and
structure of the formed vesicles so that one may control these properties for
each application. To demonstrate their use, vesicles will be formed from a
breast cancer binding protein and loaded with chemotherapeutic cargo and tested
for their ability to kill breast cancer cells. Overall, this research will
contribute to the development of protein vesicles for a variety of applications
that support human health and the results will be published for public
dissemination. During this work, a postdoctoral student and undergraduates will
be trained in state of the art methods that integrate materials engineering and
biology and they will be prepared for careers in engineering, biomaterials, or
drug delivery. Additionally, this award will support activities to recruit,
mentor and retain women in STEM at education levels ranging from middle school
to post-doctoral, including hands-on experiments for middle school girls in the
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the study of
fusion protein self-assembly into vesicles using techniques such as light
scattering and electron microscopy. The knowledge generated will be applied to
fine tune vesicle properties, including size and membrane structure, through
simple changes in assembly conditions. The proposed studies are expected to
produce vesicles ranging from ~100 nanometer to 2 micro meter with single or
double layer membranes while maintaining the functionality of proteins that form
the vesicle membrane and cargo loading ability. Functional application will be
demonstrated by assembling vesicles from fusion proteins containing single chain
antibody fragments that bind the Her2 receptor on breast cancer cells and carry
chemotherapeutic. The ability of these functional vesicles to specifically
target and kill Her2+ breast cancer cells will be assessed in vitro. The results
will be published for public dissemination. During this work, a postdoctoral
student and undergraduates will be trained in methods including recombinant
protein design and production, materials characterization, and cell culture
assays. They will be mentored and prepared for careers in engineering,
biomaterials, or drug delivery. Additionally, this award will support activities
to recruit and retain women in STEM at education levels ranging from middle
school to post-doctoral, including hands-on experiments for middle school girls
in the lab.