* 1709381
* Thermodynamics and kinetics of membrane protein oligomerization in bilayers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Yinan Wei, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 01/31/2022
* USD 452,850.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division funds this
work. Professor Yinan Wei from University of Kentucky investigates protein-
protein interactions in the cell membrane that lead to the assembly of
functional protein complexes. Selective-permeable membranes, which define the
boundaries of individual cells and cellular organelles, are essential for energy
production to sustain life. Membrane proteins are gates on these highly
impermeable barriers, allowing selective exchange of substances and signals
across the membrane. Understanding of the molecular recognition process leading
to membrane protein structures is essential for improved understanding of
protein evolution, function, and regulation. The aim this research is to
establish a clear picture of the complexation of one model system, a multidrug
efflux transporter, AcrB, in living cells and determine its stability in the
cell membrane. This pursuit allows graduate and undergraduate students to
acquire training in biochemistry and molecular biology research. This project
also integrates into an outreach program to introduce science and science
careers to girls ages 12-18. Dr. Wei is collaborates with the Hope Hill Youth
Service (Mt Sterling, KY), a program for girls ages 12-18, who suffer from
histories of abuse and neglect and have behavioral and emotional problems
requiring extensive treatment and therapy. The Hope Hill Youth Service does not
have STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) education and so
their students fall behind in math and science; the girls struggle to understand
the opportunities that education can afford them, lacking dreams and motivation.
The goals of these interactions are to broaden the knowledge of career
opportunities for the girls.&lt;br/&gt;  &lt;br/&gt;In this study, AcrB is used
as a model system and its oligomerization in both detergent micelles and lipid
bilayers is quantitatively characterized. The kinetic and thermodynamic aspects
of the trimer assembly process are monitored in cells and in reconstituted lipid
bilayers using an array of assays and methods developed in preliminary studies.
These include: a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based method that
is compatible with the characterization of AcrB subunit interaction in a lipid
bilayer environment, a fluorescence-based method to monitor protein unfolding,
and a disulfide-trapping based method to characterize the structure of AcrB in
the cell membrane in its native state. These assays are suitable for monitoring
and characterizing AcrB oligomerization in both detergent micelles and lipid
bilayers. Furthermore, a collection of AcrB mutants with decreased trimer
affinities have been created. The following research objectives are pursued: 1)
investigation of the process of AcrB trimer assembly in cells; 2) determination
of AcrB trimer stability in the cell membrane; and 3) characterization of AcrB
trimer dissociation in lipid bilayers. Outcomes from this project bring new
insight into the kinetics and thermodynamics of assembly of a multi-span and
multi-domain membrane protein trimer. The protocols and parameters developed in
the research provide valuable tools and benchmarks for the research community,
which lead the way to new initiatives in membrane protein research.