* 1709097
* Geometry and Topology of Convex Projective Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Samuel Ballas, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 166,761.00

Projective geometry is the geometry of perspective, whose practitioners over
time have included Greek philosopher/mathematicians studying incidence
properties of lines in the plane, Renaissance artists attempting to render more
realistic frescoes, and computer scientists pioneering computer graphics and
vision techniques. This geometry comes from projecting points in a higher
dimensional space along lines to a lower dimensional projective space. Unlike
Euclidean geometry, this geometry has no well-defined notions of distance or
angle. Its only meaningful geometric notion is incidence (for example,
intersections of lines and inclusion of points in lines). In principle, this
inability to measure distance initially seems like a drawback; however, in
practice it provides a unified framework for studying seemingly disparate and
incongruous geometries simultaneously. For example, projective space has pieces
that serve as models for the familiar Euclidean geometry, the non-Euclidean
spherical and hyperbolic geometries, and other exotic geometries, such as de
Sitter and anti de Sitter space, that are of interest in modern physics.
Recently, there has been increased interest in properly convex domains, which
are interesting pieces of projective space that share many properties with
hyperbolic space but enjoy interesting deformation properties absent in the
hyperbolic setting. A primary focus of this project is to produce more of these
properly convex examples and to understand their geometric, dynamic, and
algebraic properties in a systematic fashion. Due to built-in connections with
perspective and computer vision, many of the low dimensional examples under
study in this project can be effectively visualized and rendered with the aid of
a computer to produce vibrant dynamic graphics. This feature will allow the
involvement of students with limited mathematical background in portions of the
research as well as conveying the spirit of many of the important results to the
broader non-mathematical community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Properly convex
domains are subsets of projective space that are disjoint from a projective
hyperplane and convex in the affine space produced by removing such a hyperplane
from projective space. Hyperbolic space serves as the prime example of a
properly convex domain via the Klein model. Properly convex domains and their
quotients by discrete groups share many properties with hyperbolic space and
hyperbolic orbifolds. A main point of this proposal is to understand how
familiar concepts in hyperbolic geometry manifest themselves in properly convex
geometry. Three main aims of the project are 1) developing a properly convex
theory of Dehn surgery that can be used to produce examples of closed properly
convex manifolds from non-compact ones, 2) investigating how dynamic properties
of the fundamental group of a projective manifold manifest themselves
geometrically, in analogy with geometric finiteness for hyperbolic manifolds,
and 3) using properly convex structures to produce subgroups of the special
linear group with interesting algebraic properties (such as thinness). In
addition to the obvious potential to better understand geometric and dynamical
aspects of properly convex manifolds, this project should also yield a deeper
understanding of hyperbolic geometry by elucidating which geometric features of
hyperbolic geometry are consequences of uniform negative curvature and which are
consequences of more general geometric structure.