* 1709718
* SusChEM: Metal Organic Nanoparticles (MONPs) for Supramolecularly Assisted Covalent Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Steven Zimmerman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 961,000.00

A wide range of important organic compounds, including pharmaceutical agents,
are prepared from simpler, commercially available materials. The synthesis of
these organic compounds often takes several steps, some of which involve metal-
based catalysts. Developing catalysts that give higher yields and operate in
water reduces both the amount of volatile organic solvents used and the heavy
metal waste, thus, making these synthetic processes more sustainable. With the
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
NSF Chemistry Division, Prof. Steven C. Zimmerman at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign is developing nanoscale, polymer-based metal catalysts that
can perform such reactions in water and, because of their low toxicity, even in
human cells. Thus, a broader impact of the work is the creation of a nanoscale
robot, a "nanobot" that selectively enter certain types of cells and prepare
bioactive agents from smaller, cell-permeable, but inactive small molecules.
Another broader impact is the training of a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team at the University of
Illinois is developing new polymeric catalysts, prepared by ring-opening
metathesis polymerization, that expand the types of reactions performed.
Optimized metal-organic polymeric nanoparticles (MONPs) are designed to catalyze
the copper-assisted "click" reaction, the palladium-catalyzed Suzuki-Miyaura
coupling reaction, and the ruthenium-mediated ring-closing metathesis reaction.
The hydrophobic interior of these MONPs is designed to allow the reactions to
proceed in water at low concentrations of catalyst by taking advantage of the
hydrophobic interior of the nanoparticles. Efforts are directed toward the
preparation of MONPs that contain two different catalytic centers to allow
sequential, orthogonal processes to occur, increasing the complexity and power
of the MONP approach. Finally, an ONP that modularly binds metal catalysts using
hydrophobic binding is being pursued as a more universal, plug-and-play
strategy.