* 1709094
* High-Fidelity, High-Performance Multi-Stage Transmission Planning with Spatio-Temporal Uncertainty Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Pascal Van Hentenryck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 04/30/2019
* USD 431,175.00

The transmission system of the United States, mostly built in the 1960s and
1970s, provides the backbone infrastructure to deliver electricity with great
reliability to consumers all over the country. However, the drive towards
renewable energy, power electronics, and changes in fuel costs are fundamentally
altering the energy landscape. Significant cost and environmental benefits would
result from a holistic study of transmission planning at the national scale,
based on a high-fidelity modeling of the grid and accurate forecasting models
for renewable energy. The goal of this project is to realize a step change in
the fidelity, scalability, and performance of transmission planning systems. The
research will have scientific as well as broad societal and educational impact.
The project will also pioneer methodologies for solving important problems in
energy optimization and management, and generate both short-term and long-term
technical impacts. Moreover, the research results will be disseminated through
education initiatives. Several education plans, including promoting K-12
education and participation of female and underrepresented minority groups in
science and engineering, will be undertaken through involvement in various
initiatives at the University of Michigan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
proposes a new generation of transmission planning systems to amplify the
benefits of renewable energy, while addressing the challenges created by
increasing stochasticity and power electronics. The project relies on high-
fidelity models of the grid and novel, hierarchical predictive models for
renewable energy and substation loads that capture complex spatio-temporal
correlations that are critical in obtaining realistic characterizations of
uncertainties. The project brings together four PI and Co-PIs with their
expertise in power system optimization, uncertainty quantification, algorithm
design, and large-scale distributed computing. It proposes multi-stage
stochastic programs over various risk and robustness measures for transmission
planning and adopts a prioritization methodology to express planner preferences
as the uncertainties are being revealed. It is expected to achieve high
computational performance through the use of convex relaxations, large
neighborhood search, and parallel implementations of decomposition algorithms.
The proposed algorithms will be evaluated on real test cases offered by the
largest transmission operator in Europe, ranging from 2,000 to 20,000 buses, as
well as synthetic versions from these test cases that are adapted to the
realities of the United States.