* 1709506
* Collaborative Research: De novo Protein Constructs for Photosynthetic Energy Transduction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* William DeGrado, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Division of Chemistry, the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Physics of Living Systems in the
Division of Physics.

With this award, the three investigators, Dr. Michael J. Therien (Duke
University), Dr. William F. DeGrado (University of California at San Francisco),
and Dr. Jeffery G. Saven (University of Pennsylvania) are investigating new
approaches to design proteins that collect, store, and release energy.
Scientists are not yet able to mimic biology in creating protein-based energy
harvesting, storage, and release systems. Recent advances in protein design
enable chemists to construct large molecules that can capture and direct the
flow of charge and energy. The experimental procedures used in this effort (i)
provide new tools to build proteins having novel designed functions, and (ii)
characterize the structures and energy storage and release functions of these
proteins. This research trains graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
synthetic chemistry, protein design, protein biochemistry, and modern
computational methods. The students and fellows are also trained in techniques
to monitor fast processes that move charge and energy, especially related to
solar energy conversion. The protein design methods developed are broadly
applicable. They enable construction of new biologically-inspired systems that
carry out novel functions not seen in nature. Outreach activities of this
project introduce college and pre-college students to important new
technologies. These activities also teach skills important for future careers in
science and engineering.

Biological energy transduction relies on protein-cofactor assemblies that
possess physico-chemical complexity that far exceeds that realized to date
through molecular, supramolecular, and macromolecular design and synthesis. This
research project is undertaken to realize such complexity through "design from
scratch" strategies that exploit de novo proteins. These de novo proteins bind
abiological cofactors and elucidate fundamental design principles required for
photosynthetic energy harvesting, storage, and release. This project takes
advantage of an integrated, multi-disciplinary approach to evolve peptide-
cofactor complexes that possess sophisticated electro-optic functionality. Such
functionality encompasses cofactor design and synthesis, advanced computational
methods, protein expression and characterization and state-of-the-art pump-probe
transient optical methods. The computational methods allow the design of
proteins that bind co-factors in a precisely organized spatial arrangement.
State-of-the-art, pump-probe, transient optical methods characterize function
and reaction dynamics. Information from this study elucidates fundamental
principles required for photosynthetic energy transduction, and provide general
strategies to interrogate important protein structure-function relationships.