* 1709222
* Properties and applications of microcrystalline organic thin films
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Barry Rand, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 368,500.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;With some organic electronic
devices now firmly established in the marketplace, it is becoming clear that
organic electronics has the capacity to positively influence our technological
ecosystem. However, the disordered films used in today's organic electronic
devices hold the U.S. back in science and industry. Studies on single crystals
of conjugated organic molecules have been critical in driving our understanding
and testing the limits of various properties of organic semiconductors, such as
mobility, exciton diffusion length, etc. Despite the very promising implications
of such studies, highly disordered amorphous films are currently used and
studied for applications, because these disordered films can be reproducibly
formed into pinhole free films. Crystalline heterojunctions promise combined
high exciton diffusion lengths and carrier mobilities and, when used in vertical
heterojunction devices, crystalline films can dramatically expand the
application domain of organic electronics. This project will 1) enable important
technological and industrial breakthroughs in organic electronic devices, and 2)
strengthen technological leadership of the U.S. and prepare the next generation
of STEM graduates, including women and underrepresented groups, to follow a STEM
career. The PI will engage with the public and students, and is particularly
involved in active learning activities to establish role models across
generational gaps.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will study organic
semiconductor films and heterojunctions with crystal domain sizes of up to 1 mm,
very ordered when compared to amorphous or nanocrystalline films employed today.
Notably, this will be accomplished while still maintaining a low surface
roughness and pinhole free coverage. The fact that organic single crystals
reveal highly attractive properties with respect to disordered films means that
organic semiconductors hold significantly more promise than what can be realized
with the disordered films of today. This is in terms of charge and exciton
transport, central to the operation of organic electronic devices. Charge
carrier mobility is up to two orders of magnitude more in crystals compared to
disordered films (up to 20 vs. 0.1-1 cm2/Vs) along with evidence of band
transport, whereas exciton diffusion lengths are up to 2 microns vs. 5-30 nm.
These large differences between disordered films and single crystals are thought
to source from grain boundaries and structural disorder. Two scientific goals
that will allow for future applications are: 1) demonstrate high-performance
crystalline heterojunction solar cells with greatly reduced energy losses; 2)
unveil the role of grain boundaries on exciton and charge transport.