* 1709275
* OP: Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Synthesis, Characterization and Modeling of Rationally Designed Plasmonic Materials and Architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Philip Rack, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 331,153.00

Nontechnical Description: This collaborative and interdisciplinary project
brings together both experimentalists and theorists to explore advanced optical
materials and devices. This is accomplished using new materials processing
methods, advanced characterization techniques, and state-of-the-art
theoretical/computational models. The materials and devices have practical
applications such as improved solar energy conversion, chemical sensors, and
faster as well as higher data storage capacity for computing. The project
explores new material combinations and architectures to optimize the way
different frequencies of light can be harnessed and manipulated. Advanced
materials processing methods are developed to create complex two-dimensional and
three-dimensional arrangements of these optical materials. One goal of the
project is to train both graduate and undergraduate students to function in a
collaborative and interdisciplinary environment. To accomplish this, the
graduate students work closely with the collaborating institutions which cross-
cut several research areas: materials synthesis (materials science and
engineering), materials characterization (chemistry), and theory/simulation
(chemistry and applied mathematics). Undergraduate students are impacted by the
development of a new multi-institutional and interdisciplinary design project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The overarching goal of this
activity is to study new plasmonic materials and architectures for advanced
optical and metamaterial concepts with a broad spectral tunability across the
visible and near-IR. This goal is realized via the execution of three
overarching objectives. The first objective comprises a systematic study of the
synthesis, characterization, and theory/modeling of Au-Al, Ag-Al binary, and Au-
Ag-Al ternary alloys with the goal of correlating the materials nanostructure to
the fundamental optical properties and full plasmonic spectrum. The second
objective aims to rationally design, synthesize, and characterize innovative 2D
plasmonic nanoarchitectures that incorporate multi-material dimer/oligomer
systems, templated substrates that induce asymmetric dielectric coupling, and
advanced lithographic/focused ion beam nanomachining for pushing the limits of
small size/narrow gaps. The third objective seeks understanding of the far- and
near-field optical properties of new 3D plasmonic nanoarchitectures synthesized
via focused electron beam induced processing. These objectives are accomplished
via a highly collaborative and multi-disciplinary approach which brings together
distinctive expertise in the areas of thin film and nanoscale synthesis and
characterization, optical and electron-beam plasmon spectroscopy, and advanced
theory/simulation of optical- and electron-induced localized surface plasmon
resonance phenomena. The multidisciplinary program provides a unique learning
experience for both undergraduate and graduate student participants.
Additionally, a new multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional design project
extends this experience to other undergraduate students at all three
participating institutions.