* 1709005
* Optical Excitations and Applications in Novel Organic Macromolecular Aggregates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2020
* USD 290,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of organic polymeric
materials for optical and electronic applications has shown great progress in
the last decade. However, there are scientific questions which still remain
regarding their fundamental optical properties. There is a need for further
scientific investigations which will allow scientists to tailor the structures
of polymers in order to achieve better optical and electronic effects. In this
project the PI will carry out experiments with two types of organic polymeric
materials. In order to examine the optical properties of these two types of
organic polymers advanced specialized laser spectroscopic measurements will be
carried out. These laser experiments will be conducted so as to determine how
changes in the polymeric structure affect their optical properties. Ultimately,
the results of these optical experiments will be utilized to design new organic
polymeric materials for enhanced optical applications. This research project
will also promote scientific education for high school students in the
surrounding areas of southeast Michigan as well as facilitating the
participation and training of undergraduate students from the University of
Michigan and other undergraduate institutions with diverse backgrounds. Among
the goals and impacts of this research project will be the identification of
specific properties leading to improved polymeric materials for potential
optical applications, as well as an increase in the diversity of students
trained in science or engineering related to polymer
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic conjugated polymers and macromolecular aggregates
are now promising candidates for many electronic and optical applications. In
order to further understand the fundamental structure-function relationships in
macromolecular materials one must probe the dynamics of excitations. In the
proposed studies the PI will investigate the optical excitations of new organic
polymers and macromolecular ladder-type systems. Measurements of time-resolved
and nonlinear optical properties will be carried out in these materials in order
to provide new structure-function relationships to further design superior
materials. Measurements in solution as well as in the solid state will be
carried out on the new macromolecular materials. The effects of energy transfer,
charge transfer and exciton diffusion will be probed with time-resolved
fluorescence and transient absorption experiments in solution and in solid thin
films. The results of the time-resolved measurements will be utilized to design
new materials with better optical properties for nonlinear optical applications.
This investigation will facilitate the progress in scientific training of high
school students as well as undergraduate and graduate students. The
investigation will also enhance the participation of women and minority
scientists in the area of polymer physics and materials science with activities
related to increasing the diversity of faculty in this area of research.