* 1709208
* Amphiphilic Peptide Nucleic Acids as Biostable Programmable Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Jennifer Heemstra, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/28/2018
* USD 130,001.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to University of Utah is for exploration of new biomimetic
materials that can be used for applications in the detection of drugs and
toxins, or for the controlled delivery of therapeutics. Nucleic acids provide
exceptionally information-rich architectures, and this capability can be
harnessed for a variety of applications in biotechnology. However, the molecules
typically used in these applications are not suitable for use in biological
environments, as they are rapidly degraded by enzymes. This proposal will
explore non-natural nucleic acids that are not degraded in biological
environments. Importantly, these nucleic acids can also be functionalized to
impart a diverse range of chemical properties. In the proposed research, the
modulation of these properties will be explored to control formation and
disruption of nanoscale assemblies, which is anticipated to enable controlled
binding and release of small guest molecules such as therapeutics. This research
project will span the fields of materials science, chemistry, and molecular
biology, providing undergraduate and graduate students with a highly
interdisciplinary training experience involving the use of cutting edge
techniques. This project will also contribute to public scientific literacy
through a blog project implemented in a course taught by the PI, as well as
through the PI's participation as a judge and student mentor for the high school
International Science Fair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This research
project will explore amphiphilic peptide nucleic acids (PNA) as a new class of
programmable materials capable of stimuli-responsive assembly, disassembly, and
guest release. PNA is an artificial nucleic acid having unique physicochemical
properties, which can largely be attributed to the fact that it has an achiral,
peptide-like backbone in place of the sugar-phosphate backbone found in native
nucleic acids. Specifically, PNA is not degraded by nucleases or proteases, and
exhibits increased binding affinity with DNA and RNA. Additionally, PNA can be
synthesized having a functionally diverse array of side chains located at
sequence-defined positions along the backbone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesis
and exploration of amphiphilic PNA strands in which side chains are
strategically located to enable phase-driven self-assembly into micellar
architectures will be studied. Specifically, the project will (1) establish
design rules for the assembly and guest binding properties of amphiphilic PNA
sequences; (2) evaluate disassembly and guest release from PNA micelles in
response to small-molecule and nucleic acid targets; (3) explore stimuli-
responsive assembly of PNA amphiphiles to promote small-molecule release. The
broader impacts of the proposed research include activities aimed at improving
undergraduate education and public scientific literacy, and the potential to
benefit public health through the future development of improved diagnostics and
drug delivery platforms.