* 1709051
* Understanding Mechano-electrochemical Cycling of Si Electrode Composites Across Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Rouzbeh Shahsavari, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2021
* USD 320,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award is a collaboration between the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation. It supports computational research and education that includes
developing computer simulation tools and applying them to advance understanding
of battery electrode material performance. Material failures are serious
roadblocks to the development of high performance energy storage materials,
which are vital to many applications, such as electric cars and delivering
renewable energy. The PI aims to use computers to simulate the chemistry and
mechanics of candidate electrode materials in a lithium-ion battery. The PI will
investigate proposed high-performance electrode materials, particularly one made
of copper coated silicon on a scaffold made of carbon. The simulations will show
how charging and discharging cycles affect the failure of the electrode
material. The research activities will not only advance the scientific knowledge
on the material structure changes and the dynamics of lithium ions of silicon-
based electrode composites, but also will provide a Mutliscale Modeling Toolbox
that describes physics and chemistry that spans from processes on the scale of
atoms to macroscopic scales. The computational toolbox can be extended to
systems beyond silicon and lithium technology such as newly developed magnesium
and lithium air batteries. This approach has impact on enhancing the performance
of energy storage materials. This project also supports educational activities
that will employ the latest methods of emerging media to recruit and retain
underrepresented students and women to engineering through professional programs
at Rice University, and provide outreach to local high school teachers in
Houston to help enrich the science content and to introduce pedagogical methods
with lesson plans to nurture future generations.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award is a collaboration between the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation. It supports computational research and education to develop a
reactive molecular-dynamics-based multiscale simulation framework that enables
the application of fundamental material science to tackle the pressing global
needs for high performance energy storage materials. These needs include high
capacity, rate, and cycle life rechargeable batteries. The overarching goal is
to study how the intrinsic coupling between mechanics and electrochemistry
during cycling impact the failure and performance of silicon-based electrode
composites of lithium-ion batteries. Copper coated silicon deposited onto a 3D
carbon scaffold will be a focus of this modeling effort. A novel computational
protocol will be developed to enable understanding of the synergistic behavior
of material characteristics and atomistic processes across multiple length
scales and how it affects the performance of silicon-based electrodes. The
proposed electrode composite will provide a 3D template, which exhibits improved
service life and performance as well as lightweight and multifunctional
features. The key hypotheses of this project are: 1) there exists two or more
phase boundaries in the composite silicon electrodes that co-evolve, influence
each other, and trigger defects and mismatched strains, and 2) a memory effect
in the topology of the active material controls the system to retrace a similar
electrochemical pathway during cycling, leading to voltage hysteresis. By
sequentially monitoring relithiation and delithiation processes, the PI aims to
unravel a series of complicated dynamic atomistic mechanisms at unprecedented
length scales, including aggregation and segregation pathways of residual
silicon topology, and formation of voltage hysteresis. The work is aimed to
provide fundamental insights and to introducing new design concepts and
principles for de novo computational-driven fabrication of lightweight and high
performance rechargeable batteries, which may lead to a new line of research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.