* 1709472
* Support of 14th Annual Conference on the Foundations of Nanoscience (FNANO 2017)
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This grant is for travel support for students (undergrad, grad and postdoc)
giving accepted posters or talks at the Conference on Foundations of Nanoscience
(FNANO17), Snowbird, Utah from April 10-13, 2017. This grant will provide a
substantial multidisciplinary impact to nanoscience, biochemistry and chemistry,
which will profit from the introduction of key methodologies derived from
mainstream computer science, such as mathematical modeling, software
engineering, algorithms and modular design methodologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FNANO conference was established by the International
Society for Nanoscale Science, Computation, and Engineering in 2004 as a venue
for the wide range of researchers interested in various aspects of self-assembly
as it relates to nanoscience and nanotechnology. FNANO17 will have a mixture of
invited talks by distinguished nanoscientists as well as contributed posters and
open discussion periods to enhance attendee interaction with the goal of
creating vibrant intellectual community in the area of self-assembly. The
meeting features 12 tracks covering recent work in different types of self-
assembled architectures and devices, at scales ranging from nano-scale to meso-
scale. Methodologies include both experimental as well as theoretical
approaches. The conference spans traditional disciplines including chemistry,
biochemistry, physics, computer science, mathematics, and various engineering
disciplines. The emphasis is on basic, rather than applied research. Last year's
meeting attracted 190 registered participants