* 1709894
* Kahler Manifolds with Curvature Lower Bound
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Man Chun Lee, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2021
* USD 163,209.00

Complex numbers are everywhere in modern mathematics, from solving quadratic
equations, to modeling fluid flow, to probing the spaces hidden in the curled-up
dimensions of string theory. The natural domains of complex-number-valued
functions are complex manifolds, including the n-dimensional complex Euclidean
space. This project concerns the relationship between the geometry of a natural
class of complex manifolds, called Kahler manifolds, and the behavior of complex
functions on these manifolds. One of the most beautiful results in complex
analysis (the study of complex-valued functions) is the uniformization theorem,
which says that one-dimensional complex manifolds have essentially only three
shapes: a sphere, a disc, or a plane, corresponding to positive, negative, or
zero curvature. A higher-dimensional version of uniformization has long eluded
mathematicians; for example, it is conjectured that if an open n-dimensional
complex manifold has positive curvature then it is a copy of complex n-space.
The PI will address this long-standing conjecture. The resulting research, which
lies at the intersection of many branches of mathematics, will establish new and
interesting connections between analysis, algebra, differential geometry and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the PI will work on the
uniformization conjecture of Yau, which states that a complete noncompact Kahler
manifold with positive bisectional curvature is biholomorphic to complex
n-space. So far there have been numerous attempts at this conjecture, starting
with Mok-Siu-Yau in early 1980s. Along with the uniformization conjecture, the
PI will also address related problems such as Siu's conjecture on Stein-ness of
complete noncompact Kahler manifolds with positive bisectional curvature. As in
the PI's earlier work, the Gromov-Hausdorff convergence theory will serve as an
important tool to study these conjectures. The PI will also study the Gromov-
Hausdorff limit of Kahler manifolds with curvature lower bound (e.g., the
degeneration of the complex structure). In some sense, this is a generalization
of the breakthrough result of Donaldson-Sun on Kahler manifolds. The expectation
is that the limit space should carry a natural complex analytic structure.