* 1709290
* Correlating structural heterogeneity to deformation in metallic glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jinwoo Hwang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated
experimental and computational study of structure-property relationship of
metallic glasses (MGs). Glasses are ubiquitous in nature, and many of them have
superior properties (much better than crystals) that can be utilized for
important applications. For example, metallic glasses (MGs) are multi-component
metallic alloys with glassy (disordered) atomic structure, and their excellent
properties, including high strength and elastic energy, have shown great
promises for novel structural applications. However, such applications are
currently limited by the poor ductility of MGs. To understand the deformation
behavior of MGs, it is required to understand their atomic structure and how
structural heterogeneities at different length scales influence the way they
plastically deform. Using a unique combination of advanced electron microscopy
and mesoscale computer simulation, the PIs will investigate how the local atomic
ordering that is inherited from processing of the MGs affects their important
mechanical properties, and seek opportunities to improve MG ductility by
engineering structural heterogeneities at the nanoscale through adjusting alloy
composition and heat treatment. The PIs will use electron microscopy techniques
for the educational component of this award to introduce science and engineering
of MGs to K12 students and teachers, including students with disabilities, and
to motivate them to choose science and engineering as their college major and to
pursue their careers in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated experimental and
computational study of the correlation between nanoscale structural
heterogeneities and deformation behavior of metallic glasses (MGs). In
particular, the PIs will use nanodiffraction combined with two advanced analysis
methods (fluctuation microscopy and angular correlation function) to reveal the
details of medium range (nanoscale) atomic orders (MROs) in MGs, including their
type, size, volume fraction, and distribution, at an unprecedented quantitative
level. These structural details will be characterized as function of composition
and thermal history of the MGs and correlated to their deformation behavior. The
PIs will then incorporate the experimentally determined MRO information into
mesoscale computer simulations based on a heterogeneously randomized shear
transformation zone (STZ) model to establish new understanding on how the MROs
affect shear banding and overall deformation. The possible connection between
MRO and STZs will be investigated by first assuming a set of deformation rules
in the simulations according to the detailed MRO structures revealed by the
nanodiffraction, and then matching the simulation results (including overall
ductility and shear banding patterns) to the experimental observations. Such a
fully integrated experimental and computational study will provide important
insights into how the nanoscale structural heterogeneity affects STZ activation
and the overall deformation. &lt;br/&gt;Through this award the PIs will probe
nanoscale structural heterogeneities in MGs beyond the limits of the
conventional characterization methods, and reveal important connections among
composition, thermal history, MRO, and mechanical properties. Simulations
incorporating the experimentally determined structural heterogeneity will offer
new insights into how structural heterogeneities at the nanoscale in MGs affect
their overall deformation behavior beyond the spatial and temporal limits of
previous simulations. This award will also provide insights into how the
nanoscale structural heterogeneity is related to the previously suggested
plasticity carriers and structural defects in MGs, such as STZ, free volume
distribution, and the recently suggested geometrically unfavored motifs. The new
structure-property relationship established will provide new possibilities in
designing MGs with enhanced mechanical properties (in particular, ductility) by
tuning the nanoscale structural heterogeneities.