* 1709148
* RUI: Investigations of the cybotactic nematic phase in bent-core liquid crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Eric Scharrer, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 124,245.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystal displays (LCD) are found in
devices such as cell phones and television and computer screens. These devices
are constructed using compounds that exhibit a liquid crystal phase. Molecules
in this phase can be reoriented in the presence of an electric field, which
changes their optical properties. With support from this grant by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program compounds are prepared and studied that
exhibit a unique type of liquid crystal phase in which the molecules can
potentially undergo faster reorientation. This could lead to faster liquid
crystal displays, which would improve the optical quality of the devices, and
lower the amount of energy consumed by the devices. Undergraduate students at
the University of Puget Sound are directly involved in all aspects of the NSF-
funded research. Participation in research offers an excellent opportunity for
students to enhance their critical thinking skills. These experiences provide
students with strong technical training that will serve them well as they enter
the workforce in a scientific field or pursue graduate studies in Chemistry or a
related area. At the University of Puget Sound, 57% of the students are women,
and 25% of the students identify as students of color. This support from NSF
helps the PI to provide research opportunities to students from groups who are
typically underrepresented in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;There has been intense interest in the biaxial nematic phase
(Nb) since it was reported in high melting bent-core compounds; liquid crystal
displays fabricated using this phase have the potential to undergo faster
electro-optic switching. However, there is controversy as to whether this phase
is truly a biaxial nematic phase; recent evidence suggests the phase consists of
layered (smectic) domains (cybotactic clusters) that show nematic order only
across larger length scales. This grant from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program supports the synthesis of a variety of oxadiazole-based
compounds, and analysis of their liquid crystalline behavior. These studies
provide critical insight into how various structural factors affect the
stability and nature of the nematic phase in bent-core compounds. The
preparation of series of compounds with 1) various lateral groups, 2) highly
polar substituents, and 3) amide linkages allow the PI and his students to
generate structure-property relationships, with the intention to learn what
structural features yield a nematic phase with a low onset temperature.
Synthesis of the target compounds and initial analysis of phase behavior (using
polarizing microscopy and differential scanning calorimetry) are carried out at
the University of Puget Sound. Collaborators of the PI study the compounds by
X-ray diffraction, which provides detailed information about the molecular
organization within the nematic phase. They also carry out electro-optic
experiments on the derivatives with highly polar groups as these are candidates
for ferroelectric switching. Having derivatives with low temperature nematic
phases would facilitate both fundamental study by physicists and investigation
of possible applications. This support from NSF helps the PI to provide research
opportunities to undergraduate students from groups who are typically
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;