* 1709136
* Confined and Directed Polymer Crystallization at Curved Liquid/Liquid Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2021
* USD 548,166.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intriguing geometrical shapes of
familiar crystals such as snowflakes and diamond are dictated by regular
molecular packing. The smallest unit of the crystal, the unit cell, repeats
itself in straight lines across three dimensions to grow these stunning objects.
But what if the available space for the crystals to form is non-flat, i.e.
curved? How could the unit cells be accommodated and how will the structure be
distorted? The molecules have to make turns as they pack into the crystalline
lattice, and the shape and properties of the resultant crystals will vary. This
project is concerned with such a scenario, and aims to understand the
fundamentals on how polymer crystals are formed in a very small and curved
space. The PI has recently shown that hollow crystal capsules can be formed by
crystallizing polymers on the surface of liquid droplets. These unique capsules
are termed "crystalsomes". In this project, crystallization from solution will
be conducted in small liquid droplets. Crystallization conditions and the
molecular structure of the polymers will be systematically varied to control the
shape and size of the crystalsomes, whose structure will be studied using a
number of advanced instrumental techniques. It is anticipated that well-
controlled crystalsomes may find applications in the fields of nanomotors, drug
delivery and gene therapeutics. The educational component of the proposal
includes: (1) Developing two class modules which will be used in an Advanced
Polymer Characterization course; (2) Mentoring graduate and undergraduate
students; (3) Involving high school students and teachers, particularly from
under-represented populations, in the proposed research activities; and (4)
Engaging in local outreach activities to enhance broader interest in science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystallization is a ubiquitous self-assembly process in
nature. By definition, crystallization implies that a unit cell self-repeats in
a three-dimensional (3D) lattice following translational symmetry. A curved
space, on the other hand, is intrinsically incommensurate with 3D translational
symmetry. Recently, the PI's group observed a unique type of crystalline
morphology in a miniemulsion system. Polymer crystallization was found to be
confined within and directed by the curved liquid/liquid interface. Polymer
single crystal-like capsules were obtained and the structure mimics the familiar
polymersomes. The term "crystalsome" was coined to describe this unique
structure, and the goal of the proposed work is to systematically investigate
the structure and crystallization behavior of these peculiar crystalsomes. The
specific aims of the proposal are to understand 1) the single-crystal growth
mechanism in miniemulsion-solution crystallization systems, and 2) the crystal
structure and chain packing in these curved crystalsomes. In this project, a
variety of tailor-designed crystalsomes will be fabricated using the novel
miniemulsion solution crystallization method. The crystalline morphology and
structure of these crystalsomes will be systematically investigated using X-ray
scattering, differential scanning calorimetry, electron microscopy, and scanning
probe microscopy. It is anticipated that this project will lead to clearer
understanding of the mechanism of polymer crystallization at nanosized and
curved liquid/liquid interfaces.