* 1709479
* Minority and Majority Charge Carriers in Organic-Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Bjorn Lussem, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,265.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Organic Field-Effect Transistors
(OFETs) are a key technology for flexible and low-cost electronics used e.g. for
wearable electronics or flexible displays. However, OFETs are facing severe
obstacles that delay their commer-cialization. Doping of organic semiconductors
opens a new perspective on the OFET technology. This additional degree of
freedom allows to realize new device concepts and to overcome current
limitations of the OFET tech-nology. To take full advantage of the benefits of
doping for OFETs, current doping ratios in the range of 0.1-1% have to be
reduced significantly. The project addresses this challenge. Doping processes
will be optimized to re-duce the doping level into the sub-100 ppm range. At
these ultra-low doping concentrations, the influence of dop-ing on transistor
behavior will be studied thoroughly: a) A quantitative model will be developed
to describe charge carrier accumulation and depletion in doped organic
transistors; b) Generation of minority charge carriers at ul-tralow doping
concentrations will be studied; c) A new device concept - the organic tunnel
field-effect transistor - will be realized, and its potential will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;To broaden the impact of the project, additional measures
will be taken to increase the participation of minority students. Summer
projects will be offered, which will provide undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups with the opportunity to learn about experimental
research and to inform them about potential choices for graduate school.
Furthermore, research projects will be offered to local high-school students
through the college credit plus program, and graduate students will be trained
in a highly interdisciplinary field.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Doping
organic semiconductors provides a new dimension in the design of OFETs and bears
the potential of ena-bling new device concepts with increased performance. In
light of these prospects, the research goal of this project is to study the
influence of doping on OFETs and to provide an improved understanding of
majority and minority charge carrier generation and recombination in doped
OFETs. &lt;br/&gt;To reach this aim, the following objectives are pursued: a) to
develop a consistent and experimentally validated model describing majority
charge carrier accumulation and depletion in doped organic transistors; b) to
study mi-nority charge carrier dynamics in doped organic transistors and clarify
the mechanism of minority charge carrier generation and recombination; and c) to
leverage on the potential of doping and realize vertical organic tunnel field-
effect transistors (VOTFETs).&lt;br/&gt;Doping organic transistors necessitates
the use of much lower doping concentrations as commonly used in organic devices.
In this project, a rotating shutter system capable of controlling doping
concentrations in the sub 100 ppm regime is introduced, which opens a new regime
of doping. The influence of doping on the flatband, threshold, and pinch-off
voltage at these ultra-low doping concentrations is studied by capacitance vs.
voltage measurements, photoelectron spectroscopy, and transistor
characterization. Minority charge carrier generation is studied in organ-ic
metal-oxide-semiconductor structures and organic transistors, whereas the
lifetime and diffusion length of mi-nority charge carriers are characterized in
p-n-i-p structures. The operation mechanism of VOTFETs will be stud-ied by
systematic device variations. In particular, the tunnel injection mechanism will
be validated by an increase in the thickness of the intrinsic semiconductor
layer.&lt;br/&gt;These experiments have the potential to advance the knowledge
in the field: a) The mechanism of minority charge carrier generation will be
clarified; b) An analytical model describing the influence of the flatband
voltage on the threshold and pinch-off voltage will be tested; c) A detailed
understanding of minority charge carrier diffusion will be developed and it will
be studied how the lifetime of minority charge carriers depends on the doping
con-centration and temperature; d) A new analytical solution describing current
saturation in doped OFETs will be verified.