* 1709975
* RUI:  Using graph theory measures to probe oxygen vacancy and proton conduction in perovskites and double perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Maria Gomez, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2021
* USD 201,333.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award, which supports
theoretical research and education on the conduction properties of materials
used in fuel- and solar cells. Limitations in the supply of fossil fuels,
environmental considerations, and the relative inefficiency of burning fuel to
produce electricity have sparked considerable efforts in developing alternative
sources of energy. Combustion is inherently inefficient due to the number of
energy transfer steps. Fuel cells avoid the entire combustion process by
directly converting chemical energy into electricity, significantly increasing
efficiency. Solar cells directly convert light energy into electrical energy
and, while not as efficient as fuel cells, they make use of a renewable
resource. Both processes emit significantly fewer pollutants than combustion and
reduce dependence on petroleum products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A solid oxide
fuel cell is comprised of two electron-conductive surfaces (electrodes)
sandwiching a conductor (electrolyte) of ions. Electricity production is
substantially determined by how fast the ions move through the electrolyte. In
solar cells, electricity production is limited by missing oxygen atoms in the
material, which comprise mobile atom-lattice defects. Overall, understanding ion
or ion-defect motion through a material is important for optimizing the
performance of these devices. This project will clarify how changes in structure
near an ion or vacancy influence conduction pathways. Simulations of specific
materials as well as the simulation methods developed in this project will be
useful in furthering our knowledge and understanding of conduction, and help
engineer more efficient conductors for use in fuel- and solar cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will include training undergraduate women at
Mount Holyoke College in computational chemistry, programming, and the
associated mathematics. These undergraduates will attend the annual MERCURY
conference organized for undergraduates doing research in computational
chemistry by the MERCURY consortium, of which the PI is one of the founding
members. An extension to the PI's Passport to Chemistry Adventure outreach
program targeting high-school students will be developed and sent to the eleven
western Massachusetts libraries participating in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry Division contribute funds to
this award, which supports computational research and education on oxygen-
vacancy and proton conduction in perovskites and double perovskites. Charged-
defect conduction is essential to the functioning of many devices. For example,
protons and oxygen vacancies are sometimes the main conductors in fuel-cell
membranes; oxygen-vacancy transport is essential for oxygen reduction at the
cathode of a fuel cell. Furthermore, band gaps in solar cells are sometimes
tuned by oxygen-vacancy concentration. The project will further computational
investigations to understand how charged-defect conduction paths in perovskite
and double-perovskite materials change with lattice restructuring near the
defect, as well as with charge-defect correlation during the conduction process.
The project will extend the uses of the PI's defect conduction path finding
methods and centrality measures based on time. Centrality measures will be used
to not only predict traps, key nexuses, and pathways, but to also predict
correlated motion including proton/proton correlation and proton/oxygen-vacancy
correlation in acceptor-doped barium zirconate. Complementary techniques such as
accelerated dynamics techniques on an empirical potential will be used to
determine how well graph-theory-based methods work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will include training undergraduate women at Mount Holyoke College in
computational chemistry, programming, and the associated mathematics. These
undergraduates will attend the annual MERCURY conference organized for
undergraduates doing research in computational chemistry by the MERCURY
consortium, of which the PI is one of the founding members. An extension to the
PI's Passport to Chemistry Adventure outreach program targeting high-school
students will be developed and sent to the eleven western Massachusetts
libraries participating in the program.