* 1709025
* Nanometer-Scale Piezoelectric, Flexoelectric and Piezotronic Effects from 2D Piezoelectric Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Xudong Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Piezoelectricity and flexoelectricity describe a
response of electricity to uniform and non-uniform mechanical strains,
respectively. Both effects play an important role in modern electromechanical
systems, including energy harvesters, power transformers, sensors,
microbalances, transducers, and actuators. This project aims to experimentally
test the theoretical prediction that both effects may exhibit orders of
magnitudes enhancement in very thin, on the order of 1 to 2 nanometer scale,
films. Studies are conducted on a two-dimensional (2D) sheet-like oxide
materials. In such materials, strain can impose tremendous impacts on their
properties. This project aims to study how electron movement in such 2D material
systems can be controlled by the strain. The knowledge gained from this research
has the potential to disclose new materials and design principles for next-
generation sensors, actuators, and energy harvesting devices. This project
provides opportunities for recruiting and training graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented minority groups with knowledge and experiences of
synthesizing and characterizing 2D oxide nanomaterials on the frontier of
nanoscience. The research results are utilized in outreach to high school
teachers and students. This project also creates open-access online codes for
calculating the piezotronic band diagrams, serving the international communities
of piezoelectrics, semiconductors and piezotronics.

Technical Description: Atomistic calculations have predicted an orders-of-
magnitude enhancement of the piezoelectric and flexoelectric effects in
nanometer-thick free-standing two-dimensional (2D) materials. This strong
strain-induced polarization may drastically influence their semiconductor
properties via the piezotronic effect. However, due to the lack of appropriate
material objects, experimental study of the nanometer-scale piezoelectric and
flexoelectric effects far lags behind the theoretical study. Free-standing
nanometer-thick single-crystalline ZnO nanosheets recently created by the PI's
team offer a unique platform for studying the piezoelectric, flexoelectric and
piezotronic behavior of this material. The research aims at studying these
phenomena in 2D ZnO nanosheets in order to verify the theoretical prediction of
the gigantic enhancement of both effects in the nanometer scale and to
understand how the semiconductor properties are tuned by the strain-induced
polarization in 2D nanomaterial systems. Atomic force microscopy-based
techniques, including Kelvin probe microscopy, electrostatic force microscopy,
and piezoelectric force microscopy applied on individually strained ZnO
nanosheets allow quantitative estimation of piezoelectric and flexoelectric
coefficients along different crystal orientations. In addition, the strain-
related interfacial electron energetics and electronic transport properties in
2D confined piezoelectric and semiconducting channels are explored by designing
and characterizing ZnO nanosheet-based transistors and diodes.