* 1709322
* Responsive Boron Beta-Diketonate Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Cassandra Fraser, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2022
* USD 472,000.00

Professor Cassandra L. Fraser of the University of Virginia is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to investigate the luminescent (light emitting) properties of
materials based on difluoroboron beta-diketonates, a family of organic
responsive dyes. The many different ways by which these dyes respond to changes
in their environment in solution, organized media and the solid state are being
investigated. These responsive dye materials change color when scratched,
crushed or smeared, and can self-erase with time. As such, they can find use as
sensors, optical memory materials, security inks, intelligence contexts,
pigments for art and other products. Students from diverse backgrounds obtain
multifaceted training in a multidisciplinary environment, engage with a network
of local, national and international collaborators and learn science
communication skills. Outreach towards K-12 schools is established through ties
to a local high school science teacher. An interdisciplinary "Real World
Chemistry Lab" is under development to engage students, faculty and the
community in chemistry and materials related issues relevant to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to explore
responsive properties of difluoroboron beta-diketonate and bdk dyes in different
environments and to consider ways to harness these properties for applications.
Informed by computation, this is accomplished by preparing material sets
designed to modulate luminescence properties in solution, nanoscale lipid
assemblies and molecular solids. Dyes with donor-acceptor substituents,
molecular rotors, lipids and other organizing groups are synthesized. Optical
properties (emission, lifetime, quantum yield, ultrafast photoluminescence
decay) are measured in solution and compared to computed spectra and frontier
molecular orbitals. Solvatochromic and viscochromic effects are probed, relevant
to investigations with liposomes, membranes and mechanistic probe development.
Aggregation induced emission studies characterize the transition from solution
to the solid state, whereas dye/polymer blends probe solid-state solvatochromism
(dielectric, polar dopants, dye-dye interactions), rigidochromic effects
(polymer glass transition temperature, crystallinity), and ML mechanisms, and
are readily processable for potential uses. Powder and single crystal XRD
provide information about order, dye-dye interactions, and molecular structure,
whereas AFM reveals crystallinity and thin film morphologies in molecular
solids. Dye assemblies are modeled computationally. Super cooled liquids are
investigated by DSC, and mechanochromic properties of dyes are studied for thin
films on weigh paper and glass along with new substrates with promising
behaviors. A laptop/RGB camera imaging system will characterize dynamic optical
effects such as ML recovery, supercooled liquid crystallization, and other
luminescence changes in films and assemblies. The expected outcomes of this
research are greater fundamental understanding of boron and diketone dye
properties in solution, organized lipid media and the solid state. This will
lead to more rational design of stimuli responsive, luminescent boron and
diketone materials for imaging, sensing and detection applications.