* 1709371
* Guiding Polymer Assembly with Molecular Architecture
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Javid Rzayev, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Synthetic chemists have long striven to mimic nature's ability to construct
large and complex aggregates and molecular machinery that perform critical
functions in the body by spontaneous association of small, well-defined building
blocks such as proteins. Inspired by this biological analogy, this research
project aims to develop a new class of fully synthetic polymer molecules with
brush-like architecture that provides three-dimensional control over the shape
of the molecules and their interactions to guide the biomimetic molecular
organization. Such highly tunable molecular building blocks will be prepared by
newly developed synthetic chemistry methods and studied by a variety of
techniques for the formation of advanced materials. These materials will be
relevant to water filtration membranes, uniform biomimetic vesicles, and
lightweight nanocomposites, for a variety of energy and health related
applications. The planned research activities will advance the current
understanding of molecular assembly, allow for unprecedented levels of
biomimicry, and offer potentially new avenues for the fabrication of high-value
nanomaterials. The scientific aspects of the proposed research program will be
integrated with broader outreach and educational initiatives aimed at improving
science/technology/engineering/mathematics (STEM) education and developing a
competitive STEM workforce through teacher professional development and graduate
and undergraduate student training.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The research to be conducted under this project aims to develop new modes of
polymer assembly directed by molecular architecture. Comb-like macromolecules
with a persistent shape and spatial control over compositional profile and
intermolecular interactions will be developed by introducing three new
structural motifs: bottlebrush architecture with a gradient compositional taper
along the backbone, quadruple hydrogen bonding functionalities on bottlebrush
periphery, and highly associating polyimide brushes. A combination of different
intermolecular interactions spatially guided by the bottlebrush architecture
will be used to drive the assembly of polymeric building blocks into highly
ordered nanomaterials. Three specific objectives will be pursued: (1) synthesis
and melt self-assembly of gradient bottlebrush copolymers, (2) programmed
biomimetic assembly of amphiphilic bottlebrush copolymers with strategically
directed hydrogen bonding interactions into highly uniform porous aggregates,
and (3) synthesis of polyimide nanoparticles and nanofibers by controlled
anisotropic aggregation of core-shell bottlebrush copolymers. The successful
outcome of this research program will provide access to a new molecular
architecture, design principles to control the directionality of intermolecular
interactions and molecular orientation within the self-assembled nanostructures,
and the potential fabrication of previously unattainable materials with a wide
range of properties and applications.