* 1709771
* Investigation of pathways for nanoscale high temperature stability via nano-metallic multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Andrea Hodge, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials with grain sizes below 100 nm, better known
as nanomaterials, provide many exceptional properties. For example, the strength
of a material with nanoscale microstructure can be four to five times higher
than a larger grain counterpart. However, to fully exploit their performance,
the stability of the materials with nanoscale microstructure must be maintained.
If grains grow within the microstructure, the extraordinary properties will
disappear. This proposal aims to develop a new method to fabricate nanoscale
microstructures in such a way that the final material is very stable for a wide
range of temperatures. The focus is on understanding how to maintain stability
and how to fabricate many different types of metal alloy systems. This research
is applicable to nanomaterials used in aerospace, bridges, automotive, and other
fields. Additionally, the project has broader impact in the community through
education. Specifically, this project launches the "Trojan Panda Program", which
brings hands-on science and engineering projects to low-income children in the
Los Angeles area. The graduate students involved in the project lead these
sessions to expose K-6 students to science and engineering concepts while
fostering an interest in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Though nanostructured metallic materials have many attractive properties
including high strength, they generally exhibit poor thermal stability which
severely limits their application. The complexity of synthesizing metallic
nanostructures coupled with convoluted kinetic and thermodynamic phenomena have
confined research to a few available systems. To truly exploit nanoscale
properties there is a critical need to synthesize and understand the mechanisms
that control thermal stability at the nanoscale. This research provides a novel
synthesis approach to achieve thermally stable nanocrystalline materials by
exploring the microstructural evolution from a multilayered system to an
equiaxed nanocrystalline structure. By utilizing nano metallic multilayers
(NMMs), this research allows for the synthesis of a wide range of compositions
selected from thermodynamic models, while examining intermediate microstructural
steps that can elucidate the controlling mechanisms at various temperatures. The
graduate students educated in this effort will gain international experience
through collaboration with faculty at Ruhr Universit√§t, Bochum in Germany and
their Interdisciplinary Center for Advanced Materials Simulations (ICAMS).