* 1709289
* Designing 2D nanostructured metals for age hardenability
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Bahr, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2020
* USD 301,235.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exceptional materials will,
almost by definition, be used in exceptional applications, which can include
exposure to elevated temperatures, and therefore the design of ultra-strong
metals requires consideration of the strength of materials in extreme
conditions. Bulk metals often become mechanically softer after exposure to high
temperatures; one exception to this rule is materials that are designed to age
harden. Aluminum alloys are the classical example of age hardening, where after
heating the strength of the aluminum alloy increases due to local re-
arrangements of impurity atoms that lead to an internal nanoscale network of
strengthening particles. Stronger materials benefit society on several levels;
in particular they allow us to develop lighter weight structures that carry the
same loads (i.e. more fuel efficient cars, lower materials costs in bridges, or
higher performance in aerospace applications). Ultra-strong metals often use
many closely spaced nanoscale particles within the metal to increase strength,
but often these particles grow upon exposure to high temperatures and their
relative spacing increases, which decreases strength. A new method is proposed
in this study to strengthen metals that relies upon forming layers of
alternating two different metals which creates a material with many internal
interfaces. By confining the strengthening particles to nanoscale slabs the
maximum particle growth will be constrained, and at the same time that the
particle-to-particle spacing increases the interface-to-particle spacing
decreases, resulting in retained strength and thermal stability. The students
working on this project will also design classroom materials and accompanying
lesson plans for middle school science classrooms to help teachers provide
students engaging activities that fulfill Indiana learning standards while
teaching college students how to effectively support local educational
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Annealing precipitate-strengthened metals
increases the spacing between second phase particles, and the structure will
soften. By adding second phase precipitates within layers, annealing will change
both the particle-particle and particle-interface spacing. This work will
examine the effects of two dimensional confinement on precipitation of Cr
particles within a metastable Cr-Cu system. As precipitation occurs within the
FCC layer, the nanolaminates with precipitates are expected to have a higher
strength than single phase laminates. During annealing the spacing between the
particles may increase, but the distance between the particles and the Cu-Cr
interfaces will decrease as the precipitates grow. This provides a strengthening
mechanism that should lead to increases in strength after annealing, rather than
decreasing strength after annealing, and is possible only due to the two
dimensional architecture of these materials. The system should also be resistant
to over-aging, adding a level of thermal stability not possible in 3D
architectures. However, the confined layer slip mechanism of strengthening
relies on dislocation core spreading and shear at the FCC/BCC interface; it must
also be determined if precipitates at interfaces, rather than in the layer,
accentuate or attenuate strength enhancements. The goal of this proposal is to
test and verify the possible strengthening mechanisms, determine if the
nanoscale features of planar systems provides additive synergistic strengthening
with other hardening mechanisms (i.e. are precipitation hardening, confined
layer slip, and solid solution hardening additive in 2D confined systems?), and
develop strengthening models for this 2D architecture that will predict the
strength of new metallic multilayer alloy structures that strengthen when
annealed and exhibit smaller decreases in strength at elevated temperatures than
other nano-featured metals. This work is motivated in part from recent molecular
dynamics simulations that suggested nanolaminate strength increases as
precipitate size increases, providing a new direction in strengthening metallic
systems for use under elevated temperatures and or subjected to thermal
conditions that would traditionally degrade their strength.