* 1709011
* Collaborative Research: Adsorption and Photochemical Transformations of Arsenic and Selenium Species by Natural Organic Matter-Coated Magnetic Nano-sized Iron Oxide Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Dionysios Dionysiou, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 113,995.00

This award is supported jointly by the Chemistry Division's Environmental
Chemical Sciences Program and the Environmental Engineering Program in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. The
collaborative study involves Professors Kevin E. O'Shea and Yong Cai from
Florida International University and Professor Dionysios D. Dionysiou from
University of Cincinnati. Together with their students, the faculty members seek
to develop an environmentally-friendly approach to purifying water. Water
contamination by highly toxic arsenic (As) and selenium (Se) is a serious threat
to the environment. This has affected the health of hundreds of millions of
humans globally. The approach is to coat magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles with
natural organic matter (NOM). The coated nanoparticles can strongly bind arsenic
and selenium and can convert them to less toxic forms upon solar irradiation.
The magnetic nanoparticles carrying the arsenic and selenium are later removed
from the contaminated water with a magnet. Overall, the research activities are
expected to strengthen co-operation among the local community, educational
institutes, and investigators. The&lt;br/&gt;broader societal impacts of this
research include enhancing sustainable development. The knowledge obtained from
these studies guides the development of new water treatment methodologies using
environmentally-friendly materials. Application of these insights may accelerate
the implementation of related technologies in addressing environmental problems,
as well as advance the understanding of the interaction of natural organic
matter and metals to determine their fate, transport and bioavailability. The
research plan emphasizes participation of persons from underrepresented groups.
It also includes a high school outreach program with local schools to educate
the students on water quality and water contamination
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop a fundamental
understanding of the molecular interactions of As and Se species with
fractionated NOM and the subsequent NOM-photosensitized redox transformations of
As and Se. Specific trapping or quenching agents are used to study the roles of
individual reactive oxygen species, electron transfer and energy transfer
processes in the NOM photosensitized transformations. These fundamental studies
guide the selection of the most promising NOM fractions for grafting onto the
surface of different sized magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for the process of
interest. The research is expected to aid in the development of strategies for
optimizing removal and conversion of toxic metals. Such a process is is critical
to water reuse and treatment.