* 1709304
* Controlled variations of quantum phases observed by NMR
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Stuart Brown, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 483,503.00

Non-technical abstract A wide range of phenomena of current interest in
condensed matter physics are observed in electronic materials where interactions
must be taken into account for a proper description. How those correlations are
manifest depends on multiple parameters, which can be used to tune the complex
systems. For example, the state of matter observed in very low temperatures can
be controlled by an external parameter, like magnetic field, strain or carrier
doping. Such tuning is performed to investigate new and uncharacterized states
of matter, to control the physical properties within one state or another, to
provide insight where prevailing understandings break down, and to investigate
the potential for applications through optimization. In this project, nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) is applied in versatile ways to selected systems
subjected to variable magnetic fields and uniaxial strain. The specific
objectives range from studies of the properties of otherwise inaccessible states
of matter, to clarifying questions unresolved by other means. NMR is used
because it provides a window into the local electronic environment. Both
graduate and undergraduate students are trained in cryogenic, radiofrequency,
and simulation technologies, with opportunities to train and collaborate with
research groups located at user facilities in the United States and abroad, such
as the National MagLab in Tallahassee. In addition to the transfer of science,
technology and hardware between research groups initiated by these
collaborations, the students benefit from exposure to complementary expertise by
way of interactions with scientists working in other areas, and through extended
visits to facilities.

Technical abstract This project employs solid state magnetic resonance
techniques to address questions associated with quasi-two dimensional
superconductors and frustrated quantum magnets. The approach integrates nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) with different combinations of extreme conditions,
specifically uniaxial strain, high magnetic fields, and temperatures ranging to
less than 1 K. The objective is to study the nature of induced phases and
excitations. NMR is well-suited for this task since the technique is generally
sensitive to the local magnetic and charge environment through the hyperfine
interaction and nuclear quadrupolar coupling to the electric field gradient. The
strain method has potential for broader application since it can be varied
continuously in situ; here it will be employed in a compound long-considered a
chiral p-wave superconductor. Through transport and susceptibility studies,
dramatic, non-monotonic changes in the critical temperature were demonstrated.
NMR experiments will inform as to strain-induced changes to both normal and
superconducting states, including changes to Fermi surface topology and density
of states, identification of an anticipated split superconducting transition, or
a transition between different superconducting orders. High magnetic fields will
be utilized to stabilize and study the physical properties of inhomogeneous
superconductivity in a quasi-2D compound for which where orbital suppression of
the superconducting state is avoided as a result of uncommonly large electronic
structure anisotropy.