* 1709031
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Decoupling Structure and Surface Chemistry Impacts of Carbon Nanomaterials on Environmentally Relevant Electrochemical and Biological Activity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Leanne Gilbertson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2021
* USD 334,646.00

PI: Gilbertson, Leanne / Francois Perreault &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1709031
/ 1708681 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials are engineered at the molecular
level to modify their structure and functional properties, which in turn,
enables the development of innovative nano-enabled technologies. However, these
same property manipulations have the potential to influence the adverse impacts
of these engineered nanomaterials. It is therefore, critically important to
drive the development of safe and functional nano-enabled products. This is
accomplished through the identification of relationships between material
structural features, physicochemical properties, functions, and hazards. These
established relationships can then be used to inform rational sustainable
material design. This approach will be applied in this project to carbon
nanomaterials, which are one of the leading classes of engineered nanomaterials
(based on production volumes). Their high surface area, electronic properties,
and the ability to control the surface chemistry enable numerous environmental
applications where the interactions of the carbon nanomaterial with
environmental media are used to detect, remove, or degrade contaminants, for
example. Realizing the performance of these next generation applications while
precluding negative environmental impacts necessitates a fundamental
understanding of the material properties that elicit both desirable and
undesirable responses. These research efforts will: (i) identify design
parameters for the synthesis of high performance carbon nanomaterials, taking
into account structure and surface chemistry, (ii) define mechanisms that relate
carbon nanomaterial surface chemistry, inherent structure, electrochemical and
biological activity, and (iii) establish parametric relationships that identify
how electrochemical activity can be selectively improved with minimal impact on
inherent material hazard. The broader impacts of the proposed work will
influence three key areas: (i) the development of fundamental scientific
concepts crucial to understanding phenomena driving the interactions of
nanomaterials in their applications and in the environment, (ii) accelerate the
efforts of us and others in the education of undergraduate and graduate students
throughout the scientific and engineering communities, and (iii) the
professional development of K-12 science educators through training of prepared
content modules, the success of which will be monitored through surveys to
evaluate student engagement and learning gains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific objective of the proposed project is to resolve the molecular-level
phenomena at the material surface that govern the chemical and biological
reactivity of different allotropes of carbon nanomaterials, including carbon
nanotubes and graphene. The central hypothesis is that the interplay between the
surface functional group and the host carbon material is important and will
present unique influences for different carbon nanostructures. Understanding the
role of surface chemistry on the reactivity of carbon nanomaterials with
inherently different electronic structure "semiconducting and metallic carbon
nanotubes and grapheme" can elucidate design parameters to tailor the material
functionality. The project rationale is that the performance of carbon nano-
enabled electronic and electrochemical applications can be greatly improved
through the establishment of parametric relationships that include the chemical
nature of the host carbon nanomaterial. Furthermore, to safely enable carbon
nanomaterial applications, it is necessary to gain a mechanistic understanding
of how molecular level manipulations influence their intrinsic properties. The
expected research outcomes are to (i) establish material design parameters, in
the form of parametric relationships (structure-property-function and structure-
property-hazard), that will inform the development of functional and safe carbon
nano-enabled products, (ii) provide enhanced understanding of the underlying
mechanisms of action of carbon nanomaterial electrochemical and biological
reactivity by resolving the fundamental chemical properties and interactions
with environmentally-relevant biological systems, and (iii) determine the extent
to which the established parametric relationships are modulated by environmental
conditions, providing an avenue towards determining the robustness of the
relationships established under laboratory conditions.