* 1709727
* CDS&amp;E: Space-Time Parallel Algorithms for Solving PDE-Constrained Optimization Problems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Adrian Sandu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Many fields of science and engineering, from atmospheric science to aeronautics,
and from material science to cosmology, rely on complex models built from "first
principles" in order to study the phenomena of interest; the fundamental
physical laws are often described by time-dependent partial differential
equations (PDEs). These models are implemented in complex software that performs
vast amount of computations and processes large data sets in order to simulate
the physical reality. PDE-based models typically run long times on parallel
computers, using large numbers of cores. A central problem in these fields of
science and engineering is that of optimizing the system of interest according
to specific design criteria. For example, in aeronautics, one wants not only to
simulate the flight of an airplane, but also to design the best aircraft using
shape optimization. In numerical weather prediction, one needs not only simulate
the evolution of the atmosphere, but also to optimally utilize the information
coming from satellite, aircraft, and ground based measurements in order to keep
the forecasts accurate. All these applications seek to optimize systems governed
by PDEs. This is an extremely challenging quest, since solving a PDE-constrained
optimization problem is one-two orders of magnitude costlier than the underlying
forward PDE simulation. There is considerable need for novel highly-parallel
solution methodologies. This project develops the algorithmic infrastructure to
support large-scale optimization of systems governed by time-dependent PDEs. New
ideas will be used to unravel and exploit the inherent parallelism. First, we
seek to parallelize the computations in both space and time. The space is
divided in subdomains, the time in subintervals, and sub-models on each time
subinterval and on each spatial subdomain are run concurrently on different sets
of processors. Next, to further increase computational effectiveness, we will
build surrogate models, i.e., inexpensive approximate models that capture the
main dynamical characteristics of the full PDE-based models. Parallel
construction of new surrogates is proposed using local-in-space-and-time
information. The main idea is to perform optimization using the inexpensive
surrogate models, transferring the improved design to the full PDE-model, re-
computing a surrogate for the new configuration, and iterating. Enormous
computational savings can be realized this way. Lastly, the new algorithms will
be laid on solid theoretical foundations, and will be applied to speed up the
incorporation of measurement data in a numerical weather prediction model. The
tools developed in this project will enable leap developments in many fields in
science and engineering where time-dependent PDE-constrained optimization
problems are central. Important examples include aircraft shape optimization,
seismic imaging, medical imaging, optimal control of fabrication processes, and
inverse problems. The project will directly train one doctoral student and one
postdoctoral researcher, will involve undergraduates in research, will develop
graduate level educational materials, and will attract students from under-
represented groups in parallel computing and large-scale simulations of the
physical world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the
algorithmic infrastructure to support large-scale optimization of systems
governed by time-dependent partial differential equations (PDEs). PDE
optimization problems are central to many fields in science and engineering.
They are considerably more complex, and costlier to solve, than the underlying
PDE simulations. There is considerable need for highly-parallel solution
methodologies. In order to address this, the project proposes a space-time
parallel formalism, and new reduced order modeling techniques, that have the
potential to speed up the PDE-constrained optimization solution process by
several orders of magnitude. (1) Intellectual merit: This work develops a space-
time parallel formalism for the solution of large scale PDE-constrained
optimization problems. The space is divided in subdomains, the time in
subintervals, and the forward and adjoint models are run in parallel on each
time subinterval and on each spatial subdomain. Solution continuity equations
are imposed more stringently as the optimization process advances. This work
formulates reduced-order PDE-constrained optimization problems using local-in-
space-and-time reduced order models. Such models can represent the system
dynamics much better than traditional global approaches. Moreover, both the off-
line construction of local reduced order models and the on-line reduced order
simulations can be carried out concurrently on each time subinterval and on each
spatial subdomain, resulting in considerable speed-ups. A trust region framework
is employed for provably convergent reduced order optimization algorithms. The
new methodologies are demonstrated on large atmospheric data assimilation
applications. (2) Broader impact: The tools developed in this project will
enable leap developments in many fields in science and engineering where time-
dependent PDE-constrained optimization problems are central. Important examples
include aircraft shape optimization, seismic imaging, medical imaging, optimal
control of fabrication processes, and inverse problems. One doctoral student and
one postdoctoral researcher are directly trained in PDE-constrained
optimization, reduced order modeling, high performance computing, and science
applications. Graduate level educational materials are
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.