* 1709151
* Collaborative Research:   Computational and Experimental Study of Alloying Effects on &lt;c+a&gt; slip in Mg
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* K. Sharvan Kumar, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 267,000.00

Nontechnical Summary:

By virtue of their low density, Magnesium (Mg) and Mg-rich alloys are of
significant interest in lightweight vehicle technology. However the ability to
form these materials into useful shapes at ambient temperature has been the
Achilles heel to widespread implementation. The room temperature formability and
damage tolerance are essential to making the cost of Mg alloys competitive with
those of aluminum alloys and steels. These properties rely on the ease of
plastic deformation, a phenomenon that is mediated by atomic level processes.
This research effort provides a fundamental understanding of how the atomic
processes, responsible for enhanced formability, can be facilitated through
addition of alloying elements. Furthermore, the integrated
computational/experimental methodology developed by this program is a crucial
step towards physics-based predictive alloy design compared to the traditional
empirical approach based on trial and error and can be applied to a range of
other metallic systems with similar crystal structure, such as technologically
important Ti and Zr alloys. Moreover, the education and outreach component of
this program, are aimed at (1) incorporating computational modeling in classroom
to enhance learning of difficult concepts, (2) preparing materials science and
engineering students for future careers with an increased importance of
computational modeling and (3) fostering enthusiasm about Science, Technology
Engineering and Math (STEM) fields in students, particularly from
underrepresented groups. This project has an outreach program component in
collaboration with the college of Engineering at the Ohio State University.

Technical Summary:

The overarching goal of this program is to enhance the room temperature
deformability of Mg alloys. In pursuit of the above goal, this project aims to
activate the <c+a> slip mode through favorable alloying. Electronic-structure
calculations of <c+a> dislocation cores will be used to (1) Identify solutes
that would stabilize the glissile core geometry of the <c+a> edge dislocations
(2) Study the effect of candidate elements on the stability and cross-slip rate
of <c+a> screw dislocations. Elements that promote the slip of edge segments
without compromising the motion of screw segments will be suggested as viable
candidates. The consequence of the theoretical alloying suggestions will be
evaluated experimentally by (3) making single crystals of the proposed alloys
(4) measuring stress-strain curves and (5) characterizing dislocation structure
evolution. The outcome will provide new understanding of solute effects on
easier activation of non-basal deformation modes in Mg that can then enhance
room temperature ductility of Mg alloys, thereby increasing the widespread use
of these lightweight alloys.