* 1709857
* Radiation resistance in alloys by solute-defect trapping
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Robert Averback, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials used in current nuclear
reactors cannot meet key requirements of the advanced designs proposed for
future reactors. In particular, their resistance to radiation damage is
insufficient. We investigate here one approach to increase materials radiation
resistance, where small additions of carefully selected alloying elements are
used to drastically slow down the kinetics of evolution of these materials. The
approach takes advantage of the large body of accurate data now available to the
community from high-throughput atomistic calculations to screen the most
promising alloying elements. The research proposes to employ state-of-the-art
nanoscale experiments to validate this approach in a copper matrix, for which
antimony has been pre-selected as a promising alloying element. The work also
aims at determining whether this material design approach can be combined with
another one, relying on the spontaneous formation of precipitates at the
nanoscale, thus resulting in extreme radiation resistance. The research will
provide education for two graduate students and several undergraduate students,
with an emphasis on advanced materials synthesis and characterization
techniques, and atomistic modeling. Special effort will be made to recruit
female and underrepresented minority students. The research will be integrated
with education to further develop and implement active learning
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research program examines a
strategy for designing single phase materials resistant to radiation damage by
using small alloying additions of solutes that trap point defects so as to
increase point defect mutual recombination over their elimination at sinks.
While this strategy has been considered in the past, and yielded encouraging
results, it has not received widespread attention in large part because no
reliable method was available to select the best solutes to trap point defect.
The proposed research takes advantage of recent modeling advances to overcome
these limitations. Specifically, for a Cu matrix, using first principles
calculations to calculate solute-point defect interactions, and self-consistent
mean-field theory to calculate defect and solute transport coefficients, Sb was
identified as one of these promising solutes. The experimental program measures
directly the relative rate of recombination over sink elimination during
irradiation of dilute Cu-Sb alloys from the broadening and the drift of thin
marker layers placed at strategic positions in a Cu thin film bounded by Nb
layers, the Cu/Nb interfaces providing near perfect sinks for point defect
elimination. These broadenings and shifts are measured at the nanoscale using
atom probe tomography (APT) and analytical scanning transmission electron
microscopy (TEM). In addition this approach is implemented for imparting
radiation resistance to alloys that self-organizes under irradiation, such as
Cu-Fe, so as to further extend their stability under irradiation. By combining
the two approaches, point defect trapping and compositional patterning,
radiation resistance can be achieved in a vastly extended domain of irradiation
conditions. The experimental program is complemented by atomistic KMC
simulations to support the data analysis and to explore the potential impact of
simplifications made during the solute screening stage. The impact of the
program is broadened by offering research opportunities to undergraduates and by
integrating research with education through computational modules in courses
taught by the PIs. Active engagement is also offered to develop, assess, and
spread active learning techniques.