* 1709263
* RUI:   Refractory Cleavage Sites to Elucidate Type IIS Restriction Endonuclease Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Van Dyke, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2020
* USD 118,840.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Michael Van Dyke from Kennesaw State University
(KSU) to investigate an enzymes called type IIS restriction endonucleases that
cleaves deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in specific places. Restriction
endonucleases are critical tools in biotechnology, allowing investigators to
make specific fragments of DNA. The fragments can be recombined to create new
DNA sequences, otherwise known as recombinant DNA. Type IIS restriction
endonucleases, recognize specific DNA sequences, but then cleave DNA at fixed
distances away from them. Previous work reported that this cleavage occurred
without any regard to the specific sequence (sequence specificity). However,
sequences have now been identified that are completely resistant to this
cleavage. This project investigates why certain DNA sequences are unable to be
cleaved by type IIS restriction endonucleases, which may impact their use in
biotechnology. Also, this research incorporates a mix of undergraduate and
Master's graduate students, providing them with training in the biochemistry of
nucleic acids and associated enzymes. Professor Van Dyke mentors graduate
school-oriented undergraduate students and maintenance of the nascent Sequencing
Core Facility at KSU.    This research project is undertaken to mechanistically
determine why specific DNA sequences are refractory to the type IIS restriction
endonuclease FokI. Cleavage-resistant sequences identified through the
combinatorial approach Restriction Endonuclease Protection, Selection, and
Amplification are sequenced and resistant motifs identified for Motif
Elicitation analysis. These sequences are independently validated using an
internally controlled Restriction Endonuclease Protection Assay to characterize
observed cleavage resistance as a function of time, temperature, and
concentration. Stopped-flow spectroscopy studies are then performed using
Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) to dissect individual steps during the
process of DNA cleavage by FokI and to determine those affected by the
identified cleavage-resistant sequences. Information from this study may provide
a better mechanistic understanding of DNA recognition and cleavage by IIS
restriction endonucleases, with potential applicability to other DNA
cleavage/modification systems.