* 1709813
* Collaborative Research: Synthesis, Structural Characterization and Electrochemical Studies of Framework Substituted Silicon, Germanium and Tin Clathrates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Svilen Bobev, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 275,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The structural integrity of a crystalline
material is an important property that can greatly influence its ability to be
utilized in practical applications. For electrochemical energy storage devices,
daily operation involves the electrochemical insertion and extraction of ions,
which is often accompanied by larger structural transformations that may cause
the material to collapse. Hence, the search for new electrode materials is
necessary in order for future energy storage demands to be realized. Clathrates
are a class of materials with cage-like structures that can naturally hold guest
ions, a feature that may be exploited in energy storage applications. However,
different features in the clathrate bonding arrangement may affect its
mechanical integrity. Key objectives of this project are to understand the
electrochemical characteristics of these materials, how the structure of the
clathrate changes upon electrochemical insertion of guest ions, and the
development of new synthetic routes to obtain clathrates. Results from this
project enable new knowledge on the intricate relationships among the
clathrates? structures and their physical properties, electrochemical
characteristics, and structural stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are: (1) to investigate the
electrochemical and structural properties of germanium and tin clathrates using
first principles calculations and detailed structural characterization to
understand the electrochemically obtained structures; and (2) to synthesize new
clathrates containing lithium ions from novel precursors. The project uses a
concerted approach combining the synthetic, structural and electrochemical
characterization, and theoretical expertise of the investigators. The research
enables a better understanding of the relationship between the clathrate
structure and its physical properties, electrochemical characteristics, and
phase stability. These achievements could lead to higher energy density lithium
and sodium batteries. The studies also help to build up the predictive power of
solid-state chemistry, establishing new ideas of why and how atoms assemble and
form new compounds and structures with the desired electrochemical properties.
Investigation of these materials involves a collaboration between two
universities (Arizona State University and University of Delaware) and three
different departments (materials science, chemistry, and physics), which exposes
students to multidisciplinary research. Outreach and educational activities
engaging students ranging from the middle school to undergraduate levels, with
an emphasis on recruiting females into science and engineering and improving
student learning and engagement in introductory undergraduate classes.