* 1709568
* Crack Growth During Fatigue in Ni Superalloys: Physical Origin of Stochastic Jumps and Their Predictive Role Using Statistical Approaches
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Xingbo Liu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 423,277.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong, durable materials are an
integral part of our society. One such class of materials found in turbine
engines, used in the aerospace and marine industries, are known as superalloys.
Superalloys exhibit excellent mechanical properties (strength, creep resistance,
corrosion resistance). However, there is a catch in that these materials involve
a large degree of structural disorder as a result of the required material
manufacturing process. The effects of such disorder become even more pronounced
at the high temperatures of turbines, due to sustained loading conditions,
leading to microscopic damage and cracks in the material. These cracks are
exacerbated over the lifetime of the machinery. Therefore, it is crucial to
understand the behavior of these cracks and prevent catastrophic mechanical
failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crack initiation and growth in very heterogeneous
materials not only can be detrimental but also very unpredictable, thus it
requires statistical methods and protocols for assessing the reliability of
components at various stages of fatigue loading. This project will advance the
science of stochastic crack growth jumps during cyclic loading (fatigue) of
metallic heterogeneous materials, with a particular focus on Ni superalloys. The
usefulness of the mechanical noise produced by such little cracks is that it
might contain distinctive statistical features that can identify the damage
level in a turbine component. A team of engineers and scientists will combine
multi-scale modeling approaches, statistical methods, and experiments to
ultimately develop combined experiment and theory protocols for characterizing
the fatigue-induced "cracking noise" and assessing the damage levels of
mechanical components. Beyond superalloys, the very outcome of this research is
to promote the progress of the fundamental understanding of fatigue damage and
develop non-invasive structural prognosis methods. An educational outreach
program is also planned that involves graduate, undergraduate, and high-school
students, as well as the general public, in the under-represented EPSCoR state
of West Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the understanding of stochastic
jumps during fatigue loading of Ni superalloys. A multi-scale modeling approach
will be employed that will combine density functional theory (DFT) predictions
with phase-field modeling. Machine-learning methods will be incorporated into
the phase field model, which will be trained based on conducted experiments. The
outcome of this research will be the fundamental understanding of fatigue damage
that may be used to predict catastrophic failures, especially when there is
limited statistical sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of engineers and
scientists will develop a novel pathway to predictive modeling of crack growth
during fatigue loading in metallic superalloys: By statistically sampling the
noise correlations at various stages of fatigue under the assumption of
constant-stress short-time tests, we will build a predictive machine-learning
framework using a direct multi-step forecasting strategy. In doing so, we will
investigate the fundamental origin of stochastic crack growth jumps and will
develop a probabilistic model that will incorporate a first-principles
relationship of the cohesive energy, generated by density functional theory
predictions and phase-field modeling. To validate our models, we will conduct a
series of well-controlled experiments using in-situ SEM and we will track crack
growth using DC resistance drop measurements. The statistical properties of
crack growth noise at various stages as a function of temperature and
environmental pressure will be compared to the multi-scale model predictions.
The validated multi-scale model will then be used to investigate the probability
distributions of crack growth events (classified in terms of crack-length
changes) during the first few cycles to predict crack growth at late stages. The
outcome will be a trained model that can predict failure based on early fatigue
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has a societal impact based
on the fundamental physical origin of crack growth jumps during fatigue loading
of metallic superalloys, which are commonly used on aircraft turbines and other
hardware. The aim is to develop general protocols to promote early, safe
prediction of crack growth in metallic alloys. In addition to societal impact,
an educational outreach program is planned that involve training graduate,
undergraduate, and high-school students, as well as the general public, in the
under-represented EPSCoR state of West Virginia. The focus of training will be
on the use of computational modeling materials science as well as the deep
understanding of basic physical properties of crack growth, fracture, and non-
equilibrium rare events. The PI will design a course that will introduce the
fundamentals of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and fracture to
multidisciplinary, undergraduate engineering environments.