* 1709934
* EXCITON PHASE TRANSITION IN ATOMICALLY THIN 2D SEMICONDUCTORS
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Kenan Gundogdu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 445,166.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Optical excitations in semiconductors create
electron and hole pairs. These quasiparticles are responsible for optoelectronic
behavior of materials used in many device applications including, photovoltaics,
light emitting diodes and light detectors. These electron and hole
quasiparticles, similar to particles in ambient, can go through phase
transitions from noninteracting gas to condensed liquid phase at high enough
densities and low temperatures. The condensed quasiparticle state exhibits very
different electronic properties compared to dilute phase. However so far the
studies involving the electron-hole condensation are limited to very low
temperatures and high laser excitation densities in limited group of material
systems. This project focuses on study of these condensed electron-hole states
in atomically thin semiconductors at high temperatures. The educational
component of the research involves recruiting high school students specifically
from underrepresented communities to the labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Atomically thin 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDC)
provide a remarkable excitonic system with a large exciton binding energy, more
than an order of magnitude larger than typical semiconductor materials. These
materials can provide unprecedented opportunities for the studies of quantum
many-body physics at elevated temperatures. It has been known that excitons at
high enough densities condense into electron-hole plasma and then into a liquid.
But in general this gas to liquid phase transition takes place at cryo-
temperatures. Here the proposed work aims to study the phase transition of
excitons in 2D TMDC materials into a state of electron-hole liquid (EHL) at room
temperature and above. This exciton condensation is a quantum mechanical
analogue of the classical gas condensation into a liquid droplet. This work will
pursue a thorough understanding of the exciton condensation in 2D TMDC
materials.