* 1709877
* Character Varieties and Locally Homogeneous Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* David Dumas, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Studying all of the possible shapes of a geometric or mechanical object is a
fundamental part of many problems in science and engineering, from understanding
the folding of proteins or the formation of galaxies to programming autonomous
vehicles to navigate complex terrain. This research project will broaden our
understanding of a class of such "shape space" problems in which the geometric
objects are surfaces (i.e. flat or curved two-dimensional shapes) or closely
related spaces built from higher-dimensional pieces assembled in a two-
dimensional pattern. These are natural examples to study because of the frequent
appearance of surface geometry in a wide variety of mathematical problems and
applications. In addition to contributing to mathematical knowledge, the
computational and visualization components of this project will produce striking
images of mathematical objects that exhibit their intricate structure and
complexity in a way that can be appreciated by scientists and non-scientists
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A locally homogeneous geometric structure on a
compact manifold determines a holonomy representation, which is a homomorphism
from the fundamental group of the manifold into a Lie group. The resulting map
from the space of geometric structures to the space of group representations is
always a local homeomorphism, but apart from a few classical examples (such as
constant curvature geometries), the global behavior of the holonomy
correspondence is not well understood. The investigator will contribute to our
understanding of this basic problem by studying cases in which analytic methods
can be brought to bear. For example, families of Anosov representations of
surface groups in complex Lie groups are amenable to study through Kodaira-
Spencer deformation theory, and through the application of tools from complex-
analytic Teichmueller theory. In other cases, such as real projective structures
on compact surfaces and generalizations thereof, geometric structures can be
understood in terms of the solutions of a system of partial differential
equations on the underlying manifold, allowing geometric questions to be
attacked through techniques such as asymptotic analysis, barriers, and maximum
principles.