* 1709527
* Collaborative Research:  Adapting Cas9 Protein from CRISPR as a Structural Unit for Molecular Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Charles Gersbach, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 06/30/2020
* USD 210,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Even with very advanced
lithographic techniques, it is difficult or impossible for human engineering to
reach down and control matter in the low nanometer length-scale. However,
biological systems utilize the ability of molecules to recognize and bind to one
another for self-assembling very complex structures with feature sizes down in
the nanometer range. Taking inspiration from the rich diversity of functional
architectures observed in biology and making use of new discoveries in
engineered biomaterials, this project will expand basic understanding of
biomaterials and their programmable assembly. Successful completion of the
research will, in the short-term, enable significant progress in nano-scale
self-assembly using proteins and nucleic acids. In the long-term, this will
provide the needed technology for implementation of ever-smaller devices for
computing, communications, and sensing applications; implantable medical devices
and biosensors; and programmable, artificial molecular machines. This project
will provide training opportunities for postgraduate and postdoctoral students
in cutting-edge molecular engineering and bionanotechnology. Using NSF?s
supplemental funding mechanisms, high school and undergraduate students will be
attracted to the project to participate research and to train in the emerging
field of nanoscience. This project will expand our scientific understanding of
nanometer-scale phenomena and materials as well as to improve our ability to
design and engineer new functional materials on this length-scale. The results
of this project could impact future application areas in the sustainable
fabrication of electronic devices and new approaches to medical diagnostics and
therapeutics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; DNA?s capacity for highly reliable and
programmable molecular recognition has led to the field of DNA-based
nanotechnology, also known as structural DNA nanotechnology. Researchers in this
field develop materials and techniques for DNA-guided molecular and nano-scale
self-assembly and have made remarkable recent progress, including the ordering
of matter with unprecedented precision and parallelism, nano-scale organization
of proteins and metal particles, as well as fascinating demonstrations of
artificial molecular machines. One problem that has limited DNA nanotech?s
translation from prototype demonstrations to commercially viable applications
has been the lack of a general purpose, rapidly-reprogrammable method for
functionalizing DNA structures with polypeptides. The Cas9 protein from the
CRISPR RNA-directed bacterial immune system is used here as a novel solution to
this problem. Cas9 is a programmable protein that acts as an endonuclease for
cleaving non-self nucleic acid targets. In an engineered form, dCas9 has been
mutated to bind a DNA sequence (specified by an RNA molecule) without cleavage
of the targeted DNA. The dCas9 protein, guide RNA, and its target DNA sequences
are well understood, modular, and programmable. Consequently, dCas9 is perfect
for use in the development of a new family of molecular assembly tools with
designed sequence specificities and the ability to act as a new smart glue for
the programmed assembly of other nanomaterials including protein enzymes,
affinity peptides, inorganic nanoparticles, and carbon nanotubes. The
overarching goal of the project is to add the programmable recognition and
binding functions of dCas9 to the growing toolbox of materials and methods
available to DNA-based nanotech. Specifically, the project seeks to develop
fusion proteins bearing mutant Cas9 domains to organize other polypeptides
(including ligands, in vitro selected affinity peptides, enzymes, and
inhibitors) on DNA nanostructures in programmed patterns for biomedical
applications as well as in the bionanofabrication of electronic and photonic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;