* 1709564
* Menaquinone Physiochemical Properties Alter Energy Metabolism in Actinobacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Debbie Crans, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2021
* USD 480,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division funds this
award. Professors Debbie Crans and Dean Crick from Colorado State University
investigate how a specific molecule plays a crucial part in the generation of
energy from nutrients (metabolic energy) in microorganisms. The first step in
production of metabolic energy is electron transport- where electrons are passed
stepwise through a series of small molecules and proteins embedded in a
membrane. One of these molecules is menaquinone. It has been known for a long
time that menaquinone is involved in the electron transport steps, but how it
participates in the process is still unknown. The structure and reactivity of
the menaquinone molecule is investigated in this research. The critical electron
transfer reaction is exquisitely sensitive to the structure of menaquinone. The
basis for this sensitivity is examined by making small variations in the shape
of the molecule and measuring the effects on the metabolic energy generation.
These studies allow undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to acquire specialized training in synthesis, analysis of molecular
structures in solution and at the interfaces of artificial membranes, and
microbiological methodology. The topic is presented to the public in suitable
settings including outreach programs with K-12 students and other community
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enzyme MenJ (Rv0561c) of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis catalyzes the reductive conversion of menaquinone with nine
isoprene units (MK-9) to menaquinone with nine isoprene units with the second
isoprene unit saturated (MK-9(II-H2)). A subtle variation in the structure of
MK-9(II-H2) results in surprisingly dramatic changes in survival and energy
metabolism for the organism. How the conversion of a single bond to a double
bond (MK-9(II-H2) to MK-9) could have such profound effects on the energy
metabolism of mycobacteria is not understood. The current research project seeks
to define the biological role of regiospecific saturation in MK derivatives. The
physical properties of simple synthetic MK derivatives are investigated with the
objective of elucidating the effects of saturation on solution structure, redox
potentials, and molecular interactions at water/lipid interfaces. The results
from these studies are used to develop an understanding for how these changes
can affect MK's biological activities. The current hypothesis is that the shape
of the molecule directs the biological responses.