* 1709357
* RAPID:   Multi-Hazard Performance of Load Bearing Wall Systems: A Case Study in Haiti following the January 2010 Earthquake and October 2016 Hurricane Matthew
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Tracy Kijewski-Correa, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2017
* USD 24,983.00

This grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will enable a team of wind,
coastal, and structural engineers from the University of Notre Dame and the
University of Florida to conduct a forensic analysis across the Tiburon
Peninsula of Haiti to examine the performance of low-rise construction during
the October 2016 Hurricane Matthew. Strengthening community resilience to
natural disasters depends critically on improving construction practices across
a private sector dominated by low-rise buildings. This issue becomes
particularly urgent for coastal communities, where hurricane risk is escalating
under changing sea levels and climate conditions. Historically, masonry load
bearing wall systems had served as a trusted mode of low-rise construction in
such settings. For example, builders in the southeastern United States commonly
use masonry for churches, schools, commercial buildings, and even residences.
Despite their popularity, the vulnerabilities in these systems to natural
hazards can be significant, particularly within states that have yet to enact
statewide minimum building standards. Regrettably, these vulnerabilities are
only revealed under extreme wind, wave, and storm surge loads associated with
the passage of major hurricanes. This makes the forensic analysis of building
failures during major hurricanes a critical source of knowledge to improve the
design state-of-the-art. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The passage of Hurricane Matthew
over Haiti in October 2016 provides an opportunity to conduct a forensic
analysis of low-rise masonry building performance under one of the most
significant hurricanes in recent history. This setting includes construction
preferences that facilitate unique comparative analyses of variables known to
influence performance of masonry buildings under wind, wave, and storm surge.
Moreover, the fact that portions of Haiti have recently undergone
reconstruction, following the devastating January 2010 earthquake in that
country, with greater vigilance toward seismic detailing, furthers the potential
for impact, as there has been no prior opportunity in the United States to
explore the in-situ performance of structures under multiple significant hazards
in a limited time period (strong earthquake followed by major hurricane).
Through a combination of aerial and ground-based techniques, the multi-
institutional team will collect perishable data to answer the following
questions: (1) How did traditional masonry structural systems perform under
hurricane wind, wave, and storm surge? (2) How did the new structural systems
that have emerged in response to the 2010 earthquake and aseismically detailed
traditional masonry systems perform in this major hurricane? (3) How does the
performance of traditional masonry load bearing walls in Hurricane Matthew
compare to that observed in the 2010 earthquake? How can this inform future
multi-hazard designs? These insights will contribute to advancing more
resilient, multi-hazard construction practices to reduce future losses of life
and property.