* 1709144
* Synthetic Approaches to Semi-Sequenced Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Tara Meyer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 530,000.00

Nature encodes properties into large molecules, like DNA and proteins, by
combining a set of building block molecules, called monomers, into specific
sequences. Spider silk protein, for example, derives its exceptionally tough
nature from a specific sequence of amino acid monomers. This model for
controlling properties in large molecules like polymers has been difficult to
emulate in non-biological materials, however, because of the challenge in
preparing perfectly sequenced molecules of this type. With the support from the
NSF Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program, Professor Tara
Meyer at the University of Pittsburgh conducts research to enhance our
understanding of how precisely the sequence needs to be controlled to attain the
desired polymer properties. This work is expected to have a significant impact
scientifically, technologically, and educationally. The new synthesis method and
the study of monomer sequence and their resultant properties represent a
considerable scientific impact. The demonstration that sequence need not be
perfect to be useful could translate into the increased use of sequence in
industrially-produced polymers, a potential technological benefit. Finally, the
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in the research, with a
particular emphasis on ensuring broad participation of trainees from all
backgrounds, should contribute to a well-prepared scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Meyer group has successfully prepared
perfectly sequenced, biodegradable, non-toxic polymers called poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acids)s (PLGAs) and demonstrated the dependence of their properties on
sequence. Unfortunately, the preparation of these perfectly sequenced PLGAs, and
almost all other sequenced polymers, is too complicated and expensive to scale
up for most applications. The research team thinks that one way to address this
barrier is to answer the following two questions: "Is it essential to have a
perfect sequence?" and "Is it possible that a polymer with a sequence pattern
that is 75% correct would be almost as high performing as a polymer whose
sequence is 100% correct?" The goal of this project is to address these
questions by developing a new, more scalable method for preparing polymers with
"just enough" sequence and then testing the properties of these semi-sequenced
copolymers against perfect analogues. A new parallel/successive synthetic
strategy is introduced and developed with the goal of creating semi-sequenced
step-growth copolymers with an intermediate level of control over monomer order.
Inspired by the classic synthesis of polyurethanes, the parallel/successive
strategy involves the creation, in parallel, of compositionally controlled pre-
oligomers with similar backbones but differing sequences. The successive
reaction of these pre-oligomers produces semi-sequenced copolymers with a
homogeneous composition in terms of the types of monomers present, but a
segmented structure. Careful experimental design and the implementation of the
method using a flow system can be implemented to yield materials with varying
degrees of fine (monomer-by-monomer) and course (segment-level) sequence
control. The comparison of the properties of the semi-sequenced copolymers with
those of the perfectly sequence materials improves the understanding of the
various mechanisms through which sequence effects manifest. Ultimately, this
research may be translated into new technologies in advanced plastics and
materials manufacturing.