* 1709116
* Low Dimensional Organometal Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Biwu Ma, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 428,650.00

Non-technical Description. New functional materials are one of the keys to the
advance of technologies useful in our daily life. Organometal halide perovskites
are an emerging class of organic-inorganic hybrid materials that have potential
applications in many optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells and light
emitting diodes. In this project, the research team aims to develop and study
new types of organometal halide perovskites with unique crystalline structures
and properties that have not been observed in conventional ones. Of particular
interest are low dimensional organometal halide perovskites that have been
largely unexplored by the research community. The expected outcomes of this
project include fundamental understandings of this new class of materials, and
guidelines for the development of functional materials with new phenomena and
superior performance for optoelectronic devices. Various educational and
outreach activities are integrated in this project, including: (i) promoting
multidisciplinary research, education and training to graduates and
undergraduate students, in particular those from underrepresented groups; (ii)
involving K-12 students and general public through scientific exhibitions of
"The Evolution of Lighting Technology at the Challenger Learning Center of
Tallahassee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. Organometal halide
perovskites are crystalline hybrid materials with exceptional structural
tunability. By choosing appropriate inorganic and organic components, the
crystallographic structures can be finely controlled with the inorganic units,
metal halide octahedrons, forming zero- (0D), one- (1D), two- (2D), and three-
dimensional (3D) structures in the hybrids on molecular level. Despite a great
deal of work conducted in this class of materials, the research focus to date
has been mainly on 3D and 2D perovskites, with little done in 1D and 0D
perovskites that can exhibit unique, remarkable and useful properties
significantly different from those of 3D and 2D perovskites. In this project,
the research team investigates new low dimensional organometal halide
perovskites with 1D and 0D structures, in which the metal halide octahedrons are
connected in a chain (1D) and completely isolated from each other (0D),
respectively. The research involves (i) identification and understanding of
phenomena and mechanisms associated with synthesis and processing of 1D and 0D
perovskites, (ii) characterization of the unique structural, optical, and
electronic properties of these new materials to gain a fundamental understanding
of the structure-property relationship, and (iii) investigation of their
functionalities in optoelectronic devices, such as optically pumped and
electrically driven light emitting diodes. The success of this project can
generate guidelines for the development of new organic-inorganic hybrid
materials to exhibit novel phenomena and superior performance in optoelectronic
devices. The knowledge gained in this project can relate the classic molecular
science to solid-state physics, for instance "excited state structural
distortion" in molecular concept to "exciton self-trapping" in solid state
theory, as the building blocks of these materials can be considered as either
molecular species or lattice points.