* 1709285
* Collaborative Research:   Understanding the Design Principles of Modular Nanopores for Highly Efficient Chemical Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Takashi Ito, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 255,645.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division. Professor Takashi Ito of Kansas State University, and
Professor Amar Flood, and Dr. Yi Yi, both from Indiana University - Bloomington
seek to design cylindrical nanoscale pores (pores 10-40 nanometers in diameter
and 30-100 nanometers in length; there are 25,400,000 nanometers in one inch)
for efficient chemical separations and detection. Chloride ion is used as the
model target. This work examines how chloride can be chemically recognized by
the nanopore geometry and physical environment. It is hypothesized that
selectivity, specificity, and strength of chemical recognition can be enhanced
by adjusting the environment and charge inside the nanopores. The control of the
nanopore physical interior for chemical recognition can be a versatile, basic
principle for designing highly efficient separations for various species,
including those of environmental interest such as chemicals in fertilizers. A
direct societal impact of improved anion sensing is improvement in water
purification and analysis. Microscale anion sensors for measurements within the
body are also being pursued. These research achievements are integrated with
educational activities by developing a new hands-on polymer lab course that
includes both polymer synthesis and characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematic investigations explore polymer-based
cylindrical nanopores (10-40 nm in pore diameter; 30-100 nm in pore length) to
assess the effects of nanopore physical environment on chemical recognition and
redox-involved charge transport. Nanopores decorated with surface alkyne groups
are covalently modified with various azide-tagged anion receptors and redox
moieties. The fundamental understanding of the nanopore design principles
present an approach to rationally fabricate monolithic nanoporous membranes and
films for efficient chemical separations and detection. The research focuses on
the fabrication and characterization of alkyne-decorated nanoporous scaffolds
with controlled pore orientation and dimensions. This is followed by
understanding of the effects of nanopore's physical environment on anion
recognition and charge transport. The third area of research is the redox-
controlled anion sensing. The anion recognition and electrochemical properties
of modular nanopores are assessed using spectroscopic and electrochemical
techniques. The investigators have complementary expertise for this
interdisciplinary project: electrochemistry and spectroscopy on nanostructured
films (Ito), design, synthesis and characterization of anion receptors with
"click" reactions (Flood), and block copolymer synthesis (Yi). Results obtained
in this project provide fundamental knowledge required to design better chemical
sensing media of inorganic ions which are of special importance in water quality
control and biosciences.