* 1709244
* Collaborative Research: LEGO-Based Active Learning Activities for Software Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Stephanie Ludi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2021
* USD 136,098.00

Software engineering, which plays a significant role in preparing students for
becoming a part of the professional workforce, requires the pairing of in-depth
disciplinary knowledge with a robust set of soft skills, such as teamwork and
communication abilities. Given the engineering nature of the discipline, one of
the best ways to study software engineering principles is to apply them in
active learning contexts, such as case studies or hands-on exercises. When
teaching undergraduates, it is crucial to make a clear connection between these
learning contexts and related theoretical material, while designing active
learning activities in a way that students would find easy to relate
to.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and establish
the effectiveness of using kinesthetic learning modules leveraging LEGO as a
tangible manipulative to improve student learning and engagement in
undergraduate software engineering education. This project will demonstrate that
compared to traditional classroom instructional techniques, the use of LEGO
tangible manipulatives will improve student knowledge in software engineering
and improve student engagement with coursework by using a framework of active
learning activities. This project will develop curricular support materials for
educators at universities and high schools to incorporate software engineering
topics into their courses via the active learning modules. The study design will
utilize a pre-post test control group design without random assignment of
students to course sections. The same study design and the same instruments will
be used at both participating institutions.