* 1709294
* GOALI: Doping Control and Processes in Metal Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Oki Gunawan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 399,926.00

Nontechnical Description: Metal halide perovskites refer to a class of
semiconductors that have recently achieved an exceptional rate of performance
improvement for use in light-emitting devices, photodetectors and solar cells.
The combination of excellent performance and facile solution processing open new
opportunities for low-cost high-performance electronic devices. While these
materials have enjoyed extensive success for application in electronic devices,
further improvement is limited in part by a lack of understanding of how to
control the number of electrical carriers within the semiconductor (known as
doping), which is a vital parameter for establishing device operation. By
creating a broadly interdisciplinary project, employing both theory and
experimental approaches, the current research seeks to develop a better
understanding of doping processes for controlling the level of electrons/holes
within this important class of halide perovskites. By achieving the goals of the
project, novel designs of higher-efficiency solar cells and light-emitting
devices, as well as higher-performance perovskite transistors are expected.
Undergraduate, graduate and postdoc researchers play a pivotal role in the
multidisciplinary project execution and the project therefore plays a vital role
in training future scientists. As a GOALI project, a critical aspect involves
broadening student experiences to include industrial research exposure, as well
as creating a link to the world-leading materials characterization capabilities
within industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Semiconductor
doping using intrinsic/extrinsic crystalline defects establishes the energy
levels and carrier densities that determine optoelectronic properties. High-
performance photovoltaic materials, for example, rely on careful doping control
to modify the electronic properties and improve the device performance to levels
approaching the Shockley-Queisser limit. Although metal halide perovskites have
received much attention recently, due to the exceptional rise in associated
photovoltaic performance, the current understanding and exploration of doping in
this class of complex ionic semiconductors remains limited. This project paves
the way for more tunable functional halide perovskites by addressing important
doping related questions, such as: (1) can the relatively 'soft' nature of metal
halide perovskites create special challenges and opportunities for development
of new doping pathways; (2) can the use of complexes rather than individual ions
enhance doping tenability; and (3) what opportunity for molecular doping exist
within the organic cation layer versus impurity doping within the metal halide
framework? In order to develop this critical understanding, the project
integrates academic and industrial research in materials synthesis,
optoelectronic characterization and theory to investigate dopant incorporation
and activation in perovskite semiconductors. The research consists of several
thrusts, including: (1) theory/computation-guided development of new dopants and
doping processes, (2) exploration of molecular dopants in hybrid perovskites,
(3) manipulation of radiative recombination using doping and (4) application of
unique electrical transport characterization tools, developed by the industrial
partner, to understand doping in halide perovskites and also to provide a
framework for future study of transport phenomena in complex materials.