* 1709370
* Molecular Control over the Mechanism of Crystal Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* James Martin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Control of crystalline structure is important
to the application of materials, whether to control the activity of
pharmaceuticals or the electronic conductivity of advanced materials. However,
deciphering the physical/chemical processes that determine growth of specific
crystal structures is complex. This project systematically measures the
influence of molecular shape and the strength of intermolecular interactions on
the kinetics of crystal growth to investigate molecular level control of the
mechanism of melt crystallization. In addition to advancing the fundamental
science, this work is invaluable to all fields of science for which crystal
growth is critical, such as polymers, pharmaceuticals, food products, geology,
and atmospheric science. In addition, professional development for high school
chemistry teachers is made available across the state of North Carolina. This
discipline based professional development helps teachers shift curricula from a
standardized test-based content/algorithm focus to critical-thinking/problem-
solving based teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award uniquely presents a
melt crystallization strategy that directly probes the influence of intrinsic
factors of molecular shape and intermolecular forces on the mechanism of crystal
growth. Experimental measurement of the crystallization kinetics of oligoacenes
and alkylammonium metal halide salts, as a function of the number of aromatic
rings and length of alkyl chains, respectively, is being used to probe the
impact of molecular anisotropy and crystal dimensionality on the rate of
crystallization. Comparative kinetic measurements from isotropic vs. oriented
melts of liquid crystals is utilized to articulate the impact of molecular pre-
orientation on the rate of crystallization. Also, the crystallization kinetics
across the family of substituted benzenes creates a geometric and energetic
matrix with which to evaluate functional group effects. The PI's recent
discovery of Transition Zone Theory, the condensed matter analog of Eyring's
transition state theory, enables for the identification of entropic and
enthalpic activation parameters of crystallization reactions. This award
facilitates a continuing offering of the summer teacher workshops, and also
supports hiring a high school chemistry teacher to work with the PI during
summers to write and publish components of this professional development, which
affords greater dissemination of the problem-solving/discovery based materials.