* 1709483
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Livelihood Strategies at Classic and Colonial Period Tahcabo, Yucatan, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Patricia McAnany, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 20,373.00

This research project will study the impacts of macro-governance changes such as
colonialism on the activities of farmers in rural communities. In studies of
contemporary agriculture, researchers strive to understand how people choose
livelihood strategies and to infer the long-term implications of their decisions
for regional political stability, economic security, and landscape
sustainability. Archaeological research is well-positioned to contribute to
knowledge about the impact rural farmers can have in these realms due to its
focus on behavioral and environmental changes over extended time frames. Within
this broader context, this project will generate an agricultural history for the
research site, including an account of the activities pursued and crops grown
through time, focusing on periods of high population density. The study will
provide training to graduate-level students from the United States as well as
undergraduate students from Mexico. It will generate collaborations between
laboratory scientists in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Research results
will be disseminated through publications written for broad audiences in more
than one language and the installation of an exhibit in the museum of the
community that will host the research. Community residents will be made aware of
food production strategies employed in the past that could prove useful for them
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeological research has focused on large
political centers, while extant historical records primarily tell the stories of
elites. Recent studies have begun to address daily lives and household
economies. This project shifts attention to farmers and their strategies given
regional constraints and opportunities. It will study whether past peoples
living in the rural community of Tahcabo diversified their economic activities
or pursued specialized production of particular goods or crops during times of
population growth spanning the Early Classic (AD 200-500), Late Classic (AD
600-900), and Colonial (AD 1550-1800) periods. Excavations will take place in
houses and gardens from these time periods in order to locate evidence for the
economic activities conducted by household. Analysis of soil samples for
microscopic plant remains will provide information on the crops grown through
time. Chronological information about the occupation of each house will be
determined through the study of ceramic styles and the dating of charred wood.
Using these lines of evidence, the project will test propositions about the
strategies employed by farmers before and after Spanish colonization. The
results will provide new insights into the relationship between social and
agricultural change.