* 1710748
* Collaborative Research: Connecting Mesoscopic Dynamics of Metallic Films on Semiconductors to Nanoscale Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ching Yao Fong, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,591.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic devices, such as computers
and smartphones, are at the heart of our technological society. Such devices
currently are based on semiconductor technology, which involves making
electrical contacts between metals and semiconductors. By studying and
understanding the details of how metals can be deposited onto semiconductor
materials, this project will allow the development of novel methods to grow low
dimensional nanostructures, such as extremely thin wires and very thin films.
The project connects state-of-the-art experiments to observe the growth
properties of the materials with sophisticated theoretical techniques using
models consisting of tens to millions of atoms to explore the physics governing
the predicted properties of the fabricated nanostructures. Working in
conjunction, these methods will facilitate the optimal design and creation of
these low dimensional nanostructures. Such structures could be very useful in
making future electronic devices, thus maintaining the technological leadership
of the U.S. in nanotechnology. Students working on the project will not only
gain in-depth physical understanding in the exciting research areas involving
metal-semiconductor interfaces but also will engage in outreach activities with
local K-12 students and teachers with whom the PIs have on-going interactions,
especially through the American Physical Society Physics Teacher Education
Coalition (APS PhysTEC). All PIs regularly mentor undergraduate researchers and
are actively engaged in recruiting women and underrepresented minority students,
particularly through the APS Bridge
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the growth mechanisms of
several metal on semiconductor systems. The objectives of this project are
controlling the growth of low-dimensional (1D and 2D) nanostructures,
elucidating the novel and complex collective diffusion behavior which has been
observed for these systems, and understanding how quantum behavior can influence
epitaxial growth in order to facilitate the optimal design and fabrication of
novel materials. A complementary set of experimental and theoretical techniques
will be applied to examine systematically the initial growth stages and
structural evolution of Ag, Au, and Pb nanostructures on single crystal surfaces
of Ge and Si. The atomic ordering and adatom binding sites, as well as sizes and
shapes of formed islands, will be determined by scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) and low energy electron microscopy/diffraction (LEEM/LEED) and compared
with predictions from density functional theory (DFT)-based simulations. Unusual
collective behavior of millions of atoms and quantum size effects (QSE) will be
investigated to elucidate details of the mechanisms. Scanning tunneling
spectroscopy (STS) and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) will be
used to measure local density of states, k-resolved band structure, and quantum
well states; these results will be compared with DFT calculations to understand
the factors controlling the nanostructure characteristics and to formulate the
physical picture about the basic mechanisms and processes for future growths.
Bond order potentials (BOP) will be determined for metals bound to semiconductor
surfaces and used for self-learning kinetic Monte Carlo (SLKMC) simulations of
the growth and movement of islands. These large-scale simulations will improve
understanding of the physical origin of the collective motions and suggest
additional experimental systems that may display unusual physical phenomena. The
use of Si and Ge-based materials would enable rapid development of technological
applications for electronic devices.