* 1710437
* Emergent Unconventional Superconductivity at Interfaces between Superconductor, Topological, and Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Dale Van Harlingen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 620,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Computers are ubiquitous, yet typical
computation methods consume enormous amounts energy, soon to reach unsustainable
levels. Thus, an eminent national grand challenge is to develop a more energy
efficient method with which to process information without losing computing
power. This project addresses this challenge by determining the unique physical
properties of unconventional superconducting materials, which could then be used
to design a more powerful and energy efficient computer, referred to as a
topological quantum computer. Unconventional superconductors are materials that
exhibit useful zero-resistance states, but whose properties are poorly
understood. The proposed work combines theoretical and experimental expertise to
fabricate nanoscale superconducting devices, and investigate the different
combinations of materials and electronic transport measurements that best
establish and probe unconventional superconductivity. The results of the
research help determine properties that may be useful in a quantum computer. The
collaborative research team incorporates a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students in research activities and provides a rich environment for
training in nanoscale and quantum technologies. Educational aspects are further
integrated through course development, research-related seminars, and outreach
activities that especially target groups under-represented in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to determine the symmetry and transport properties of superconductors
suspected of exhibiting unconventional pairing symmetry as result of proximity
coupling to topological and ferromagnetic materials. The aim is to both better
understand complex superconducting systems and also to determine their potential
use in electronic devices. The experimental effort consists of making phase-
sensitive as well as quantum transport measurements of the hybrid topological
superconductor/magnetic structures to determine the superconducting order. The
experimental research is closely coordinated with a theoretical effort that uses
both numerical and analytic techniques to analyze the experimental data and aid
in the design of new experiments. Key expected outcomes include: determining the
pairing symmetry of proximity-coupled and intrinsically superconducting
topological insulators; observing if exotic excitations, possibly Majorana,
exist and determining their relation to the pairing symmetry; and developing new
techniques for probing unconventional superconductors, including enhanced phase-
sensitive probes. The collaborative research team incorporates a diverse group
of undergraduate and graduate students in research activities and provides a
rich environment for training in nanoscale and quantum technologies. Educational
aspects are further integrated through course development, research-related
seminars, and outreach activities that especially target groups under-
represented in physics.