* 1710376
* Development of Charge Transfer Dissociation Mass Spectrometry (CTD-MS) of Oligosaccharides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Glen Jackson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Glen Jackson and his group at West Virginia University
are developing instruments for the characterization of oligosaccharides -
complex sugar molecules critical to living systems. Specifically, Dr. Jackson is
assessing and expanding the usefulness of mass spectrometry as a means of
determining the structure of these complex biomolecules. The research benefits
from collaboration and student exchanges with a research team at the French
National Institute for Agricultural Research (INRA) in Nantes, France. The tools
being developed help answer important questions about the structure and function
of biological molecules including, but not limited to, oligosaccharides. The new
instruments can address, for example, questions about how sugars are digested,
the gelling properties of food-grade pectins, and cell recognition pathways in
living systems. The project is also providing a mechanism to educate elementary
school students through organization of activity stations at local science
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jackson group is developing two mass
spectrometers, a 2D and a 3D ion trap, for charge transfer dissociation (CTD) of
oligosaccharides. Initial efforts seek to improve fragmentation efficiency by
incorporating additional ion optics in the reactant ion beam. This modification
may also reduce reaction times, enabling CTD to be coupled with ultra-high
performance liquid chromatographic separations of complex mixtures. Instrument
variables such as reagent ion kinetic energy, flux, and electron affinity
(through the choice of noble gas); CTD reaction time; and the trapping parameter
(qz) are optimized to enhance fragmentation behavior. Key aims are the
elucidation of general rules for fragmentation and identification of the best
conditions with which to augment oligosaccharide characterization. Isolated
fractions of well-characterized oligosaccharides are used to elucidate the
effect of oligosaccharide properties on the extent and nature of fragmentation.
Properties expected to influence glycosidic and cross-ring fragmentation
mechanisms include: glycan sequence, inter-residue linkage position, branching
point, charge state, adducting ions, and glycan modifications such as
esterification, amination and sulfation. Additional studies investigate the
efficacy of CTD towards other oxygenated oligomers, including polymers,
PEGylated drugs, anionic surfactants and oligonucleotides. These combined
studies demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses of CTD relative to existing
technologies and help guide future research towards high-impact applications.