* 1710735
* Redesigning Education for Learning Through Evidence and Collaborative Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Stephanie Salomone, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 299,987.00

Quality undergraduate STEM education is critical for national success, progress
in science, the advancement of national health initiatives, and overall national
prosperity in an increasingly technical economy. However, retention in STEM
fields is critically low, particularly for women and other underrepresented
groups. Reforming STEM education has drawn national attention, but ineffective
instructional practices continue to dominate. The goal of this project is to
address the national call for improved learning environments for undergraduate
students in STEM classes by implementing a new framework for instructional
change at the University of Portland that will serve as a model for sustained
instructional change. The University has faculty in the following STEM fields:
Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics, Environmental Science, Engineering,
and Computer Science. Participating faculty will learn to incorporate research-
informed educational practices that favor active learning. Ongoing support for
sustaining these new instructional practices will be fostered within cohorts of
faculty as they engage in a reflective process of regular peer observation. The
resulting instructional changes will improve the retention and success of STEM
students while shaping the institutional culture of teaching in a lasting way.
In addition, this model for supporting instructional change through shared
practice will inform institutional change at other regional, comprehensive
universities where reflective instruction is paramount.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
foster systemic instructional change, the project will invite a total of 25 STEM
faculty members at the University of Portland to participate in week-long summer
workshops across two successive years. They will explore current research-
supported instructional practices. Project leaders will assist participants in
the development and implementation of evidence-based, student-centered
curricular innovations and meet with participants throughout the implementation
period. In order to ensure that instructional change is sustained by
participants, project leaders will also foster the development of communities of
practice, wherein cohorts of participants will observe one another and engage in
structured, reflective conversation about teaching and learning. Participants
will be trained in formative assessment and in process-oriented protocols for
evaluating teaching. Project leaders will host a local symposium at the end of
the project to disseminate results and strategies to other regional universities
that could similarly benefit from systemic change efforts.