* 1710339
* The Many Facets of Coenzyme B12 Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Thomas Brunold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 01/31/2022
* USD 547,349.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Thomas Brunold from the University of Wisconsin-Madison
to study the chemistry of vitamin B12. Vitamins are necessary nutrients because
they assist in various chemical changes that take place in living systems.
Vitamin B12 is extraordinary because it is one of the few molecules in biology
where the metal cobalt is found. In addition, the cobalt atom is bonded to
carbon in vitamin B12, a connection that is very rarely seen in biology. The
research applies state-of-the-art scientific methods to understand how this
unusual bond is made, and how it is used in three specific biological systems.
Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project gain a thorough
understanding of how the special chemistry of cobalt contributes to biological
processes. The broader impacts of this work are enhanced by an open-house
laboratory workshop and an undergraduate inorganic laboratory with examples
derived from the research resulting from this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes that bind corrinoid cofactors catalyze a
number of unique chemical transformations, including cobalt (Co)- carbon (C)
bond formation (e.g. ATP:Co(I)rrinoid adenosyltransferases [ACATs]), radical-
based rearrangement of substrates (e.g. AdoCbl-dependent enzymes), and
dehalogenation of organic substrates (e.g. reductive dehalogenases [RDases]).
Reactive cob(I)alamin species are postulated as intermediates in the sterol
O-acyltransferase (also called Acyl-CoA cholesterol acyltransferase or ACAT)
enzyme mechanisms. A characterization of these species during enzyme turnover
has not previously been attempted. The research may lead to a detailed
understanding of how ACATs accomplish the formation of Co(I)Cbl intermediates
and control their nucleophilicity. In the case of AdoCbl-dependent enzymes, it
is widely accepted that the homolytic cleavage of the Co-C bond of AdoCbl to
generate a 5'-deoxyadenosyl-based radical represents the first step in their
catalytic cycles. Yet, little is known about the origin of the rate enhancement
for this step displayed by Class II eliminases, which bind AdoCbl in a unique
conformation. The research elucidates the mechanism used by Class II eliminases
to promote homolysis of the Co-C bond of their AdoCbl cofactors in response to
substrate binding. Lastly, the B12-dependent RDases have recently attracted
considerable interest because they are critical for the bioremediation of
organohalides. Professor Brunold and his group use a range of spectroscopic and
computational methods to test the hypothesis that novel halogenated corrinoid
intermediates are formed in the catalytic cycles of these enzymes.