* 1710672
* Using Electrodeposition to Understand the Effects of Composition and Element Segregation on the Physical Properties of Anodes for High Energy-Density Rechargeable Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Amy Prieto, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

PART 1:  NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Energy conversion and storage
technology is critical to the operation, maintenance, and development of modern
society. The United States now produces over 25 terawatt hours of electricity
per year, with the vast majority being provided by non-renewable fuels such as
coal, natural gas, and oil. Developing new technologies that are more efficient
than existing ones, or technologies that help existing technologies use energy
more efficiently, is therefore critical to our future. Over the last few
decades, it has become clear that energy storage devices are a key component in
a wide range of proposed technologies. The technical requirements vary
dramatically based on the specific constraints of each desired application, and
as such there is need for a wide range of functional materials, chemistries, and
architectures that can be used to build targeted and specific energy storage
devices. The research, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, focuses on developing non-toxic, inexpensive manufacturing methods for
three potential anode materials that could be used in lithium and sodium
rechargeable batteries. These materials are known, but how they degrade (and
why) is not. Understanding how these materials work and what their key
limitations are is the main goal of this study. This is the critical first step
toward finding out how to extend the life of these materials and thereby the
life of batteries. This Solid State and Materials Chemistry award furthermore
enables the principle investigator to conduct outreach activities related to her
research involving students at all grade levels as well as the general public
and policymakers. For example, the CSU 'Chemistry Club' engages elementary
school students, high school students are mentored by the principle investigator
and her students in the research lab, the principle investigator gives invited
talks about science at local clubs, and she is a board member of the Colorado
Clean Energy Cluster, which impacts policy in Colorado
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:  TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Battery
materials that store large amounts of lithium and operate reversibly at the
extreme ends of the electrochemical potential range of electrolytes enable high
voltage and high energy density battery cells. Among available candidates,
elemental alloying materials such antimony and related antimonides possess
exceptionally high volumetric capacities and operate at potentials close to the
plating of lithium metal, allowing for high theoretical energy density.
Nevertheless, they suffer from low reversibility as a result of large changes in
their volume during cycling, and poor surface passivation that causes
significant degradation of the electrolyte at the anode surface and a subsequent
rise in the cell impedance. This work develops direct electrodeposition methods
for producing low-cost, high-performance anodes for alkali metal ion (lithium
and sodium) rechargeable batteries. The advantage of using electrodeposition is
that the composition and morphology of the material can be controlled, and
inactive binders are completely eliminated (which greatly aides in the
characterization of the functional materials). The research endeavor involves a
strategy of synthesizing directly electrodeposited thin films and nanostructures
of three key antimonides (nickel, copper, and zinc and animonide) and
characterizing them fully to develop a deeper understanding of the lithiation
and delithiation reactions that occur as a function of composition, and how
these reactions may lead to degradation and ultimately cell failure. Observing
the phase formation and elemental composition across films during cycling
further aids in the development of a clear model of how these materials work,
how they degrade, and ultimately, the development of hypotheses for how to
extend cycle life and utility. With this grant the principle investigator also
conducts a variety of educational and outreach activities. Besides engaging
students at all grade levels in STEM-related activities, she also communicates
her findings directly to the general public through invited talks about science
at local clubs and as a board member of the Colorado Clean Energy Cluster, which
serves to impact policy in Colorado related to the economic development of clean
tech companies.