* 1710285
* Probing the impact of metal impurities on the structure, reactivity, and transformation of biogenic manganese oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Yuanzhi Tang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2020
* USD 330,558.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program of
the Chemistry Division. Professor Yuanzhi Tang of the Georgia Institute of
Technology investigates the impact of metal impurities on the structure and
reactivity of manganese (Mn) oxides. Manganese oxides exist in nearly all
environmental settings. They have significant influence on the biogeochemical
cycling of metals, nutrients, and organic compounds in these cycles manganese is
transferred between living systems and the environment. It also studies the
transformation pathways of Mn oxides produced by living organisms under
environmentally-relevant conditions. The project includes developing high school
curriculum materials that integrate earth and environmental sciences, chemistry,
and biology. It promotes the next generation of scientists from underrepresented
groups and with different cultural backgrounds and research experiences.
Professor Tang and her students develop community outreach activities to
showcase mineral and mineral properties to the general public. This task is
conducted annually in March during the Atlanta Science Festival, Georgia?s
biggest science fair that showcases science and technology&lt;br/&gt;to the
general public. Specifically, the research group puts on a ?rock show? where the
general public, students, and science educators have the opportunities to learn
mineral properties with hands-on demonstrations of parameters such as color,
hardness, texture, and chemical alteration. They also develop a kit for the
demonstration of biomineralization and mineral-facilitated environmental
remediation such as microscope and visual observation of microbial Mn oxidation
and color changes during chemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese
oxides play an important role in the biogeochemical cycling of many important
nutrients and contaminants. Still, much remains unknown about the influence of
ubiquitous metal impurities on the structure, reactivity, and transformation
pathways of biogenic Mn oxides. This knowledge is needed to develop accurate
predictive models for understanding the fate of contaminants and nutrients in
the natural environment. This project systematically examines the changes in
biogenic Mn oxide reactivities when they are formed in the presence of common
metal ions. The processes of geological and environmental interest include
sorption of cations and anions, and abiotic reductive transformation induced by
Mn(II). Controlled laboratory studies lead to predictive insight into the
relative importance of different metal ions in controlling Mn oxide reactivity.