* 1710695
* Nonlinear Optical Studies of High Temperature Surface Chemistry in Energy Conversion Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Robert Walker, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 417,569.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Walker at Montana State University is developing new
spectroscopic methods capable of examining chemical processes that occur on
surfaces of fuel cell systems, which are relevant to energy storage and
conversion technologies. Processes such as coal gasification, steam reforming
and solar-thermal energy production require temperatures as high as 1000 C. At
these high temperatures, chemical degradation can happen at an accelerated rate,
leading to decreased efficiencies and, ultimately, process failure.
Understanding the mechanisms responsible for sustainable operation as well as
those that compromise performance is critical for designing new, durable
chemical systems capable of electrochemical power generation. Professor Walker
and his students are working to expand the use of state of the art spectroscopy
techniques to identify and quantify the chemical reactions responsible for
energy conversion processes. In addition to providing interdisciplinary research
experiences to both graduate and undergraduate students involved in the project,
Professor Walker actively reaches out to students from underrepresented minority
groups through the Montana Apprenticeship Program (MAP) and American Indian
Research Opportunities (AIRO) Office on campus and works with student volunteers
to help organize and judge elementary school science fairs throughout the
Bozeman Public School District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor
Walker employs second-order nonlinear optical spectroscopy to study phase
changes and surface chemistry for complex, mixed valent metal oxides commonly
used in thermal solar and solid oxide fuel cell applications. Specifically,
resonance enhanced second harmonic generation (SHG) is used to examine the
surface properties of ceria, yttria, nickel oxide and other materials at
temperatures above 600 C and under strongly oxidizing or reducing atmospheres.
SHG is a well suited for stand-off, noninvasive studies of materials in
chemically aggressive environments. SHG signal can arise from bulk materials
that lack inversion symmetry but the surface contribution can still be extracted
through analysis of the signal's phase and wavelength dependent resonance
behavior. Resonance enhancement ensures the chemical (or material) selectivity
necessary for answering specific questions about oxidation states, phase
formation, and mass transfer. These studies could significantly expand the
window of chemical systems capable of being studied with surface specific,
second-order nonlinear optical spectroscopy. The goals of this work are two-
fold: 1) developing and applying second-order NLO techniques to study high
temperature surface chemistry, and 2) testing proposed mechanisms that describe
material segregation and new phase formation with a particular emphasis on
reversible and irreversible changes in electrochemically active ceramic
electrodes. Professor Walker's research program actively supports aspiring
scientists from underrepresented groups in science. He engages students from
underrepresented minority groups in his research projects through the Montana
Apprenticeship Program (MAP) and American Indian Research Opportunities (AIRO)
Office on campus. His outreach activities are structured to provide a platform
for his students to develop strong communication skills and mentoring abilities.