* 1710630
* RUI:  Disorder and bonding dynamics in superionic solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Nicole Adelstein, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 154,398.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research aimed to contribute to the discovery of new materials for all solid-
state batteries. In contrast to all solid-state batteries, conventional lithium-
ion batteries suffer from fire hazards and low energy-density. Solid-state
batteries will be safer and enable advances in electric vehicle and renewable
energy technologies, but they are not yet commercially viable because most
solids do not conduct ions as well as the liquids or polymer gels used in
conventional batteries. Batteries require a separator that conducts ions, but
not electrons, called an electrolyte. Advances in the fundamental understanding
of ion conductivity in solids are needed to predict materials with very fast ion
conductivity, superionic electrolytes. Battery technology will be transformed by
the discovery of crystalline and amorphous superionic electrolytes, which are
cheaper to manufacture and can improve battery stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use large-scale simulations of ion
conductivity in known solid electrolytes to advance fundamental knowledge of the
relationship between a material's structure and composition and conductivity.
The tools developed to identify these relationships will be used to screen for
new materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Master's and undergraduate students will
receive training in this project at San Francisco State University, one of the
most diverse institutions in the nation. The PI incorporates her research into
computational and physical chemistry courses to recruit students. Active
participation of students in frontier research will enrich their education and
prepare them, many from under-represented groups, for professional careers in
the sciences. The research team volunteers with Girls-Who-Code, a pioneering
organization that introduces high school students to computer science, kindling
their interest and building confidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research using large-scale
ab-initio molecular dynamics simulations to advance fundamental knowledge of the
effect of bonding and structural disorder on ionic conductivity. The project
goal is to predict ionic conductivity in solid materials and use high-throughput
screening to discover new superionic electrolytes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research tests the hypothesis that the breaking and forming of bonds to lithium,
bonding dynamics, significantly affects lithium conductivity, especially through
correlated motion. Most previous theories of lithium conductivity in
electrolytes assume that lithium retains a constant ionic bond character and
motion is uncorrelated. Identification of the lithium-anion bond character as
ionic or polar-covalent is a novel approach of this research. The research team
will compare correlated motion and bonding dynamics among many known fast
lithium conductors, leading to the development of generalized analysis tools for
predicting higher conductivity electrolytes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Most
previous attempts to predict new solid electrolytes have focused on crystalline
materials. The research team aims to identify the effect of disorder on lithium
conductivity in amorphous electrolytes, using both empirical and ab-initio
molecular dynamics simulations to compare crystalline and amorphous
electrolytes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will include master's and
undergraduate students in all aspects of this computational project: performing
the molecular dynamics, writing scripts to analyze data, and constructing
comparative simulations to gain insight into conductivity. The PI incorporates
coding, simulation, and electrochemistry into her courses, to inspire and
recruit students into research and into science careers. The research team will
volunteer to introduce local high school students to this research and
computational science.