* 1710739
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Leveraging collections to quantify phenotype-genotype-environment associations underlying variation in songbird cryptic coloration
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Nicholas Mason, Mason                   Nicholas       A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. An enduring goal in evolution and ecology is to understand how
populations and species adapt to environmental conditions that vary over space
and time. Studying local adaptation provides important insights into the
biological processes that generate geographic variation in observable
characteristics within and among populations. Furthermore, many populations and
species have traits that have changed overtime, often in response to human-
induced modifications of their natural habitat. This research will combine
traditionally disparate data sources to quantify associations between
phenotypic, environmental, and genetic variation in a widespread songbird, the
Horned Lark. In examining geographic and temporal variation in camouflage among
Horned Lark populations, this project will shed light on how organisms evolve
local adaptations and cope with disturbances to their native habitat in a
rapidly changing world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will take standardized
measurements of lark coloration and patterning by photographing museum
specimens. These measurements will be compared to data acquired from two remote
sensing instruments that vary in their spectral and spatial resolution. These
phenotype-environment associations will then be considered alongside genotypic
variation. After assembling a reference genome, the PIs will examine
associations between genotypes and phenotypes to unravel the genetic
architecture underlying adaptive coloration in larks. Finally, the PIs will
examine phenotypic and genetic variation among a series of museum specimens that
exhibit phenotypic change over time in response to increases in agricultural
activity in the southwestern United States. In comparing genetic variation
between darker-colored larks that were collected in the past ten years to
lighter-colored larks that were collected more than 80 years ago in the same
locality, this research will quantify the role of selection, drift, and gene
flow in driving rapid phenotypic change over contemporary time scales. During
their time as a post-doctoral research at UC Berkeley and the Museum of
Vertebrate Zoology, the Fellow will learn a variety of bioinformatics
techniques, remote sensing technologies, and museum curatorial skills that will
benefit him throughout his career in the natural sciences. Furthermore, the
Fellow will examine how involvement in natural history collections might
influence undergraduate volition and retention in ecology and evolutionary
biology, particularly among under-represented demographics in science. Results
from these studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals and shared at
scientific meetings.