* 1710640
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Twin boundary structure and mobility in shape memory alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Peter Mullner, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 514,065.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends the fundamental
understanding of how materials deform and provides valuable information for the
development of novel and improved alloys. Active or "smart" materials such as
those in this work find applications in medicine (e.g. stents and tooth braces),
vehicles (including automobiles, aircrafts, and spacecraft), and in micro-
electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). &lt;br/&gt;This is an international
collaboration between a US team at Boise State University, Boise, Idaho, and an
Israeli team at the Technion in Haifa, Israel. The project enhances the basic
understanding of alloy deformation and develops an educated workforce in this
area. This promotes the Idaho economy, with one of the lowest gross domestic
product per capita in the US. Also, the US team will promote education, science,
and diversity by continuing a tradition of visiting local K-12 school and using
institutional channels for recruiting students from underrepresented minorities.
Undergraduate students and secondary education teachers will gain research
experience through a Boise State Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
site. The team will disseminate results through peer-reviewed journals,
websites, conferences, and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:
Technical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-BSF
collaborative research project which includes a US research team at Boise State
University, Boise, Idaho, and an Israeli research team at the Technion, Haifa,
extends the fundamental understanding of how materials respond to dynamical
loading. In particular, research focuses on deformation by twinning, besides
dislocation mediated deformation one of the major modes of plastic deformation.
While the dynamical properties of dislocations have been well studied, a
corresponding knowledge for twin boundaries does not exist though it is highly
needed for the advancement of modern materials including high strength
structural materials, nanocrystalline materials, nanoscale materials, and
functional materials to align with the Materials Genome Initiative. The
international team aims to correlate the dynamical properties of twin boundaries
(TBs) to their atomistic structure, which includes topological defects such as
twinning disconnections (TDs). Researchers will use novel experimental and
analytical models to: (1) characterize twin boundary structures, (2) establish
twin boundary defect models for type I and type II twins, (3) measure the
complete kinetic relation of twin boundary motion, (4) develop analytical models
for twin boundary motion, and (5) formulate relations between structural
properties of twin boundaries and the dynamics of the twinning process. This
research program proposes to advance knowledge in materials science and physics
through a comprehensive theoretical and experimental study of the relationships
between the atomistic structures of TBs and TDs; barriers and mechanisms for TB
and TD motion; and kinetic relations for TB motion. The team will study these
topics in three different martensite structures and three different types of
twins (compound, type I and type II). Results are expected to facilitate
accurate models of the complicated structures of TBs of type I and II twins, and
the kinetic relations of the TBs. Results will be significant as they will apply
to all materials that deform by twinning including intermetallic compounds,
ferroelectric ceramics, shape memory alloys, and metals. Both US and Israeli PIs
have complementary research projects on related subjects that will benefit from
project results. Specifically, the American PI is conducting twinning and
fatigue research including NSF-funded work. The Israeli PI has an ISF project on
twinning dynamics in ferroic materials, which has one year of overlap with the
proposed program. The experienced international team has the required know how
and resources to carry out the proposed work.