* 1710347
* RUI: Quantifying the thermodynamics of Calcium(II) and Cadmium(II) interactions with EF-hand proteins:  Understanding the factors that define Cadmium ion mimicry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Anne Marie Spuches, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2021
* USD 252,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Elizabeth Smith from Eastern Carolina University to
investigate a largely unexplored aspect of the biological chemistry of cadmium.
Researchers have mainly focused on cadmium interactions with proteins that
contain sulfur atoms as a point of contact. A recent analysis of all available
protein structures found that cadmium prefers binding to oxygen rich calcium
sites in proteins as well. Interestingly, there is very little data regarding
the fundamental driving force for cadmium binding to these proteins therefore
creating a large gap in the understanding of such interactions. It is the goal
of Dr. Spuches and her students to fill this gap in knowledge regarding cadmium
interactions with proteins. Funds provided by the NSF Chemistry of Life
Processes Program will allow students in the Spuches lab to conduct a detailed
thermodynamic and structural investigation of cadmium binding to natively
calcium binding proteins and model peptides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be
an investigation of a largely unexplored aspect of the biological chemistry of
cadmium. The Spuches lab will focus their attention on human cardiac troponin C
(HcTnC), an EF-hand protein that utilizes Ca(II) to regulate cardiac muscle
contraction. They plan to use a combination of isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC), circular dichroism (CD), and NMR spectroscopy (113Cd/1H) in their
studies. The proposed project will provide thermodynamic and structural data on
Cd(II) and Ca(II) binding to human cardiac Troponin C and model peptides thereby
exposing the differences between Cd(II) and Ca(II) binding to EF-hand proteins.
The project will also explore subsequent protein interactions between HcTnC and
TnI in the presence of Cd(II). This work will benefit students by allowing them
to learn a multitude of techniques that will prepare them for careers in the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries or make them very competitive for
PhD programs. The project also has the possibility to provide Eastern North
Carolina with highly skilled researchers thus positively impacting economic
growth in the region. Most importantly, the data obtained from this project are
highly likely to provide new insights into cadmium toxicity.