* 1710580
* Collaborative research: Applicability limits of aqueous pKa values for bulk and surface nanoparticle processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* James Smith, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 288,994.00

This award is supported by the Chemistry Division's Environmental Chemical
Sciences Program. The collaborative study involves Professors Kelley Barsanti
and Bryan Wong at the University of California, Riverside, and Prof. James Smith
at the University of California, Irvine. Together with their graduate and
undergraduate students, they investigate the acidity of atmospheric aerosols
(very fine droplets in the atmosphere). Several key processes that cause small
particles to form and grow in the atmosphere are controlled by the acidity of
the surface and interior of aerosol particles. The formation and growth of these
small particles in the atmosphere have implications for their effects on health
as well as their potential to directly and indirectly impact climate.
Atmospheric aerosols are particles that are often smaller than 100 nanometers in
diameter. Typical descriptions of acidity fail to adequately represent the acid-
base chemistry in these particles because they are so small. This project seeks
to understand the limits of the applicability of an acidity measurements (here,
acid dissociation constants (pKa)) in describing the behavior of acids and bases
in sub-100 nanometer particles. As part of a long-standing summer internship
program for undergraduates, the researchers give real-time demonstrations using
the AVOGADRO program, which provides an easy-to-use graphical user-interface to
create acid-base molecular systems and perform preliminary, low-level
simulations relevant to this project. As such, the project provides real-time
demonstrations may have a substantial impact in increasing awareness of
computationally-guided experiments in underrepresented minority populations,
potentially leading to more minority students seeking careers in the
environmental chemical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to determine the limits of applicability for bulk-phase aqueous acid and base
dissociation constants (pKa and pKb), particularly as regards acid-base
chemistry in and on sub-100 nm particles. In this size range, the direct
composition and indirect hygroscopicity measurements performed at the CLOUD
chamber show that nanoparticles formed by sulfuric acid in the presence of
excess based(amines and ammonia) are more acidic than predicted using
thermodynamic models. Further, the acidity appears to vary with particle size
from ~10 nm (most acidic) to 50 nm (more neutralized). Knowledge of the acidity
of sub-100 nm particles is important for understanding relatively simple acid-
base chemistry, but also for accurately predicting acid-catalyzed processes on
particle surfaces and in the bulk phase. The specific objectives of this project
are as follows: to use molecular modeling to predict pKa values for inorganic
and organic acids and bases as a function of particle composition and size. This
activity combines techniques such a computational quantum chemistry and
molecular dynamics to model particles with diameters of up to 5 nm and to
perform laboratory experiments to evaluate the predicted pKa values as a
function of composition and size. This is done using a temperature- and
humidity-controlled reaction chamber and chemical ionization mass spectrometers
to determine precursor and nanoparticle composition. The researchers will also
develop and apply a parameterization applicable for multiscale modeling of
relevant processes taking place in and on atmospheric aerosol particles. This
latter research aim may lead to improvements in the predictive power of models.
These models address the mechanisms and species responsible for the formation of
new particles in the atmosphere, and the effects of atmospheric nanoparticles on
human health and climate.