* 1710549
* RUI: Dicarboximide-functionalized Oxanorbornyl Homopolymers and Diblock Copolymers for Use as Solid Polymer Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Dean Waldow, Pacific Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2021
* USD 188,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage devices, such as
lithium-ion batteries, are an increasingly important technology to most areas of
society due to their broad use in devices from electronics and power tools to
automobiles. As news reports have noted, improved safety and performance of such
batteries are vital as their use grows. This research project will develop and
study new polymer materials for use as membranes in lithium-ion batteries. These
polymers might allow batteries to be constructed out of materials that are much
less flammable than current ones, and to be lighter, flexible, or have more
storage. This work will also include collaborations with scientists at other
institutions and national facilities such as Argonne National Laboratory.
Benefits to the future scientific workforce include undergraduate student
involvement in all aspects of this research at a predominantly undergraduate
institution. Outreach activities will be undertaken with underrepresented high
school students through involvement with the Mathematics, Engineering, and
Science Achievement (MESA) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New polymers will be developed for potential use
as solid polymer electrolyte supports in lithium-ion or other next-generation
batteries. The major objective of this research is to better understand how to
design polymers to facilitate the decoupling of ion motion from local segmental
motion. These polymers will be based on dicarboximide oxanorbornene monomers.
Homopolymers and diblock copolymers will be synthesized using ring-opening
metathesis polymerization. The homopolymers studied will focus on structures
that have high salt solubility and an increased fragility parameter as well as
structures that incorporate the salt as part of the monomer itself. The former
will be studied as a function of molecular weight and with structural changes to
increase the fragility parameter. The diblock copolymers will incorporate the
ion conducting monomer in one block and a high modulus monomer in the other
block. The diblock copolymer morphologies should allow the blending of these two
properties on a nanometer lengthscale. These new materials will be evaluated by
dielectric spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, DSC, and potentially solid-
state NMR. If scattering data (X-rays or neutrons) are needed, this research
will be conducted with collaborators or at national laboratories. Undergraduate
student researchers will be involved in all aspects of this research.