* 1710052
* Self-Assembly of Polymer Brush Nanoparticles into Porous Supercrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ilya Zharov, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 462,911.00

Porous materials are used extensively in applications ranging from environmental
remediation to biosensing and drug delivery. One challenge in creating new types
of porous materials is controlling the size of the pores, especially when the
desired size is several hundred nanometers, or about 1000 times smaller than a
human hair. With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division and the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professors
Zharov and Gruenwald at the University of Utah are developing new strategies for
designing and creating nanoporous materials. Their approach attaches polymers
onto spherical nanoparticles, which are then assembled into supercrystals that
resemble marbles packed into a box. The supercrystal structures observed in the
laboratory are compared with computer simulations to better understand the
factors that give rise to different material properties, such as porosity,
strength, and flexibility. In addition to developing new ways to make nanoporous
materials, the project trains graduate and undergraduate students in a
collaborative research environment. The research team is also engaged in the
local community, working with The Leonardo, a museum in downtown Salt Lake City,
to develop energy focused activities for local K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on preparing a series of
short polymer brush nanoparticles (SPNPs) with varying architecture. The
researchers are investigating their self-assembly as a function of SPNP
structural parameters (i.e. size, grafting densities, polymer chemistry, and
chain length) and assembly conditions. The structure, mechanical properties, and
porosity of SPNP assemblies are characterized by a range of experimental
methods, including transmission electron microscopy (TEM), small angle X-ray
scattering (SAXS), and Brunauer?Emmett?Teller (BET) analysis. These experimental
studies shed light on correlations between parameters of the polymer brush and
properties of the resulting assembled superstructures. Molecular dynamics
computer simulations, using efficient coarse-grained pair potentials, connect
the microscopic structure of the polymer chains to the nanoparticle assembly. In
addition, the computer models provide a deeper understanding of the experimental
findings, as they guide the exploration of the parameter space associated with
the polymer brushes. Professor Zharov is developing and directing materials- and
energy-focused hands-on and inquiry-based activities at The&lt;br/&gt;Leonardo,
a museum in downtown Salt Lake City as part of the outreach activities
associated with this project.