* 1710890
* Geometric Group Theory, Random Graphs, and Isoperimetry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Jason Behrstock, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2021
* USD 196,316.00

Non-positive curvature is the study of rapid growth, such as that occurring in
population explosions, the shape of coral reefs, and connections in real-world
networks (e.g., neural-anatomy of the brain and the structure of the internet).
This project involves several distinct areas, each with connections to Geometric
Group Theory, in which the PI will develop and apply new tools and techniques
for understanding spaces with various aspects of non-positive curvature. One
aspect of the project will involve new techniques for studying a wide range of
spaces that are "hierarchically hyperbolic"; these spaces were introduced by the
PI together with M. Hagen and A. Sisto and generalize Gromov's highly
successfully notion of a "delta-hyperbolic space" to a much broader context. The
PI intends to further develop this framework with a number of applications,
including one involving a new method for building walls. Another part of the
project will study "random graphs" through techniques which the PI and his
collaborators have been developing. Random graphs have both interesting
theoretical and applied interest; one goal is to resolve a particular conjecture
in percolation theory.

This project studies Geometric Group Theory and its interactions with
surrounding areas. The groups studied are interesting both by themselves and in
establishing a paradigm for more general classes of groups (e.g., CAT(0) groups,
outer automorphism groups, relatively hyperbolic groups). The three main aspects
of this project are to: continue developing Erdos-Renyi-style "threshold
theorems'' in random graphs (joint with V. Falgas-Ravry and T. Susse); study
higher-isoperimetric functions in groups (joint with C. Drutu); and, study
algebraic and geometric properties of hierarchically hyperbolic groups and
spaces (joint with M. Hagen and A. Sisto). In the project the PI will work to
establish models for studying broad classes of groups and spaces while also
strengthening the interplay between geometric group theory and surrounding
fields including combinatorics and geometric measure theory.