* 1710175
* CDS&amp;E: Enhancing Analyses of Live Biosamples through Chemometric Modeling of Chemical Interactions with their Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Frank Vogt, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2021
* USD 433,755.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division. Professor Frank Vogt of The University of Tennessee is
developing analytical and modeling methodologies for investigations of
microalgae-based transformation of environmental pollutants into microalgal
biomass. Microalgae uptake nutrients out of their environment. Inorganic
nutrients are converted by the microalgae into organic biomass. The release of
pollutants or contaminants into an ecosystem can alter ecosystems. The
hypothesis of this work is that a microalgae's chemical signature, and their
biomass production, can reflect the status of an ecosystem. The rationale for
performing chemical analyses on microalgae complemented by novel data modeling,
is to investigate the microalgae's capabilities regarding compound uptake and
transformation when exposed to chemically changing ecosystems. The scientific
broader impacts are manifested in that microalgae accumulate a history of
environmental events and conditions. Deciphering these events becomes feasible
and allows for the detection of past and possibly lingering, ecosystem threats.
Educational broader impacts include instructional improvements in instrumental
analysis courses. Chemometrics, the mathematical and statistical methods used to
improve the understanding and use of chemical information, is highly relevant
for the chemical workforce, but is often perceived to be very difficult for
students due to the required level of math and computer skills. This work
provides tools for students to develop their own computer controlled
instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptions of microalgal biomass regarding
their chemical composition and quantities in response to their environment are
studied by means of infrared spectroscopy and flow cytometry. Moreover, novel
chemometric modeling strategies are developed to design predictive models that
link the status, or chemical signature, of microalgae and an ecosystem. This
combination of experimental and computational methodologies leads to knowledge
about sources and sinks of (anthropogenic) compounds within an ecosystem.
Gaining an in-depth understanding of interactions between environmental
pollutants and microalgae living in a polluted environment is of importance for
understanding the current status, and possibly predicting the future status, of
an ecosystem. Microalgae can then be converted into environmental in-situ probes
or sensors. Student training in this project bridges the all-too-common gap
between analytical chemistry and data modeling. Underserved students in this
geographic area also have exposure to local industrial research and chemical
production facilities.