* 1710719
* First Deployment of a Novel Imaging Correlator for Radio Astronomy with the Long Wavelength Array
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Judd Bowman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2022
* USD 473,177.00

Astronomical radio interferometry means combining signals from multiple radio
telescopes to form a single coherent image. Advances in computer hardware enable
increasingly large-scale interferometers. Such instruments will probe the early
Universe and explore the radio sky in real-time. This project will implement a
new algorithm to enable computationally efficient interferometry on large
arrays. The algorithm has been shown to be effective in theory. Thyagarajan and
collaborators will demonstrate it on real data. They will use the Long
Wavelength Array in La Sevilleta, New Mexico. They will encode this algorithm in
specialized hardware to enable a survey of astronomical radio transients. In
addition to benefitting astronomy, this algorithm may find application wherever
interferometry is used. Applications include radar, acoustic interferometry used
in oceanography, national security applications and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coming advances in radio astronomy will be
enabled by extremely large interferometers driven by high-performance, low-cost
digital signal processing. Progress toward large scale interferometry requires
rethinking the correlator of an interferometer. The correlator is the radio
equivalent of a camera in an optical system. It cross-correlates signals from
pairwise combinations of antennae. Its computational requirements scale as
O(N^2), where N is the number of antennae. It dominates the cost and power
consumption of large arrays. This project will implement the Modular Optimal
Frequency Fourier (MOFF) correlator concept, in which spatial Fast Fourier
Transforms in the aperture plane reduce the computational complexity to O(N log
N). This potentially transformative advance enables larger arrays and the study
of fast transients. This project will implement the algorithm and demonstrate it
on real-world data from the Long Wavelength Array at La Sevilleta, deploy a
Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) based implementation, and use this method to
demonstrate a transient search pipeline. This project will demonstrate
feasibility for future large scale interferometry projects such as HERA phase
III.