* 1710551
* Dielectric Interfaces on Doped Diamond Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Anna Zaniewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 430,000.00

Non-technical description: Diamond is a crystalline material that shares the
same crystal structure with silicon, which has formed the basis of modern
electronics. Recent advances in laboratory growth methods have provided diamond
plates suitable for fabricating electronic devices. Compared to silicon, the
unique properties of diamond make it the ultimate semiconductor for power and
high frequency electronics, where diamond electronics could enable more
efficient electronic vehicles, a more efficient and smarter electronic grid, and
more efficient communication systems. One of the greatest challenges to
advancing diamond electronics is producing dielectric interfaces that can enable
fabrication of transistors on diamond wafers. The outcomes of this research
provides insight into the electronic properties of dielectric interfaces on
diamond for a new generation of high power and high frequency devices. The
research provides laboratory training for students to advance the science and
technology that will drive this field. This project collaborates with Sundial, a
program at Arizona State University which supports retention and diversity in
the physical sciences. The activities developed with Sundial include research
related workshops and an outreach-level scientific conference, geared to
community members and local high school and community college students and
teachers. The goals of these activities are to increase access to science
careers to students who are traditionally under-represented, by improving
retention and educational enrichment opportunities for these
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: One of the greatest
challenges to advancing diamond electronics is the development of stable, low
defect dielectric layers that confine electrons and holes in the conduction and
valence band of diamond. This project uses doped epitaxial diamond layers
prepared by microwave plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition on single
crystal substrates. A unique aspect of diamond is that the surface electron
affinity varies by more than 3 eV by controlling the surface termination with H,
O or F. A project goal is to determine the electron affinity, band bending, work
function, surface Fermi level position and presence of surface states on the p-
and n-type diamond surfaces. The well-characterized doped diamond surfaces are
used with in situ photoemission measurements to determine the band offsets of
wide bandgap dielectric layers on diamond. Three specific layers establish the
unique interface properties: i) high work function and high electron affinity
oxides (e.g. molybdenum oxide) that have shown unusual surface transfer doping
characteristics; ii) water as a dielectric that enables photochemical processes
on doped diamond, and iii) ultra-wide band gap fluoride layers that take
advantage of the F-terminated diamond surface. The research provides a
comprehensive understanding of the band alignment of dielectric layers on
diamond and provides guidance for device design.