* 1710948
* Collaborative Research: Wireless-Powered Implantable Bone Intramedullary Fluid Modulator for the Treatment of Osteoporosis and Fracture Repair
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Rhonda Prisby, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Numerous previous studies demonstrated that modulation of flow inside bone
marrow enhances bone growth. However, to date there are no reports on a
miniature device that can be implanted inside of bone. The goals of the proposed
work are to design and fabricate a wireless, battery-less, implantable miniature
device to treat low bone mass and fracture repair. The project will provide
ample research opportunities for graduate/undergraduate students at the
University of Texas at Dallas and the University of Texas at Arlington. The
program will also have a strong impact on diversity. Both institutions will
actively reach out to underrepresented minority students through the established
programs. This project is anticipated to make an impact in both research and
educational aspects of North Texas biomedical, semiconductor, and nanotech
industries, by developing new technologies with high commercial potential and
also by supplying well-trained scientists and engineers. This project is
anticipated to have immense impact on health care and research related to bone
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of the proposed work are to
design and fabricate a wireless, battery-less, implantable fluid modulator to
treat low bone mass and fracture repair. Numerous in vitro studies eliciting
bone formation and inhibiting bone resorption via intramedullary fluid flow
modulation have been conducted. In vivo studies modulating intramedullary fluid
flow are rare due to methodological difficulties; i.e., the ability to modulate
intramedullary fluid flow without concomitant mechanical strain on the skeleton.
To date there are no reports in the literature that utilizes compact, wireless
and chronically implantable devices for in vivo bone intramedullary fluid
modulation. The purposes of this proposal are to 1) develop a wireless,
implantable bone intramedullary fluid modulator which can reliably modulate bone
intramedullary fluid flow by external magnetic field, 2) also utilize the
wireless fluid modulator to detect real-time bone intramedullary pressure in a
battery-less, wireless manner, and 3) determine whether the wireless fluid
modulator will stimulate bone formation and augment bone mass in young and old
rats. The fluid modulator has a wireless passive pressure sensor for real-time
intramedullary fluid pressure measurement and micro magnetic agitators for on-
demand wireless intramedullary fluid flow modulation. The passive pressure
sensor is designed to have a parallel plate capacitor with one electrode on a
membrane which deflects in response to surrounding intramedullary fluid
pressure. The pressure sensor will be inductively coupled to an external coil
outside of a body using radio frequency (e.g., 200 MHz). The change in
intramedullary fluid pressure will be read by the external coil as phase dip
frequency shifts. Magnetic agitators will be designed to have optimal fluid
modulation inside the limited space of the femoral intramedullary cavity (e.g.,
approximately 13 mm in length, 1.7 mm in diameter for 6 month old rats).
Microfabrication techniques will be utilized to electroplate permalloy or
permanent magnet to get micro magnetic agitators. The proposed wireless fluid
modulator will be implanted inside the intramedullary cavity of rats using a
conventional syringe (e.g., 16G needle). Changes in bone mass as a result of
alterations in intramedullary fluid flow and pressure in the absence of
mechanical loading will be studied. Following chronic implantation and periodic
activation of the fluid modulator for 30 days, bone mass and bone cellular
activity will be evaluated and compared between young and old rats. The proposed
wireless fluid modulator may be groundbreaking in its ability to non-
pharmacologically stimulate bone growth and fracture healing and have great
potential in a variety of clinical and veterinarian applications.