* 1710170
* Simulation Studies of Ground State Phases and Criticality in Correlated Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Anders Sandvik, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 426,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on developing methods and
algorithms for the simulation of electronic states in materials. Materials
derive their properties from their microscopic building blocks: atoms and
molecules. In typical metals, a fraction of the electrons disassociate from
individual atoms and migrate through the system, while in other materials all
electrons remain localized. In either case, the electrons give materials the
electric and magnetic properties that are exploited in electronics and other
technological applications. This project aims at increasing our understanding of
the ways in which electrons can form a wealth of different complex states due to
their interactions with each other. The interactions are electromagnetic in
nature, and depend on the environment in which the electrons are embedded, i.e.
the specific material and its external conditions. In the same way as water can
appear in three different common phases (liquid, gas, and solid), electrons can
also transition between states with completely different properties by changing
their environment, e.g. by applying pressure or an external magnetic field.
Being microscopic particles, the motion and interactions of electrons are
governed by quantum mechanics, and it is technically extremely challenging to
construct tractable theoretical models to describe them, and to understand and
exploit their different phases and properties.

In this project, a set of models relevant to materials with localized electrons
are studied via large-scale computer simulations. The arrangement of the spins
(magnetic moments) of the electrons in different patterns is determined by how
they interact with each other. At the heart of the project is understanding the
way a state having a pattern of ordered spins can "melt", i.e. go into a
disordered state, or go into another type of ordered state. Progress in
fundamental understanding is important for achieving further fundamental
advances as well as applications.

In addition to its scientific goals, the project involves training graduate
students in state-of-the-art modeling and computer simulations, and creating
user-friendly software for other researchers by applying the methods and models
developed. The PI is also involved in broader training activities, through
continued involvement in summer schools and similar educational events.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on developing methods and
algorithms for the simulation of electronic states in materials.

Lattice quantum magnets play an important role in quantum many-body physics, and
offer many opportunities for studying collective behavior beyond classical
statistical mechanics. In this project, minimalistic lattice models are used to
capture universal phenomena of experimental and theoretical relevance, and
unbiased numerical tools are employed to obtain conclusive results for generic
properties of ground states, excitations, and critical scaling. In the absence
of rigorous analytical solutions, such numerically exact results are invaluable
as cornerstones of our understanding of quantum materials. An interrelated set
of investigations are proposed to address some of the most intriguing aspects of
quantum phase transitions beyond the conventional Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson
paradigm. Unbiased numerical simulations will be carried out on several lattice
models in which a second length scale appears alongside the conventional
correlation length upon approaching a quantum critical point.

Building on previous work, a scaling hypothesis involving two simultaneously
divergent length scales at the AFM-VBS transition will be further tested within
the class of J-Q models proposed previously by the PI, with the goal of firmly
establishing the proposed relationships between exponents appearing in finite-
size and finite-temperature scaling forms. Moreover, a new class of quantum
clock models are proposed as a potentially simpler class of systems in which to
investigate and understand the origin of the anomalous two-length scaling. More
detailed studies of J-Q models will also be carried out, including studying the
effects of disorder at the critical point and in the two ordered phases. In
order to facilitate QMC studies of dynamic properties, work will be carried out
on a stochastic analytic continuation method, which shows promise towards
delivering better frequency resolution than other analytic continuation methods
used so far.

In addition to its scientific goals, the project involves training graduate
students in state-of-the-art modeling and computer simulations, and creating
user-friendly software for other researchers by applying the methods and models
developed. The PI is also involved in broader training activities, through
continued involvement in summer schools and similar educational events.