* 1710186
* CDS&amp;E: A New Approach for Determining the Free Energy and Absolute Mobility of Flat, Curved, and Moving Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Elizabeth Holm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2022
* USD 393,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on interfaces in materials which may be in different
states. In the natural world, materials often spontaneously change their state.
For example, on a warm day, solid ice melts to become liquid water. However, ice
cubes don't melt all at once; instead, they melt at the surface. Scientists
study the process of melting, therefore, by understanding the properties of the
surface between the solid and liquid, termed the solid/liquid interface, and the
processes that take place there.&lt;br/&gt;The characteristics of the
solid/liquid interface depend on the molecular structure, and molecules are very
small, very fast, and very difficult to control. In this project, the research
team will develop a new computer simulation method that slows down the molecular
motions in a controlled manner so that the team can extract information about
the interfacial properties and processes in solids and liquids. The results will
help scientists better understand melting and freezing, which is important in
metal casting and in 3D printing. In addition, the research team will study
solid/solid interfaces, which occur in diverse materials from batteries to
steel, and solid/vapor interfaces, which influence the production of electronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;Computer simulations of this type are increasingly
important to support scientific and technological advancement. To prepare the
materials science workforce in these new methods, this project will help train
bachelors, masters, and doctoral students in the principles of computational
materials science. Furthermore, to maximize the impact of this work, the methods
and results of this project will be available to all interested
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education on interfaces in materials
which may be in different states. An interface is a planar defect that occurs at
the intersection of materials that differ in state, phase, crystal orientation,
magnetic spin, atomic ordering, or any other structural parameter. Because
interfaces represent a disruption in electronic, magnetic, or atomic structure,
they contribute a positive free energy to the system. Thus, if an interface is
mobile, it will move so as to minimize the total system free energy. When an
interface moves, it interacts with other interfaces, with internal and external
fields, and with geometric boundary conditions, continuously altering its
configuration. As its local environment evolves, the interface structure, shape,
and rate-limiting motion mechanism may change as well. Such collective
interactions ensure that in real materials, interfaces rarely attain metastable
equilibrium configurations. &lt;br/&gt;Because interfaces mediate the thermal,
electrical, mechanical, optical, chemical, and functional properties of
materials, materials scientists study their thermodynamics and kinetics.
However, nearly all methods are limited to interfaces that are in metastable
equilibrium configurations and cannot be applied to the mobile, evolving
interfaces that occur during material processing. The goal of this work is to
develop a new approach for obtaining the true free energy and absolute mobility
of interfaces at and away from equilibrium in order to enable physical
discovery, provide deeper understanding of mechanisms and outcomes, and link to
mesoscale material processes.&lt;br/&gt;A new method for calculating finite
temperature interfacial free energy and mobility is proposed. Termed driving
force balanced molecular dynamics (DFB-MD) method, it relies on balancing two or
more known driving forces, yielding a system of equations that can be solved for
interface free energy and mobility. One driving force is synthetic, thus imposed
upon the system; the other(s) may include curvature, chemical, stress, magnetic,
defect, or other contributions. Because the interface need not be in an
equilibrium configuration, the properties of curved and/or moving boundaries can
be obtained. These materials properties may then be used to inform materials
models at larger length and time scales or to interpret experimental
observations.&lt;br/&gt;The DFB-MD approach may be generalized to other system
geometries, driving forces, and processes. By defining an appropriate order
parameter and applying a known excess energy based on that parameter, the motion
of many types of interfaces - potentially including other defects - may be
altered. This ability to influence the motion of a moving interface has the
potential to offer insight into a number of open problems involving complex
processes, including dislocation motion, grain growth and coarsening,
precipitation, crystal growth, and vacancy formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.