* 1710481
* Microlocal Sheaves, Symplectic Geometry and Applications in Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Xin Jin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2019
* USD 107,101.00

Symplectic geometry is a mathematical framework for the study of classical and
quantum mechanics. It centers around questions about the structures and
symmetries of a symplectic manifold--an even-dimensional space that locally
looks like the phase space containing the position and momentum of a moving
particle. Modern physics has led to the discoveries of many important and
sophisticated invariants of symplectic manifolds, and has predicted a number of
deep connections to different fields of mathematics. Current definitions and
approaches to these invariants are based on the analysis of a special kind of
mapping of a surface to a symplectic manifold, known as the theory of
holomorphic curves. The primary goal of the project is to develop an alternative
approach to some of these invariants, which is more accessible and which will
form the foundations of effective calculations. The approach is based on the
microlocal sheaf theory, which was invented as an algebraic and topological
method to study differential equations. The project will have many applications
in the field of representation theory, a rich subject focusing on the study of
symmetries appearing in mathematics and physics. The PI will also continue to
organize seminars on related topics, disseminate her results through academic
events, and provide research opportunities for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the PI will use microlocal
sheaf theory to quantize Lagrangian submanifolds in an exact symplectic
manifold, and will give the definition of a microlocal sheaf category of a
symplectic manifold, which is expected to be equivalent to the important
symplectic invariant, known as the Fukaya category.  The approach is purely
topological, and it allows the coefficient ring to be a ring spectrum, which
opens up interesting connections to stable homotopy theory. The PI will develop
a parallel story in the complex setting of holomorphic Lagrangians in an exact
holomorphic symplectic manifold, which exhibits new and richer structures and
which will have important applications in geometric representation theory. The
PI will use this to quantize holomorphic Lagrangians in symplectic resolutions,
a class of holomorphic symplectic manifolds in the center of modern
representation theory, with the goal of understanding the mysterious phenomena
of symplectic duality. Other applications to representation theory involve
calculations in the Hecke category using sheaf quantizations of the braid group
action as symplectomorphisms and a proposal to realize the nonabelian Hodge
theory using microlocal perverse sheaves.