* 1710746
* Dynamic Full-Duplex single-channel wireless communication systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Fadi Kurdahi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2022
* USD 329,999.00

Due to the explosive growth in demand, access to spectrum has become one of the
overarching issues limiting the potential of communication systems to provide a
high quality of service and coverage. A fundamental limitation of current
systems is the need to operate in half-duplex modes, where to support bi-
directional communication, different frequencies are assigned for forward and
reverse channels, or alternatively, communicating nodes take turns in time. In
both these approaches, resources are not fully utilized. The research undertaken
in this project focuses on enabling efficient and robust, in-band Full Duplex
(FD) systems. In FD systems, bi-directional communication occurs,
simultaneously, in the same frequency band, improving spectral efficiency and
easing frequency planning. Through the models and results developed in this
project, researchers and practitioners will be able to better evaluate different
FD techniques and architectures leading to significant improvements in
performance and deployment strategies of next generation wireless systems.
Spectrum that is harvested using FD systems can then be repurposed to improve
service to existing users as well as create new opportunities for economic
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to lay out the basic
framework for a thorough understanding of the potential of FD systems,
especially in conditions where the wireless channel is rapidly evolving. Recent
advances in FD systems have shown that it is feasible to attain high levels of
isolation between receive and transmit paths, paving the way to a host of FD
solutions and applications. While achieving a desired isolation has been proven,
it is extremely challenging to maintain the isolation, especially in highly
dynamic wireless channels. The objective of the proposed research is to study
the dynamics of FD systems utilizing spatial, analog and digital cancellation to
enable the system to operate reliably in constantly changing environments caused
by propagation conditions, multipath, and interference. A number of technical
research challenges will be addressed including developing new heuristics that
are capable of adapting to the dynamic wireless channel rapidly, utilizing novel
approaches to cognitive learning of the operational conditions. The project is
highly structured such that the central theme is consistent throughout all
phases: develop and validate theory and algorithms to enable FD systems under a
wide variety of dynamic conditions. Through a fusion of research, educational
and outreach goals, results generated from the work performed under this award
will be widely disseminated to researchers, practitioners, and the general
public.