* 1710174
* Studies towards peptide and protein chemical synthesis using strained thiolactones
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Qiang Zhang, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 08/31/2021
* USD 375,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project of
Professor Qiang Zhang in the Department of Chemistry at the State University of
New York at Albany. He is developing state-of-the-art methods for building
peptide and protein connections. The goal of Professor Zhang's research is to
establish efficient and practical approaches to synthesize polypeptides,
proteins, and glycoproteins through utilization of strained molecules. The work
is of major importance because scientists in a broad range of fields require
these biological polymers to study cellular processes in plants, animals, and
humans. The project's goals are to enable scientists to efficiently prepare
biomacromolecules that can be utilized to make advancements in diverse fields
including molecular biology, cellular biochemistry, agriculture, pharmaceutical
synthesis, medicine, and in the development of treatments for numerous diseases.
Professor Zhang's research integrates the disciplines of organic synthesis,
carbohydrate modification, and glycobiology in a manner that provides unique
educational opportunities for women and other students historically
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.

Currently, there are a variety of synthetic methods in chemistry, including
solid-phase peptide synthesis, native chemical ligation, and metal-free
dethionylation that have been developed for obtaining polypeptides and proteins.
However, conventional methods for their synthesis have a number of disadvantages
that limit the diversity of peptides and proteins that can be produced and the
quantities that can be made. Additional challenges include the number of
reaction steps required, and the need for time-consuming post-synthesis
purifications after each step. By taking advantage of the strain of beta-
thiolactone and its derivatives, the researchers are developing a protocol for
thioester-free peptide ligation. Furthermore, the facile reactivity of beta-
thiolactones enable multi-component one-pot native chemical ligation and metal-
free dethionylation procedures to synthesize complex proteins and glycoproteins.
The realization of this approach establishes an efficient route for the chemical
synthesis of biologics with minimal separation efforts and maximum reaction
output. In addition, the installation of different carbohydrate building blocks
into the peptidyl backbone generates homogeneous glycoproteins with different
glycoforms; they can be employed for in-depth evaluation of complex
glycoproteins that are important in biological systems. The integrated education
and research training is preparing a diverse group of project trainees for
rewarding careers, and greatly enhance their readiness and competitiveness for
employment opportunities in a broad range of scientific fields.