* 1710262
* Tools for Assessment in Genetics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Nancy Boury, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 182,812.00

Genetics is one of the key foundational subjects for all biology majors and also
one of the most challenging for students to learn. A deep understanding of
genetics requires students to understand processes that are invisible to the
naked eye, master technical jargon, and think mathematically. Many recent
national reports have challenged science educators to develop courses that
promote a deeper understanding of core biological concepts by adopting teaching
approaches that are evidence-based and student-centered instead of asking
students to memorize isolated facts. As teaching techniques in genetics
classrooms change, college instructors often struggle to determine if their
changes lead to increased student learning. This project, when completed, will
provide tools, called concept inventories (CI), needed for educators to
determine the level of student understanding and misunderstanding of several
core genetics concepts, such as the nature of mutations and how genes interact
in a living system. These tools can be used by faculty to determine the teaching
methods and classroom practices that best suit the needs of their students. This
project aims to improve how biological sciences are learned and taught in
college to meet the nation?s need for more and better educated graduates in the
biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although multiple broad-spectrum
genetics concept tests exist, the intellectual merit of this project is to
develop several new concept inventories focused on a range of sub-topics. The
project will include faculty and students from community colleges, R1, regional,
and small private schools across the country. The first stage will be to gather
student responses to open ended questions that require deep understanding of
mutations, pedigrees, epistasis, epigenetics, and polygenic inheritance. The
second stage will be to develop multiple choice assessments that include student
misconceptions that were identified as possible answers in the open-ended
responses. The third stage will administer the concept inventories in multiple
classrooms across the country to determine whether the concept inventories
address the stated course learning objectives, perform similarly in different
settings, and can distinguish between high and low performing students. The
completed concept inventories will enable instructors to more easily develop and
evaluate specific teaching strategies and precisely address misconceptions
within each classroom. This project has the potential to positively affect how
hundreds of instructors teach genetics and to improve the genetics understanding
of thousands of students for years to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is being jointly funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).