* 1710588
* Synthetic biology approaches to bio-orthogonal chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Michelle Chang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

Living systems utilize chemistry to interact with the world around them and have
evolved many unusual chemical behaviors in different environments. This research
seeks to explore and discover new biosynthetic pathways to the make rare but
useful functional groups, such as the alkyne. To date, only one mechanism of
alkyne formation has been identified. In contrast, soil microbes produce a novel
family of terminal alkyne amino acids but the pathway is unknown. Identifying
and characterizing the pathway for the biosynthesis may provide new knowledge
about how formation of chemical structures such as alkene and alkynes occurs in
enzyme active sites. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in
the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Michelle Chang to examine the pathway for
the biosynthesis of beta-es. Given the unusual transformations involved in this
pathway, the enzymes responsible for these eactions are studied in detail to
clearly define their mechanisms of action. Understanding their reactivity may
allow for applications including tagging of target proteins for imaging in cells
and modification of enzymes to make new catalysts. Given the broad range of
scientific methodology required for this work, students train in broad
interdisciplinary areas at the interface of chemistry and biology with the goal
of applying their knowledge to new and complex problems in the study of life
processes. Outreach activities at the undergraduate level are prioritized to
recruit a more diverse student body at the graduate studies level.

This research project is undertaken to elucidate the biosynthetic genes involved
in the production of beta-ethynylserine in Streptomyces cattleya using a
combination of bioinformatic, genetic, and biochemical approaches. Given the
unusual nature of the functional group, the mechanism of the enzymes involved in
formation of the alkyne are studied in order to elucidate their function and
selectivity as well as their potential for identification of new families of
enzymes that may find utility in synthetic applications. Upon validiation of the
genes for beta-ethynylserine synthesis, this pathway is also tested in vivo for
its ability to be transplanted into different host organisms. The research also
seeks future applications that introduce the terminal alkyne into protein-based
targets. Given the broad range of scientific methodology required for this work,
students train in broad interdisciplinary areas at the interface of chemistry
and biology, such as bioinformatics, enzymology, microbial genetics, analytical
chemistry, and bioengineering with the goal of preparing students to apply their
knowledge to new and complex problems in the study of life processes.