* 1710120
* INFEWS N/P/H2O: Chemical and structural transformations at low solubility magnesium mineral-wastewater interface during struvite formation and growth
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jonas Baltrusaitis, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Jonas Baltrusaitis and his students study
reactions of magnesium-containing, low solubility mineral surfaces with aqueous
ammonium and phosphate ions from model wastewater streams. The goal is to
develop new, highly efficient nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) immobilization
routes for use of these minerals as slow release fertilizers. The project
utilizes readily available magnesium-containing minerals (e.g., magnesium oxide,
magnesium carbonate, dolomite and serpentinite) as substitutes for low
abundance, high solubility magnesium chlorides and sulfates that are currently
used. Outcomes of this work are expected to guide the development of nutrient
recovery and recycling systems by providing fundamental understanding of mineral
surface chemistry. Thus, this project addresses critical challenges of
adequately managing nutrients at the nexus of food, energy and water. The
project provides training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
in the areas of surface science and environmental catalysis. Furthermore, the
principal investigator actively participates in efforts to promote understanding
of environmental science research in the local community via the Lehigh
University Summer Engineering Institute and Summer CHOICES Engineering
Camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses spectroscopic techniques to
investigate reactive surface intermediates and products under diffusion-limited
conditions on single crystal surfaces. This provides information on the detailed
reaction kinetics, solid surface transformation and growth mechanisms, and
insights into the nature of reactive sites. Iron- and calcium-doped MgO
nanoparticles are synthesized in the laboratory. Ammonium and phosphate ion
adsorption from aqueous solutions is performed to monitor the growth of slow
nutrient release fertilizer mineral, such as struvite or hydroxyapatite, under
interface limited conditions. Model magnesium mineral surfaces, their growth,
and adsorption are characterized using Raman and diffuse reflectance infrared
spectroscopy. Structural surface details of the synthesized MgO nanoparticles
are interrogated using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and high resolution
transmission electron microscopy. Growth kinetics of slow nutrient release
fertilizer materials from ammonium and phosphate containing model wastewater
solutions is measured using ion chromatography.