* 1710046
* Exploring Molecular Dynamics using para-Hydrogen Induced Polarization and Singlet NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* James Canary, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2021
* USD 465,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurements and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Alexej Jerschow and James W. Canary and their
groups at New York University are examining techniques for enhancing sensitivity
and improving signal persistence in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, one of the most important tools for characterizing the structure
and interactions of molecules. The anticipated enhancements will enable, for
example, highly enhanced imaging techniques for medical applications, and more
detailed studies of metabolite and enzyme activity. The NMR methodology,
theoretical insights, and chemical syntheses developed in this project will be
applicable in a broad range of fields, from biochemistry to physical chemistry
and materials chemistry. Students participating in this work have the
opportunity to be broadly educated while interacting with domestic and
international collaborative teams. Furthermore, through collaborations with the
Pratt Institute, Dr. Jerschow and his group participate in projects that apply
NMR techniques in the field of art conservation, thus reaching and interacting
with colleagues outside traditional science disciplines. The Canary group
provides research mentoring through the Societe de Chemie Industrielle, and
through hosting high school students, including participants from the Harlem
Children Society and ACS Project SEED.

The project probes nuclear spin singlet states as polarization storage states,
and the elucidation of the fundamental mechanisms that lead to polarization
loss. These singlet states allow, in principle, the storage of polarization over
minutes and hours, but it is currently unknown what limits their lifetimes.
Using both chemical and NMR spectroscopic strategies, including a chemical
symmetry switch reaction, these states and mechanisms will be investigated
systematically. Professor Jerschow also continues to collaborate with
conservation scientists on the application of spectroscopic techniques, and
Professor Canary is involved in outreach activities related to undergraduate
professional and research mentoring.