* 1710453
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Sensitivity and Resolution Enhancement in Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Joseph Chappell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 285,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships, Professors Eric Munson from the University of Kentucky and Aaron
Rossini from Iowa State University are striving to improve the performance
(especially the sensitivity and speed of analysis) of solid-state nuclear
magnetic resonance (SSNMR) spectroscopy, one of the most powerful tools for
chemical analysis. In collaborations with Dr. John Heinrich of Revolution NMR,
LLC, the team is specifically targeting analysis of substances of interest to
the pharmaceutical industry, although the target improvements will have wide-
ranging impact across the many disciplines that use SSNMR in almost all fields
of chemistry. The industrial collaborations add value by promoting rapid
dissemination and application of the technologies being developed. They also
enhance the interdisciplinary nature of the work, providing exceptionally broad
educational opportunities for the graduate and undergraduate students (including
members of underrepresented groups) performing and presenting this research. To
expand this impact even further, the Munson/Rossini team is 1) providing short
courses for graduate students and postdocs, addressing the basics of solid-state
NMR and its applications to pharmaceutical and material science; 2) establishing
a visiting scientist program to enable for students, industrial representatives,
and members of government agencies to learn the advanced techniques being
developed; and 3) reaching out to other disciplines, such as chemical
engineering, food science, and agriculture to highlight how new developments in
NMR can be used to solve their problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three approaches
are being employed to improve the sensitivity, resolution, and general
capabilities of SSNMR of crystalline and amorphous organic compounds (such as
active pharmaceutical ingredients). 1) Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) is
known to increase sensitivity by orders of magnitude. Drs. Munson and Rossini
are working to optimize these effects by studying the impact of particle size
and phase separation in amorphous solid dispersions. One aim is to establish a
means of identifying and differentiating polymorphic forms. 2) A mechanical
magic-angle spinning (MAS) SSNMR probe operable at liquid nitrogen temperatures
to lower the cost of these kinds of experiments while retaining or enhancing the
ability to control the environment in the MAS rotor. It is anticipated that this
will provide about an order of magnitude increase in sensitivity compared to a
standard NMR probe operating at 298 K, as well as improved radiofrequency
performance. 3) The team is working to improve the resolution of SSNMR spectra
by using two-dimensional proton-carbon heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy (HETCOR).