* 1710790
* Characterizing Allelic Effects and Leveraging Genomic Prediction to Advance Soybean Breeding
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Benjamin Campbell, Campbell                Benjamin       W
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of Minnesota, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Aaron Lorenz.

Efforts to increase soybean yield and quality are challenged by the limited
genetic diversity available within each maturity zone. However, an increase in
this diversity could be achieved if genomic methodologies and tools were
developed to enable the utilization of elite genetic variation that has
previously been isolated by maturity differences. The broadened available
genetic diversity will enable an increase in food production, necessary to
sustain the growing world population. The project training will equip the Fellow
with expertise in statistical genomics and quantitative genetics. Locally, the
Fellow will visit several middle and high schools to promote student involvement
in the sciences. Nationally, this project will advance the field of genomics-
assisted breeding, will develop tools and databases that will guide the
utilization of soybean genetic diversity, and will contribute to basic knowledge
of the soybean genome.

The development of an understanding of soybean germplasm architecture for grain
yield and other agronomic traits will enhance soybean breeding efforts. Yield
trial data and genetic marker data from thousands of lines will be analyzed
using GWAS and genomic prediction approaches to characterize the germplasm
architecture of soybean performance. Computational and informatic tools will
then be developed to facilitate the use of this genomic information by breeders.
This project will enhance basic research on the soybean genome and will advance
applied soybean breeding by enabling breeders to use valuable genetic variation
from outside of their maturity zone. The generated data and computational tools
will be made publically available at SoyBase.org.