* 1710535
* INFEWS N/P/H20: Supramolecular Recognition and Catalysis Targeting Phytate, an Organic Sink for Phosphate in the Human Phosphorus Cycle
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Kristin Bowman-James, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Depletion of the world's available supply of phosphorus has grown at alarming
rates over the last seven decades. The dwindling phosphorus supplies negatively
impact crop growth and agricultural sustainability. Chemists worldwide are
focused on devising new molecular strategies to meet the food needs of a growing
population. Professor Bowman-James and her students at the University of Kansas
are focusing on gaining insight into phosphorus chemistry while addressing the
adverse chemical issues associated with phytate, one of the key phosphorus-
containing molecules found in soils. Broader impacts of this project include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Kansas, as
well as international student exchanges. Collaborators include a soil scientist,
Professor Ganga Hettiarachchi, at Kansas State University, and two international
researchers, Professor Carlos Kremer at the University of the Republic in
Uruguay, and Professor Antonio Bianchi at the University of Florence in Italy.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Phytate (myo-inositol-1,2,3,4,5,6-hexakisphosphate) is a
relatively small, but chemically complex, organic molecule loaded with six
phosphates. It is a major scavenger of metal nutrients. Unfortunately, many of
its salts with metal ion nutrients, such as iron, zinc, and calcium, are
insoluble, resulting in its classification as an antinutrient. Phytate also
holds a significant amount of much-needed phosphorus hostage within its
molecular structure. With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Prof. Bowman-James and
coworkers are designing molecules to assist in releasing captured metal ion
nutrients and to probe phytate?s phosphate chemistry. This research combines
supramolecular host-guest and metal ion chemistry tactics to provide new ways to
manipulate the physical and chemical properties of phytate. Goals are to gain a
better understanding of phytate and phosphate chemistry at the molecular level.
Aims 1 and 2 provide an in-depth structural profile of phytate and its different
conformational forms. Nutrient insolubility and delivery issues are being
addressed by using noncyclic and cyclic chelates to complex phytate via
supramolecular hydrogen bond and electrostatic interactions, in addition to
overcoming phytate?s adverse properties. Aim 3 strives to probe the phosphoryl
transfer chemistry of phytate by exploring the use of polyamine-containing
macrocycles as catalysts for phosphate hydrolysis and other phosphatase
activity. X-ray crystallography and multi-nuclear, multi-dimensional NMR
spectroscopy for both solid state and solution chemistry, respectively, are
playing major roles in elucidating the physical and chemical properties of
phytate in all three aims.