* 1710468
* GOALI: To Understand Crystallization and Amorphization Dynamics in Phase-Change Memories by Linking Electro-Thermal Models, Electrical Experiments and TEM Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* C Carter, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical description: Phase-change memory, an electronic memory concept that
utilizes materials whose electrical resistance can be rapidly and repeatedly
switched between high and low magnitudes, holds great promise for more efficient
computation and data storage. This collaborative project between the University
of Connecticut and IBM Watson Research Center combines computation, electrical
characterization and microscopy to gain a better understanding of several phase-
change materials phenomena that are critical for data storage devices. Results
from this work can open new possibilities for future materials synthesis and
electronic devices. This project supports the education and training of a
diverse group of students in Electrical Engineering and Materials Science and
Engineering, and also the broader community through several outreach programs.
The students and post-doctoral researchers directly involved with the project
benefit from access to state-of-the-art facilities and opportunities for first-
hand contributions to fundamental studies with direct technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Large-scale use of
phase-change memory has been hindered by the high power required to heat the
nano-scale element above crystallization or melting (for melt-quench
amorphization) and by limited reliability due to resistance drifts of the
metastable phases, elemental segregation, and void formation upon extensive
cycling. If these device characteristics can be improved, phase-change memory
can be integrated on top of conventional silicon electronics as high capacity,
non-volatile on-chip storage, leading to significant performance and energy
improvements. This project focuses on the crystalline-amorphous transition,
including the possibility of solid-state or electronic amorphization which can
lead to lower power devices. In addition, it investigates correlations between
electronic properties, such as resistance drifts, and changes in microstructure.
Finally, the team is also addressing details of the lesser known cubic-hexagonal
transition that is not typically used but may be advantageous in some cases.
This work requires development of techniques for in-situ transmission electron
microscopy experiments, suitable electrical characterization techniques and
improved models that combined can provide a better understanding of phase
transition dynamics across different time and temperature scales.