* 1710802
* Workshop on Applications-Driven Geometric Functional Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Anuj Srivastava, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,999.00

This award supports participation in a three-day workshop on applications-driven
geometric functional data analysis (FDA) held October 8-10, 2017 on the campus
of Florida State University in Tallahassee, Florida. The workshop focuses on
topics in the intersections of FDA, infinite-dimensional differential geometry,
and data-driven applications, and will feature both senior experts and junior
researchers from these areas. The workshop includes a half-day of tutorials
providing an introduction to the workshop topics, especially aimed at junior
researchers. The remaining time will be allocated to invited talks, a poster
session, and discussion sessions. The main motivation for this workshop is to
initiate and facilitate discussions and future collaborations between US
scientists and mathematicians with different backgrounds and expertise. The
organizers will strive for breadth and diversity by targeting leading experts in
the three components areas of the workshop -- geometry, FDA, and big data
analysis. The poster session will be used to encourage all participants,
especially the junior researchers, to present their research and interact with
others. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A rapid growth of functional data in all
disciplines, ranging from natural and social sciences to engineering and
technology, has made FDA an important topic of research. To handle the diverse
challenges facing FDA, there is a need to exploit low-dimensional patterns and
structures present in functional data. Geometry provides tools to: (1) extract
and analyze structures in functional data, (2) handle the infinite-
dimensionality of function spaces, (3) arrive at viable statistical models and
make efficient inferences; and (4) process large datasets associated with many
current and future data-centric applications. The workshop will include both:
(1) theoretical topics, such as geometries of infinite-dimensional spaces,
analysis under invariant metrics, and statistical models involving functional
data; and (2) applications, such as computational anatomy, bioinformatics,
biometrics, and neuroscience. This blend of important and complementary topics
makes the workshop a unique and worthwhile event. For more information about the
workshop, please refer to https://ani.stat.fsu.edu/GFDW/