* 1710716
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teachers in Big Data
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Kazem Taghva, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 03/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site
focused on Big Data at the University of Nevada - Las Vegas (UNLV). The project
involves a partnership between UNLV and the local Clark County School District
(CCSD). Cohorts of high school teachers in the areas of computer science and
technology will participate in summer research projects with UNLV faculty
mentors who are actively involved in current research that uses Big Data. The
research projects will focus on topics such as Big Data analytics for the next
generation of transportation systems and multimodal data analytics for mobile
health. The participating teachers will translate their research experiences and
knowledge into classroom practice by developing instructional modules and course
materials that they will introduce in their classrooms and share with other
teachers in their school district. These activities all contribute to the
formation of a community of practice between UNLV faculty and local educators
that has the potential to significantly enhance and improve computer science and
technology education in the Clark County School
District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RET participants will attend a 6-week summer
institute on the UNLV campus to participate in cutting-edge research projects
with mentoring from computer science faculty who lead projects that involve Big
Data techniques and analytics. The RET Site research topics focus on projects
which involve activities such as data collecting, data representation, data
visualization, and machine learning. These are all areas that are of increasing
importance in our data-centric world for teachers and K-12 students. The RET
Site project will provide a platform for the participating teachers to develop
problem-based instructional materials and laboratory modules that they will
share with other teachers in their school district. The excitement of learning
about Big Data and related research can inspire the high school students to
pursue further computing education and related careers. The RET Site program
will strengthen ongoing partnerships between UNLV and the Clark County School
District and lay the foundation for quality computing education in the schools
and provide for the future computing workforce needs of the community.