* 1710352
* SusChEM: Unjamming the Growth of Metal Pnictide Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jonathan Owen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2020
* USD 435,000.00

Nanoscaled crystals are atomically-ordered microscopic particles that are
approximately 100,000 smaller in diameter than a human hair. At these
dimensions, the nanoparticles take on interesting chemical and physical
properties not seen in larger dimensioned particles. The chemical synthesis of
nanostructures is tricky, and the quality of the nanocrystal depends heavily on
perfecting a good synthetic methodology, which is often specific to the chemical
composition and morphology of the nanoparticle of interest. Dr. Jonathan Owen of
Columbia University is researching new methods to synthesize indium and zinc
phosphides with novel synthesis reagents that provide greater flexibility,
safety, and control of the nanocrystal properties. To analyze their structural
characteristics, Prof. Owen uses a novel and cutting edge technique called pair
distribution function analysis of x-ray scattering. This approach allows Dr.
Owen to select for conditions that lead to nanocrystals with greater purity and
crystalline order. This program is shedding light on how the syntheses take
place mechanistically and results of the project readily transfer to synthesis
of other nanoparticle compositions. Broader societal impacts of the research are
the development of new materials with reduced toxicity, earth abundance, and
improved performance in energy technologies from luminescent displays, to solid
state lighting, and photovoltaics. Prof. Owen involves high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in this research project and maintains a
quantum dot synthesis laboratory module for undergraduate courses that clearly
illustrates the principles of quantum confinement and the mechanisms of crystal
nucleation and growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of III-V
and II-V semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) has lagged behind that of the
canonical II-VI QDs, which can be presently fabricated with outstanding
monodispersity and bright photoluminescence. While there are many fewer examples
of III-V nanocrystals (NCs) in the literature, these "pnictides" represent a
rapidly developing field. Prof. Jonathan Owen of Columbia University is
researching synthesis methods of metal pnictide nanoparticles by designing
pnictogen precursors with tunable conversion reactivity. Additional control is
achieved by speeding the crystallization kinetics using high temperature
compatible surfactants and crystallization catalysts to facilitate rapid and
reversible bond formation. Methodology for the synthesis of III-V and II-V QDs,
with an emphasis on phosphides and arsenides of zinc and indium, are the initial
pnictide target compositions, but the information obtained is generally
transferable to other pnitide materials. The broader impacts of this proposed
research result from the development of new materials with reduced toxicity,
earth abundance, and improved efficiencies in energy technologies with
applications ranging from luminescent displays to solid state lighting and
photovoltaics. Prof. Owen involves high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in this research project. He also works to bring an improved
understanding of QD properties into the undergraduate laboratory in developing a
QD synthesis lab module that clearly illustrates the principles of quantum
confinement and the mechanisms of crystal nucleation and growth.