* 1710744
* Collaborative Research:  Closing the Bulk Metallic Glass Data Gap in the Supercooled Region
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* William Johnson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 176,079.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses are high-
strength metallic alloys that have a random, non-crystalline structure. Like all
glasses, they behave like a frozen liquid with flow characteristics determined
by its viscosity, or resistance to flow, which varies with temperature.
Understanding how flow varies with temperature is a key component both to
unlocking the physics behind the underlying structure of metallic glasses, and
knowing how its properties influence, and are influenced by, processing. There
are three different behaviors: At low temperature the glass behaves as a solid;
at moderate temperature, in which the glass flows like a thick liquid, and at
high temperature the glass is fully melted. Viscosity measurement of the low-
and high-temperature regimes is readily accessible through existing methods, but
to date no methods are available to measure viscosity in the thick liquid
regime. The focus of this research is to employ newly developed methods to
measure viscosity of the thick liquid by rapidly heating the glass while
measuring their elastic response. The data collected will be used to identify
the fundamental parameters that control flow, develop and refine appropriate
models for describing flow behavior, and improve processing techniques need for
creating viable commercial products. This collaborative effort will be supported
by faculty and graduate students at California State University, Northridge, and
California Institute of Technology. Graduate students will mentor
underrepresented summer high school and college interns, expanding their
representation in the professional community and exciting them to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal describes interdisciplinary and collaborative research addressing a
conspicuous data gap in the rheological properties of bulk metallic glass alloys
(BMGs). BMGs, with their outstanding hardness, toughness, strength and
processability, show promise to combine the strengths of metals with the ease of
plastic processing, and the potential for energy efficient, environmentally
clean manufacturing. The gap in the rheological data exists in the supercooled
liquid (SCL) region, between the glass transition and the crystallization
temperatures. This data is pivotal in advancing the theory of glassy liquids,
and directly impacts processability. We propose to measure the viscosity, and
other thermodynamic properties, of a series of metallic glass compositions in
this range using rapid temperature excursions driven by ohmic heating (rapid
discharge forming, RDF). High-speed time-dependent deformation measurements of a
sample under load will be used to determine viscosity variation with
temperature. In separate experiments, the ultrasonic pulse-echo technique,
coupled with high-speed infrared pyrometry, will be used to measure the elastic
shear wave velocity variation with temperature. Data will be incorporated in
existing glass rheology models, and new models will be developed as required.
Application of the knowledge gained through these studies will be applied to the
proof-of-concept processing of metallic glasses, making net-shape objects
through thermoplastic forming, and further understanding of the
microstructure/processing/properties relationship in glasses and glassy metals.