* 1710286
* Multi-Messenger Astrophysics and Fundamental Physics Tests with Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Peter Shawhan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

The Advanced LIGO detectors have achieved the long-sought goal of directly
detecting gravitational waves, in line with a century-old prediction of
Einstein's general theory of relativity. The dramatic detection of the first few
signals in late 2015 also opened our ears to the existence of black holes with
up to about 36 times the mass of our sun, in binary orbits close enough to merge
with a huge release of energy in the form of gravitational waves. However, this
has only scratched the surface of what gravitational-wave signals may be out
there and what we can learn from them. The research supported by this award will
take full advantage of the new capabilities as the Advanced LIGO detectors
improve and are joined by similar facilities in Italy, Japan and eventually
India. The goal is to enhance communication and cooperation with the broader
astronomy community so that the astronomical community can use all the modern
tools of astronomy, from optical and radio telescopes on the ground to X-ray and
gamma-ray detectors on spacecraft, to find and study the sources of LIGO's
gravitational-wave signals through the electromagnetic energy and/or neutrinos
that they may also emit. Specifically, this effort will help to improve the
analysis software and procedures to select promising events more rapidly and
reliably, with better monitoring, and to produce prompt public alerts for
strong, clear events. This group will collaborate on searches for gamma-ray,
X-ray and radio bursts matching up with gravitational-wave events, as well as
explore how best to use the growing network of gravitational-wave detectors to
search for "scalar" gravitational-wave bursts, which would be a distinctive sign
that Einstein's theory is not the whole story about gravity. Finally, the PI
will share his expertise and develop fun and educational hands-on activities for
children and their parents to learn about science through a Family Discovery
Days outreach program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIGO-Virgo "EM follow-up
program" has enlisted over 90 partner groups who have shown a strong response to
the gravitational-wave events and candidates shared with them so far, but
several technical aspects of the program need improvement. Building on this
group's experience with the current event selection and alert generation
software and procedures, the PI will help re-implement the system to be faster,
more robust, easier to monitor, and ready to generate both public and private
alerts during the future observing runs of the advanced gravitational-wave
detector network. This group is currently discussing with LIGO and Virgo
collaborators how best to manage the system design, software development and
testing which will be needed. In parallel, they are working with the Fermi
mission science team and LWA radio observatory users to search for gamma-ray
bursts and radio transients that may be the counterparts of gravitational-wave
signals, in both triggered and un-triggered search modes. According to various
models, binary mergers involving at least one neutron star are likely to produce
emissions across the electromagnetic spectrum, although they may be challenging
to detect and to definitively identify as the counterpart. It remains an open
question whether binary black hole mergers, like the events detected by LIGO so
far, produce detectable emissions. To test whether general relativity (GR) is
the correct theory of gravity, the PI will use a modified version of the
WaveBurst algorithm to search for gravitational-wave bursts with a scalar strain
polarization, distinct from the tensor polarization states which are the
hallmark of GR. The group will investigate both all-sky and position-constrained
(when a possible counterpart has been identified) searches; the latter can also
enable a test of whether the waves travel at the speed of light (as predicted by
GR) or not.