* 1710357
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Peptide Based Multifunctional Materials for Selective Capture and Release of Nutrients and Contaminants
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Matthew Tirrell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorous is essential to
food production. Rising global population is increasing demand for high quality
foods and production of plant-based biofuels, causing the rapid depletion of
natural phosphorus resources. This non-sustainable sourcing of phosphorus is
underscored by the fact that, ultimately, mined phosphate is lost from the food
production system as agricultural runoff, livestock manure and food-processing
wastes. In addition, phosphate-containing waste streams contaminate natural
bodies of water, which leads to a decrease in biodiversity and potable drinking
water. Therefore, efforts that advance the separation and recycling of
phosphorus are necessary for protecting natural bodies of water and sustaining
global food production. This work aims to develop a reversible bio-molecular
recognition system that will remove phosphate where it is problematic, recover
it, and reinsert it into the global food-production system as a means for
enhancing sustainable use of this scarce resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A challenge in materials science is the
development of materials for selective capture and release of key nutrients
(e.g., phosphorous, nitrogen and potassium) and contaminants (e.g., heavy
metals, organochlorine pesticides, pathogens). This work aims to develop a
novel, optimized, multifunctional material for selective separation of
phosphorus based on biologically inspired, peptide amphiphiles with
supramolecular phosphate recognition capabilities. The tunable self-assembly
properties of these peptide amphiphiles will be used to engineer a system that
(1) sequesters phosphorus from model waste streams, (2) enables specific release
and reuse of phosphorus, and (3) inhibits non-specific interactions and
bacterial growth that can lead to bio-fouling. The stages of this proposed work
will progress from design and synthesis of these functional peptides with
hydrophobic conjugation, to assembly of these molecules on surfaces and in
micellar constructs, to measurement of phosphate binding energetics and
kinetics. In parallel with this experimental development cycle, molecular
simulations will be aimed at elucidating the phosphate-binding mechanism of the
peptide candidates in the experimental work and discovering peptides with
improved supramolecular recognition and assembly properties, which can then feed
back into the experimental program.