* 1710163
* Self Assembly and Controlled Folding of Emulsion Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Jasna Brujic, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 02/28/2022
* USD 465,234.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, assembly lines to build
machines, from electronic circuits to motor vehicles, follow very specific
instruction manuals, followed by robots or people. On the other hand, in
biology, organisms self-assemble spontaneously according to the instructions
encoded in their genes - following the laws of physics. Inspired by biology,
this project embellishes microscopic oil droplets with specific DNA interactions
that guide their spontaneous assembly into complex, 3D architectures. These
structures range from unusual crystals to helices with exciting optical
properties due to their interaction with light. These droplets can readily be
solidified, therefore they offer a route to programmable, hands-off
manufacturing, with high yield of the desired material. The project aims to
explain on a fundamental level the principles of organization that led to life,
and this simple model system will be used as an educational tool on the mobile
labs of the Biobus, both as an experimental demonstration and as a thought
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this proposal is to use biological molecules, particularly lipids and DNA
strands, to functionalize emulsions in order to self-assemble arbitrarily
designed structures, which can readily be solidified. This versatile system
allows us to control the fluidity, specificity, valency, and logical programming
of interactions between droplets, which in turn facilitates the assembly of
complex structures, including emulsion polymers, loops and folded
configurations. In this project, we propose 1) to use multiple flavors of DNA
grafted on emulsions to program the structure of matter on the micro-scale, 2)
to study the folding dynamics of the pathways in search of organizing principles
and 3) to use the assembled components for further assembly into large-scale
materials. This 'beads-on-a-string' experimental model is analogous to protein
folding on the molecular scale, but provides visual access to the chain dynamics
as it folds. A major goal of this project is to integrate science education and
research within the laboratory and beyond. Apart from training high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate students that participate in the research, the PI
participates in the World Science Festival and is a founding member of a science
education facility called the Biobase, which provides school students from all
socioeconomic backgrounds with a research grade microscopy facility for
standards-aligned school day field trips and summer camp programs.