* 1710558
* Geometric Analysis and Optimal Control of Quantum Systems in the KP Configuration; Generalizations to nonlinear Systems with Symmetries
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Domenico D'Alessandro, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2022
* USD 292,004.00

The precise and efficient control of the state of quantum mechanical systems,
such as atoms, nuclei and electrons, is a requirement in most applications of
these systems. Such a control is typically obtained through the interaction with
external, appropriately shaped, electromagnetic fields. Moreover, one often
wants not only to drive the state to a desired value but also to optimize the
available resources. The minimization of time is especially important. In
applications to computation, fast dynamics result in the speed-up of the
implemented algorithms. Furthermore, in general, the evolution has to occur
within the time frame during which the mathematical model can be considered
valid, before the effect of un-modeled dynamics becomes relevant. In this
context, this research will accomplish three inter-related objectives: 1) It
will provide explicit optimal control design algorithms for a large class of
quantum mechanical systems very common in important applications. 2) It will
provide an in depth mathematical analysis of the role of symmetries in quantum
control systems and how these symmetries can be used to simplify mathematical
models of quantum systems, thus considerably extending the existing theory. 3)
It will validate the mathematical results through experiments in quantum optics
and nuclear magnetic resonance via the collaboration with experimental
laboratories. The overall result will be a rich toolbox for the optimal
manipulation of quantum mechanical systems to be used in applications in secure
communication, powerful quantum computing, design of measurement devices,
medical diagnostics and, in general, every device which uses quantum systems.
The activities will involve an interdisciplinary research team composed of
engineers, physicists and mathematicians with the objective of developing a
common language and science. The resulting knowledge will be the basis of a new
area of engineering and a curriculum in Quantum Engineering, a field that will
become very important in the future as the applications of quantum mechanics in
everyday life continue to expand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main mathematical
tools used and developed in this research come from the field of differential
geometry and in particular Riemannian and sub-Riemannian geometry. The starting
point are the so-called KP mathematical models which are models whose state
varies on a Lie group and whose dynamical equations correspond to a Cartan
decomposition of the associated Lie algebra. The corresponding optimal control
problems are, on one hand, very common in applications, and, on the other hand,
explicitly solvable. In the project they serve as a test-bed to investigate
properties of quantum control systems in general. These involve the role of
symmetries, the qualitative behavior of optimal trajectories (geodesics) and the
geometry of the reachable sets. A key technical ingredient of the mathematical
approach is the use of symmetry reduction as a tool to analyze the control
problem on a lower dimensional quotient space. On this space a simpler control
problem can be posed and often explicitly solved. This procedure will
substantially enlarge the existing toolbox in quantum control, which is
frequently restricted to small dimensional systems. The experimental
implementations of the resulting control design will be for systems in quantum
optics and nuclear magnetic resonance, which are among the most promising
candidates for the construction of quantum computers. Furthermore, the
mathematical analysis will require the introduction of elements from the theory
of singular and stratified spaces, which is important in other areas of
applications of control besides quantum mechanics. In this context, this project
will contribute to the development of control theory for classical systems as
well.