* 1710182
* Understanding the structural basis of transmembrane association with a multidisciplinary strategy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alessandro Senes, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2021
* USD 539,999.00

This award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division funds Professors Alessandro Senes and Aaron Hoskins. The project
investigates the factors that stabilize proteins located in the membrane of a
cell. Some of these proteins are called transmembrane proteins since they cross
the entire cell membrane. Membrane proteins represent 20-40% of all proteins.
They are responsible for a variety of vital cellular functions, such as:
transport, signaling, adhesion, development, and many regulatory processes. This
research project examines the factors that lead to transmembrane stability and
the function of specific membrane proteins. Professors Senes and Hoskins design
courses that offer an introduction to bioinformatics, including a variety of
topics in biochemistry (genomics, proteomics, systems biology,
structure/prediction) and computational methods (and hand-on experience). The
objective of this course is to create awareness and interest in computational
biology. The team also develops an interactive computational biology module for
high-school students focused on the quantitative aspects of biology and the
importance of integrating computation with experiments.

This project involves computational structure prediction, and high-throughput
interaction studies, as well as single-molecule biophysics. The structural
centerpiece is a computational method that can predict the structure of GASright
dimers with good confidence and precision. GASright is best known as the fold of
the glycophorin A dimer (GpA), the major model system for TM helix association.
The name GASright originates from the right-handed crossing angle between the
helices (near -40Â°), and from the characteristic small amino acids (Gly, Ala,
Ser: GAS) at its interface, which are arranged to form GxxxG and GxxxG-like
patterns (GxxxA, AxxxG, etc.). The computational method is used to identify
GASright candidates among thousands of protein sequences of transmembrane
helices for high-throughput experimental analysis. The resulting data produces a
quantitative model of GASright association energetics, which is then tested in
vitro on a small set of selected proteins. Overall, the research represents a
large-scale structure-based analysis of transmembrane helix association that may
produce a quantitative model of stability and specificity for GASright.