* 1710671
* NMR Crystallography:  Linking Chemical Structure and Mechanism in Tryptophan Synthase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

This award is funded by the Chemistry Division's Chemistry of Life Processes
Program. Professors Leonard Mueller and Li Fan from the University of California
at Riverside bring together two of the tools of molecular imaging, nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography, to describe an
enzymatic reaction with atomic resolution (the ability to distinguish between
atoms of a molecule and between molecules). Enzymes catalyze specific chemical
reactions that impact nearly all life processes. Yet the details of how they do
this remain elusive. In this study, the location of all atoms including
hydrogens, the smallest of all atoms, are described as the reaction takes place.
The result is a unique and detailed view into the reaction that shows how atoms
move during the process. This new method is applied to one enzyme in particular,
but the basic approach should be widely applicable to many enzymes. This
research is carried out by graduate and undergraduate students at UC Riverside
and by first-generation undergraduate students from neighboring Claremont
colleges. The researchers share their results and experience at scientific
conferences and in the local elementary and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops of NMR-assisted
crystallography, the synergistic combination of solid-state NMR spectroscopy,
X-ray crystallography, and computational chemistry as an atomic-resolution probe
of structure and dynamics in enzyme active sites. The goal is to understand the
molecular basis for reaction specificity in the pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP)
dependent enzyme tryptophan synthase (TS). To accomplish this goal, Professors
Mueller and Fan describe with atomic resolution, the transformation of
substrates into product in the beta-subunit active site of TS. The location of
all atoms is specified, including hydrogens, for multiple intermediates along
the beta-reaction pathway. The combination of X-ray crystallography, solid-state
NMR, and computational methodologies give chemically-rich detail that is not
available when these methodologies are applied in isolation. Taken together,
these techniques can provide consistent and testable models for structure and
function in an enzyme active site: X-ray crystallography provides a coarse
framework upon which models of the active site can be developed using
computational chemistry. These models can be tested by comparisons of their
first-principles predicted chemical shifts and the results of solid-state NMR
spectroscopy experiments.