* 1710977
* Compact Polarimetric THz Sensor for Reflectometric Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Kubilay Sertel, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Unique properties of the Terahertz (THz) band such as the non-ionizing energy
levels of THz waves, coupled with micrometer-scale wavelengths offer key
advantages in sensing, spectroscopy, and imaging applications. For example,
absorption signatures of molecular resonance are rich in the THz band and enable
key remote sensing and spectroscopy techniques for scientific research in
astronomy, cosmology, physics and chemistry. Nevertheless, contemporary THz
spectroscopy and imaging tools rely on single-polarization sensors, thus, vital
polarimetric information in the sensed THz signals is often lost. In this
project, a fully-polarimetric THz sensor will be developed, which will enable,
for the first time, an entirely new modality for THz spectroscopy and imaging by
harnessing the polarization properties of THz waves. Polarimetric THz imaging
and the associated sensor hardware could change the paradigm for THz imaging by
harnessing polarimetric data. It is important to note that the impact of
"polarimetry" in the RF, microwave as well as optical bands cannot be
understated, with key applications impacting many aspects of society. For
example, polarimetric radars keep us safe from intruders and optical
ellipsometers are routinely used in many areas of solid state materials
engineering, including the multi-billion-dollar semiconductor industry. The
fully-polarimetric THz sensor and the associated THz-spectroscopic polarimetry
tools proposed here will usher in new sensing and imaging applications in the
much-needed areas of biomedical sensing, chemical spectroscopy and
pharmaceutical evaluation, to name a few. In addition, the proposed work will
result in a laboratory-scale spectroscopy tool that can be readily incorporated
into the academic curriculum to serve as a hands-on experimentation and training
testbed to inspire students to pursue their education in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the proposed effort will realize,
for the first time, novel photoconductive antenna arrays with radiation pattern
and polarization purity over the THz frequency band spanning from 100 GHz to 5
THz, integrated with pulsed and/or continuous-wave laser sources to generate
wideband, or tunable, fully-polarimetric THz-band sources and detectors with
3-times improved image resolution and improved spectral sensitivity. With the
availability of these novel sensors, first-ever polarimetric sensing data in the
form of THz reflectometric images will be demonstrated. As a most relevant and
high-societal-impact application, cancer margin detection and identification
using THz polarimetry will be pursued where the material properties of the
healthy and malignant tissues are very close to each other due to similar bound
water content. With the full-polarimetric nature of the proposed sensor, THz
images obtained by the proposed sensor exhibits significantly improved contrast
and thus conventional THz imaging will be significantly enhanced by the
additional degrees-of-freedom afforded by the new sensor. Moreover, the compact
sensor topology proposed here will be commensurate with endoscopic applications
and could likely result in a clinical trial upon the completion of the proposed
effort.