* 1710923
* Data-driven adaptive robust operation of PV generation in distribution systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Mohammad Khodayar, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2023
* USD 315,727.00

The objective of this research is to develop a novel data-driven decision
support system (DSS) to determine efficient short-term operation strategies for
accommodating large-scale PV generation and mitigating its adverse effects on
distribution network reliability and security. The proposed DSS will 1) improve
the spatiotemporal variability and uncertainty quantification for PV generation
in distribution networks; 2) determine the accommodated variability and
uncertainty boundaries of PV generation to ensure the economic efficiency and
security of the distribution networks; 3) propose cost effective dynamic
solutions that incorporate the temporal and spatial variability and uncertainty
of demand and supply in the distribution networks; 4) capture the interactions
among autonomous entities such as microgrids, distributed energy resources
(DERs), and controllable demands; with distribution system operator (DSO). This
research plan facilitates rapid dissemination of the generated knowledge to the
research and education community. Specifically, it promotes innovative
collaboration among graduate and undergraduate students to provide effective
solutions for the current challenges in the distribution network operation. This
project ensures the highest quality of integrated research and education to meet
the emerging workforce and educational needs of the U.S. energy sector by
introducing new curriculum for undergraduate and graduate programs, promoting
interdisciplinary collaboration, recruiting underrepresented minorities and
female students, and developing K-12 outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this research are as
follows. a) develop a scalable data-driven approach that leverages a multi-task
deep learning framework to provide improved spatiotemporal uncertainty measures
for the large-scale PV generation in the distribution network. b) quantify the
flexibility measures as tertiary regulation services and form distributionally
adaptive robust optimization problems to quantify the accommodated
spatiotemporal variability and uncertainty. c) provide a tight convex relaxation
for the non-convex risk-averse short-term operation problem for the unbalanced
distribution networks. The non-convexity in feasibility set is as a result of
the introduced integer variables for switching and commitment decisions as well
as the unbalanced AC power flow constraints. d) develop decentralized
optimization framework to capture the spatial interdependence among the dynamic
temporal decisions made by the autonomous entities and the DSO.