* 1710809
* Solar Multi-Conjugate Adaptive Optics: Testing and Commissioning on the 1.6 Meter Solar Telescope in Big Bear
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Philip Goode, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 10/31/2020
* USD 439,524.00

The changing magnetic field of the Sun causes powerful disturbances that affect
orbiting satellites and life on Earth. Studying these magnetic-driven events on
the Sun with ground-based telescopes requires wide-field image stability from
Adaptive Optics (AO). AO is an important tool for solar astronomy because
dynamic events on the Sun can cover a one arc-minute field of view
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AO is a method to correct telescope images
for the distortion of light caused by its travel from outer space through the
turbulent atmosphere. As a result of a previous award (AST-1407597), Goode and
collaborators demonstrated such image correction for the first time in a wide-
field with a solar telescope. Results were unveiled in a video display at the
American Astronomical Society meeting in January 2017. The broad objectives
outlined here are consistent with the Adaptive Optics roadmap, a community-
developed white paper. This strategy document specifically called for further
MCAO development work beyond these initial proof-of-concept experiments and
quantitative performance analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds
upon prior research by implementing a turbulence profilometer -- a device to
measure atmospheric turbulence throughout the observing season. Gathering such
data will optimize future observations. This project will also implement another
deformable mirror and a faster real-time control computer to enable 1-1.5 kHz
operation. Developing this technology will enable critical observations to
improve our understanding of the Sun and gain insights into the origins of
potentially catastrophic space weather. This experimental technique will be
essential to perfect for the upcoming Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST).