* 1710032
* Controlling AlInGaN/Silicon Interface Kinetics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* William Doolittle, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The focus of this project is to develop an increased
understanding of the synthesis of nitride-based materials on silicon, combining
the two most widely available semiconductors - Silicon and Nitrides. In spite of
their importance in a variety of devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs),
power transistors, and high-efficiency solar cells, much remains unknown about
the crystalline growth processes occurring at the interface between these
important materials. In order to achieve the integration of these materials for
next generation devices, an improved understanding of the interface chemistry,
growth mechanisms, metallurgical reactions, and resulting defect formation at
this important interface is needed. This project utilizes a recently developed
low temperature crystal growth process, capable of achieving commercially
advantageous, high-throughput rates with various analyses to study the complex
interfacial phenomena and extend the use of III-Nitrides to include the elusive
material AlGaInN. A mechanism to control these phenomena, possibly reducing
defects and enabling future applications is also targeted. This project provides
graduate students access to cutting-edge technology and resources at the
intersection of physics, materials science, and nanoelectronics. The resulting
device platform has the potential to lead to innovations in energy saving
devices, communications, solar cells, and medical device technologies. Social
and academic outreach programs are expanded to include demonstrations for
elementary to high school students. This research provides new opportunities for
the dissemination and publication of detailed methods for achieving
(AlGaIn)-Nitride and Silicon device integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: This project explores the development of heterostructures composed
of quaternary III-Nitrides (AlGaInN) and Silicon for electronic and
optoelectronic device integration. While AlN on Silicon is largely
commercialized, all other commonly available III-Nitride alloys including GaN,
InN, AlGaN and InGaN are substantially not implemented directly on Silicon
substrates. Furthermore, the daunting challenge of growing quaternaries of
AlGaInN has not been mastered, especially not on silicon substrates. Early
attempts to control the naturally occurring growth phenomena at III-Nitride/Si
interfaces were limited to the case where an insulating aluminum nitride
interlayer was acceptable, as in lateral transistors like high-electron mobility
transistors (HEMTs). For those cases where insulating barriers are not
acceptable, as in future vertical conduction devices, e.g. transistors, LEDs,
solar cells, and power devices, limited scientific understanding and no existing
commercial success has been demonstrated. The recent demonstration of low
temperature, rapid growth methods such as Metal Modulated Epitaxy (MME) with
growth rates up to 9.8 microns/hr is providing new possibilities to "freeze in"
new phases thought previously too challenging. Since MME is performed at
extremely low temperatures (300 degrees C for indium nitride and ~500-600
degrees C for gallium nitride), the ability to control the interface diffusion,
elimination of eutectic driven substrate etching, and control of interface
planarity, all by using kinetically limited diffusion is viable. Furthermore,
having already been proven to overcome phase separation challenges of InGaN, MME
is viable for overcoming the same challenges of quaternary AlGaInN as well. The
goal of this basic research effort is to better understand and control the
interface kinetics of III-Nitride/Silicon heterojunctions, provide high quality
quaternary III-Nitride materials and identify a better solution for vertical
conduction devices integrated on silicon that eliminates the insulating AlN
interlayer commonly used in silicon/nitride electronics today. The successful
execution of this project has the potential to lead to a detailed understanding
of the chemical and metallurgical interactions between III-Nitrides and Silicon
including quantification of diffusion and reaction coefficients. This is the
foundation required for next generation vertical power transistors on silicon
that integrate smart CMOS devices with the enhanced power handling capabilities
of III-Nitrides and LEDs for solid-state lighting grown on low-cost (even
removable/disposable) large area silicon substrates.