* 1710511
* EAGER: Establishment of an Experimental Evolution System for Probiotic Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Joerg Graf, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

Microbes in the digestive tract of animals play an important part in the health
of the animal. Sometimes this microbial community is disturbed as other bacteria
enter and establish themselves, which results in an interference with the normal
function of this community. In this study, the researchers propose to develop
tools for identifying mechanisms that prevent invasive species from establishing
themselves in the digestive tract. The goal of the proposed research is to
identify mutations that enable the native symbiont to better prevent invasive
species from establishing itself. In a synthetic biology approach, the
researchers will combine different mutations to engineer a probiotic defender
strain that can fight off invaders belonging to different species. The broader
impacts of this research include a five-day training class in genome sequencing
that will be offered to undergraduates from colleges that are less research
intense to expose the students to state-of-the-art research and technologies.
Graduate students will be trained. The research will be presented at scientific
meetings and published in peer-reviewed journals. The findings from this study
will be applicable to other animals and provide new insights into how microbial
communities prevent invasive species from entering a digestive tract, which is
important for the well-being of all animals and can lead to new approaches to
prevent dysbiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to prove
the feasibility and establish the necessary tools for identifying genes
important for preventing the colonization of invasive bacteria using the leech
Hirudo verbana as a simple model system. The first aim is to determine the
colonization parameters that allow the invasive strains to establish themselves
in the digestive tract. The second goal is to repetitively expose the native
symbiont, Aeromonas veronii, to an invasive strain. The pressure exerted by the
invasive strain will select for a native symbiont that has an enhanced
capability to fight off the invader. These gain-of-function experiments will be
done for two different invasive species. In the third aim, mutations that are
linked to the improved ability to fight off invaders will be validated by moving
them into a new strain. In addition, mutations detected in lineages evolved
against different species will be combined into the same genetic background to
engineer a super-defender that can fight off both invasive species. In the final
aim, genetic tools will be developed for a second symbiont that is an obligate
anaerobe. This study will lay the foundation for identifying molecular
mechanisms that native symbionts use to prevent invasive bacteria from invading.