* 1710922
* Biosubstance Delivery and Detection Platform based on Nanoparticle Robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Donglei Emma Fan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2022
* USD 392,000.00

A largely unmet challenge in single-cell study is to deliver accurate molecular
doses and release them with prescribed rates to a designated single living cell
in the midst of many, or to a specific sub-cellular location. The overcoming of
this challenge will have profound impact on single-cell bioscience and targeted
medical interventions, particularly for many important brain diseases. In this
work, an innovative platform based on intelligent and controllable nanoparticle
robots is proposed to deliver desired dose of biosubstances at programmable
release rates at desired single/sub-cellular locations. Such device will allow
unprecedented levels of manipulation in both cell culture and tissue setting.
Particularly, the platform will be employed to deliver drug molecules to blood-
brain barrier, a vital component in the brain structures that protect the
neurons from circulating insults of toxins, antibodies, immune cells. If
successful, the understanding of blood-brain barrier regulation on the
single/subcellular level will be unveiled, which will add new knowledges
critical for finding solutions for many neurologic diseases. The project will
also provide undergraduate and graduate students rarely available opportunities
in the interdisciplinary field of nanorobotics, nanoelectromechanical systems,
and nanosensing. An educational website will be launched to timely highlight the
recent achievements and to intrigue the awareness and interest of the public in
cutting-edge scientific advances. A professional symposium will be organized to
bring researchers to this emerging field and to foster
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovative nanoparticle based robotic
platform for smart biosubstance delivery and sensing will utilize strategically
designed plasmonic-active nanostructures to precisely transport and programmably
release biosubstances to a single live cell amidst many with sub-cellular
resolution, and simultaneously monitor the molecule release process by optical
spectroscopy. To realize such a system, the proposed research will address
challenges on the material, device, and system levels and demonstrate the
applications of the platform in manipulating and understanding localized blood-
brain barrier drug permeability and delivery. It is expected to make a giant
leap towards understanding and resolving the long-standing mystery of blood-
brain barrier breakdown and its drug stimulated dynamics, a hallmark of many
critical neurologic diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease. Not limited to the
proposed blood-brain barrier study, the nanorobtic platform will provide a
transformative tool with unprecedented spatial resolution, temporal precision,
and molecule release controllability to facilitate other single-cell research
disciplines, including cell-cell communications, signal pathways, stem cells,
and biosubstance delivery. It is expected to significantly impact multiple
fields, including nanorobotics, nanosensing, nanoelectromechanical systems,
single-cell research, and drug delivery.