* 1710792
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Patterns and processes in the evolution of nest construction in Ploceus weaverbirds
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Robert Habig, Habig                   Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2020
* USD 207,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Robert Habig, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing
the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow is being
mentored by David Lahti at Queens College, City University of New York. The goal
of the fellow's project is to perform a comparative evolutionary analysis of
nest construction in the weaverbirds (Ploceus spp.). The evolutionary history of
behavior can be nearly intractable and resistant to quantitative analysis. One
strategy for illuminating our understanding of behavioral evolution is to
conduct comparative studies of animal architectures, such as nests. Unlike
behaviors themselves, nests persist through time, and have structures that can
be disassociated into several quantitative features, which permits easy and
comparable measurements and allows scientists to address questions about
evolutionary history and functional relevance. The fellow's research addresses
two major questions: (1) How do patterns of nest construction vary within and
between species? (2) How do interrelated evolutionary processes shape variation
in nest structure? This project is important for advancing foundational
scientific knowledge, and will be the first study of weavers incorporating both
molecular data and nest morphology to better understand the evolutionary
underpinnings of a complex behavioral process. The fellow is also broadening
participation in science by mentoring students underrepresented in biology.

The Fellow will reconstruct the evolution of nest construction in Ploceus
weaverbirds incorporating advanced phylogenetic and morphological techniques
including bioinformatics, computer modeling, X-ray computed tomography, and
image processing. The Fellow will also conduct fieldwork in two hotspots of
weaverbird diversity, the Awash Valley in Ethiopia and the Limpopo Province of
South Africa, and collect behavioral data (e.g. rates of predation and brood
parasitism; mating and parental behavior) and morphological data (e.g. nest
structure) to test hypotheses of how distinct types of evolutionary selection
shape the evolution of nest construction. The proposed comparative study can
thus address questions such as how rapidly certain nest structural features
evolve, which features are ancestral versus derived, which tend to exhibit
phylogenetic signal, and which evolve in response to environmental features. The
Fellow is receiving training in three-dimensional morphological analyses,
phylogenetic tree construction, bioinformatics, computer modeling, and mentoring
skills. The plan to broaden participation includes (1) recruitment, training,
and mentoring of Queens College students from underrepresented groups in
biology; (2) designing an evolutionary biology curriculum that ties in the
research of the fellowship; (3) teaching an evolutionary biology class to
underrepresented middle and high school students at the American Museum of
Natural History; and (4) facilitating a research team for middle school and high
school students.