* 1710466
* Computer Led Design of Helical Arylamide Foldamer for Selective Water Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Zhiwei Liu, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 359,998.00

To support continued economic growth and maintenance of human health, it is
vital to have access to sufficient quantities of clean water. However, we are
increasingly unable to meet this need, and water scarcity is now considered one
of the most serious global challenges of this century. A key problem is the lack
of low-cost and high-efficiency technologies for water purification. With
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
NSF Chemistry Division, Drs. Vojislava Pophristic and Zhiwei Liu at the
University of the Sciences are designing highly permeable and selective water
channels that will significantly improve water filtration by allowing the
passage of water, while blocking salts and other impurities. The channels are
cylindrical hollow helices that are formed by assembly of specific chemical
building blocks. The group first designs the channel on the computer by creating
and optimizing the building block sequences. The promising candidates are then
made in the laboratory and tested by experiments. This project is a training
ground for students at a science-focused university, a community college and one
of the nation's Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon the group's development of
computational approaches for accurate structure and dynamics prediction of
arylamide foldamers. The arylamide scaffolds form stable single or duplex
helices of application-appropriate lengths and inner cavity dimensions. The
modularity and tunability of arylamide foldamers make them excellent candidates
for the design of water transport channels by mimicking structural
characteristics of aquaporins. The group designs water channels by establishing
sequence-structure-function relationship using rational and combinatorial
sequence generation and molecular dynamics simulations, followed by optimization
for selectivity. The project includes an international collaboration with Dr.
Ivan Huc, who experimentally verifies computationally obtained structures and
measures water/ion/proton conductivities. An important aspect to this project is
that it helps us understand naturally occurring filtration processes, such as
selective water transport by aquaporins, which play a critical role in human
health.