* 1710318
* A Unified Framework for Description of Lyotropic and Active Liquid Crystals Far from Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 361,113.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to advance the fundamental understanding of
liquid crystals (LCs). Liquid crystalline materials combine some of the
properties of liquids, such as the ability to flow, and some of the properties
of solids, such as a highly ordered molecular structure, elasticity, and
controllable optical characteristics. They are found in a wide array of devices,
ranging from simple thermometers to state-of-the-art display technologies. Most
applications of LCs to date have relied on thermotropic materials, whose
structure and appearance changes with temperature. Less is known about lyotropic
LCs, which are abundant in nature, and whose behavior can be tuned through their
concentration in a solution, as opposed to
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lyotropic materials are central to biology and
life. They are water soluble, and they provide, for example, the scaffolds that
allow cells to maintain their shape, move, and multiply. They are also
responsible for the color changes that some biological organisms can undergo in
response to external cues. From a technological point of view, they could
provide a new platform for the development of biological and chemical sensors,
or for the development of active, autonomous matter, that exhibits motion or
self-healing characteristics when provided the necessary instructions. The goal
of this project is to create molecular models that will permit description of
the behavior of lyotropic LCs. Through these models, it will be possible to
determine how particular molecular characteristics influence structure and
response to external inputs, and to arrive at a fundamental understanding of the
structure and properties of this important class of materials. That
understanding will then serve as the basis for applications of lyotropic systems
in emerging technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also involve the
training of students on state-of-the-art theoretical and computational
techniques within a multidisciplinary environment. In addition, and in
collaboration with the Museum of Science and Industry of Chicago, the students
will be provided with training and public speaking opportunities that will help
them develop communication and presentation skills. A targeted summer program
will expose younger generations of at-risk local high-school students to the
excitement of science at the forefront of
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to advance the fundamental understanding of liquid
crystals (LCs). Most of our understanding of liquid crystalline materials has
been derived from studies of thermotropic oils, where temperature is used to
control phase behavior. Less is known about hierarchically assembled LCs, which
include lyotropic systems whose morphology can be controlled by temperature and
concentration, and active nematic biopolymers, where autonomous motion or
activity can be engendered by chemical means. Hierarchically assembled LCs are
of considerable importance because they can be prepared in water and are
biocompatible. Furthermore, they often give rise to mesoscopic structures whose
characteristic dimensions can be controlled, and are considerably longer than
those encountered in thermotropic LCs. The arrangement (or anchoring) of LC
molecules at a surface or interface can be controlled through physical and
chemical treatments, and the overall orientation (or director) of the material
can be further manipulated by external fields. For hierarchically assembled LCs,
these two elements, surface and bulk control, are not well understood. More
challenging questions, including the relations between internal structure and
dynamics, have rarely been addressed before. Importantly, LC-related
technologies have benefited considerably from insights provided by theory and
simulation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a theoretical
and computational formalism that will bring the same level of understanding that
has been achieved with thermotropic LCs to the study of lyotropic LCs. A central
feature of the work will be to elucidate the nature of the defects that arise in
lyotropic materials. Depending on the molecular characteristics of the mesogens
(e.g. their length or flexibility), such moduli could vary significantly, and
lead to completely different defect structures and dynamics. Intriguing
questions, including the relations between internal structure, dynamics, and the
emergence of spontaneous, directional flows, are only now beginning to be
addressed. The current understanding of hierarchically assembled LCs will be
advanced considerably by new theoretical formalisms capable of describing the
mesophases that arise in such materials, both at equilibrium and beyond
equilibrium. The central aim of this project is to develop such formalisms, and
to apply them to understand the arrangement or segregation of surface-active
molecules or nanoparticles in distinct regions of space, and the formation of
ordered, dynamic structures. Such models will rely on the material properties
and insights generated on the basis of experimental information and, when
needed, finer, coarse-grained levels of description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will also involve the training of students on state-of-the-art
theoretical and computational techniques within a multidisciplinary environment.
In addition, and in collaboration with the Museum of Science and Industry of
Chicago, the students will be provided with training and public speaking
opportunities that will help them develop communication and presentation skills.
A targeted summer program will expose younger generations of at-risk local high-
school students to the excitement of science at the forefront of technology.