* 1710826
* RET Site: Engineering Design Challenges and Research Experiences for Secondary and Community College Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Margaret Kupferle, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 598,705.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program, Engineering Design
Challenges and Research Experiences for Secondary and Community College
Teachers, at the University of Cincinnati (UC), creates opportunities for
secondary school instructors of engineering, math, physics, chemistry, biology,
and computer science from 15 local school districts and faculty from 5 local
community colleges to participate in ongoing research projects conducted by
professors of engineering at UC's College of Engineering and Applied Science.
Recruitment will focus on both minority teachers and districts with high
minority populations so that a benefit of improving diversity in future STEM
professions may be impacted. Taking their newly acquired research knowledge back
to the classroom, participants will create and implement units of instruction
that tie the research to the curriculum, encourage team work and problem-
solving, and link science and math to real world applications. By doing so, they
will inspire and encourage students to continue taking coursework in STEM
disciplines and pursue careers in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a
7-week period each summer, UC will host a cohort of 10 secondary school teachers
and 3 community college faculty participants from schools that encompass a
diverse population of students. The program goals are to: 1) educate and enrich
science and math RET participants' content delivery in their classrooms by
exploring the engineering design-and-challenge instructional process and the
critical research skills used by engineers to solve open-ended real-world
problems, 2) improve grades 6-14 student science and math achievement and
stimulate interest in STEM careers as a result of better instruction delivered
by RET participants trained in engineering content and design-based instruction,
and 3) support RET participants in becoming leaders by applying their research
experiences in their classrooms and communicating those experiences to their
peers. Five engineering research project topics will provide research
experiences addressing National Academy of Engineering (NAE) Grand Challenges in
Water, Energy, Brain, Infrastructure and Cyberspace. An Engineering Faculty
Member and a Graduate Research Assistant will mentor a team of two participants;
a RET Resource Person will train, support, and critique the work of the
participants; and an Engineering Education Resource Person will educate the
teachers on engineering disciplines and occupations, how engineers use the
design process to solve real world challenges, and assist them in the
development of an appropriate engineering challenge for their own classes. Each
participant will develop a unique curricular unit and poster and each team will
produce a research project report which includes a classroom implementation
plan, a PowerPoint presentation, a short research video, and a draft of a
journal article during the summer. Each participant will implement the
curricular unit in at least one classroom during the following academic year.
Results will be disseminated to other participants through a dedicated website
and a regional Annual STEM Conference.