* 1710957
* Towards Ultrastable Amorphous Coatings for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Carmen Menoni, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The first detection of gravitational waves from the collision of two massive
black holes by the twin Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(LIGO) detectors in Livingston, Louisiana, and Hanford, Washington in 2015 not
only confirmed Einstein's predictions of the existence of gravitational waves
but also ratified years of efforts in the development of gravitational wave
detectors (GWD). Gravitational wave detectors are interferometers in which an
intense laser beam bounces between two sets of mirrors in orthogonal arms.
Gravitational waves cause differences in the path length of the laser beam
between the two interferometer arms, giving rise to a distinct interference
pattern that when analyzed identifies the event that created them. The detection
sensitivity of GWD is determined by various noise sources, among which, thermal
noise of the coatings in the mirrors of the interferometer is a main component.
Thermal noise in the high reflectance amorphous oxide coatings in the
interferometer's mirrors causes path length differences that can mask the
signals from gravitational waves. To increase the sensitivity of present GWD and
meet the demands of future GWD, a concerted effort to understand and control the
mechanisms that give rise to thermal noise in amorphous oxide coatings is
imperative. This work will form part of that effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research aimed at demonstrating amorphous oxide coatings with
significantly reduced thermal noise and superior optical properties that will
enable an approximate 10x increase in sensitivity of state-of-the-art GWD. The
research effort has two specific aims: 1) to realize amorphous metal oxide thin
films by ion beam sputtering with reduced thermal noise through a systematic
parametric study of the deposition conditions used to grow single films; and 2)
to engineer multilayer dielectric coatings using these materials with reduced
mechanical loss compared to state-of-the-art. A synergistic characterization
effort will support the materials' growth. In particular the CSU researchers
will collaborate with Caltech researchers to assess mechanical loss in single
and multilayer dielectric coatings. This research will support the LIGO program
in different ways. Through fundamental studies in amorphous oxides it will
enable investigations of the physical mechanisms that come into play in
affecting thermal noise. It will also offer the opportunity to seek for new
coating designs that will increase sensitivity of advanced LIGO and of the next
generation GWD. Synergistic collaborations with the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration (LSC) Coatings Group are planned to congruently advance the
fundamental material science and coatings engineering efforts.