* 1710831
* Nanofluidic Charge Coupled Devices for Molecular Separation and Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Weihua Guan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 346,680.00

Molecular separation is at the heart of molecular diagnosis and analyzing
molecular biomarkers in genomics and proteomics studies. Gel and capillary
electrophoresis are two dominant molecule separation technologies based on
charge/size dispersion. The research objective of this proposal is to explore a
novel nanofluidic molecular charge-coupled device (CCD) suitable for integrated
electro-fluidic molecular separation and sensing, fundamentally different from
the conventional gel and capillary electrophoresis. The proposed nanofluidic
molecular CCD is based on the unique field effect coupling in nanofluidic
systems, in which new transport behavior and functionality can be developed by
leveraging the unique electrostatic coupling at the nanometer. The success of
the proposed project will transform the biomolecule sensing and separation by
exploring the rich properties of the novel nanofluidic molecular CCD. The
project also includes education and outreach activities to tightly integrate the
research efforts and results with graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 education
and to globally disseminate both research and the education
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecule transport at nanometer scale plays an
important role in many biological, chemical, physical and engineering systems.
Nanoscale channels offer a unique platform to explore new phenomena appearing
for molecule confined in nanometers scales. New transport behavior and
functionalities can be developed by taking advantage of the specific couplings
occurring at these scales. Despite the fact that CCD image sensors have been
indispensable tools for a variety of applications in various scientific and
engineering disciplines, a similar bucket brigade transport and analysis of
charged biomolecules in nanochannels has not been explored and realized. The
proposed research will explore the field effect controlled bucket brigade
transport of charged molecules by rational design, simulation, fabrication, and
validation of a novel nanofluidic molecule CCD device. The outcome of the
research will enable a paradigm shift in controllable molecule transport and
separation. The major challenges in realizing a CCD-like device for bucket
brigade transport and analysis are the lack of fundamental understanding of the
dynamic electric field coupling to the charged molecules at the nanoscale, and
the lack of feasible top-down engineered fabrication methods to produce the
metal-insulator-nanochannel (MIN) structure. The proposed research objectives
will be achieved through the following three aims: (i) Understand the device
physics of nanofluidic molecular CCD, (ii) Explore viable device fabrication and
integration techniques, and (iii) Investigate nanofluidic molecular CCDs for
biomolecule transport and separation.