* 1710849
* Nonlinear Pulse Dynamics in Fiber Lasers at the Verge of Mode-Locking and in Transition Regimes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Michelle Sander, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2022
* USD 368,229.00

Title: Nonlinear Pulse Dynamics of Ultrafast Fiber Lasers in Transition Regimes
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Lasers with
ultrashort pulse durations have found widespread applications in precision
measurements, micromachining, biomedical imaging and medical surgery. For any of
these fields, it is crucial to be able to monitor and predict the power and
laser properties to avoid excessive tissue or material damage. As these lasers
feature extremely short pulse durations (on the order of femtoseconds) which
exceed the fastest electronic characterization instruments, an existing
challenge is to capture the pulse-to-pulse evolution in real-time. The goal of
this proposal is to develop new real-time optical characterization methods that
can provide insight into the pulse-by-pulse behavior and characterize novel
lasers states. These methods can enable new modulation schemes in communication
systems while having fundamental impact on laser development and optimization.
In addition, the proposed real-time characterization methods can provide
powerful analysis tools for continuous monitoring of cell mechanisms, fluid
dynamics or chemical reaction kinetics. &lt;br/&gt;This project also provides an
opportunity to train undergraduate and graduate students at the intersection of
laser physics, systems engineering, materials science, and real-time
characterization to build a new generation of multi-faceted researchers to
tackle the interdisciplinary nature of technological and societal challenges in
the future. The PI will organize professional networking and mentoring
opportunities through a Boston-wide Photonics Networking series that highlights
female engineers. This aims to bring together a diverse group of engineers and
scientists and to encourage underrepresented minorities in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to
develop a real-time measurement system to analyze the pulse-to-pulse evolution
simultaneously with phase coherence in thulium-holmium doped fiber lasers around
2 micron wavelengths as well as for erbium doped fiber lasers in 1.5 micron
region. The proposal aims at exploring and characterizing transient effects,
rapid fluctuations and nonlinear pulse dynamics on a pulse-by-pulse basis for
ultrafast fiber lasers, e.g. at the verge of mode-locking. A modified time-
stretching technique based on dispersive Fourier transform is to be developed to
capture pulse behavior on a single pulse scale. Systematic studies aimed at
resolving the intricate interplay between different pulse shaping mechanisms in
fibers will lead to fundamental insights into pulse dynamics and transient
states that can be applied to design novel laser cavities, resolve polarization
evolution and optimize performance parameters.