* 1710681
* Transformative Atomic Chemical Resolution Analysis of Modulated Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ray Carpenter, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 392,385.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alloys with modulated nano-scale
structures have their constituent elements (copper and titanium, for example)
distributed in wave-like patterns throughout their volume. The peaks and valleys
of the waves correspond to high copper and high titanium concentrations. The
spacings between the peaks and valleys are small, typically 20 to 70 atom
diameters. These modulations depend on alloy processing conditions, and they can
change after the alloys are put into service. Important properties of these
alloys, such as strength, and magnetic and electrical properties, depend on the
composition modulation, so the ability to measure these characteristics is
essential for theoretical understanding and practical applications, such as
advanced manufacturing and defense applications. Accurate experimental
measurements of these fine scale composition modulations are now possible for
the first time, using newly developed high-resolution electron microscopes. The
primary objectives of this research are high-resolution measurements of these
modulations and their three-dimensional distributions in several alloys of
practical and theoretical importance. The results will be reported widely in the
scientific archival literature and at research conferences and symposia, and
they will be incorporated into teaching at our highly regarded Winter School for
High Resolution Electron Microscopy and classes on electron microscopy and
materials science. The Winter School is taught every January (beginning in 1981)
at Arizona State University. Typical enrollment is 50 students (both domestic
and international) about equally divided between women and men. Enrollment in
graduate courses on materials phase transformations and comprehensive electron
microscopy (both lectures and laboratories) is typically fifteen to twenty
students per semester, with an even gender distribution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives of this project are quantitative measurements of composition
fluctuations in alloys with modulated nanostructures, and tomographic imaging of
the nanostructures. Formation of modulated nanostructures in alloys is most
often attributed to spinodal precipitation reactions. Modulation composition
amplitude and wavelength are the most important experimental variables to
measure to control the mechanical, magnetic and electrical properties of these
important alloys, and for correlation with alloy theory. X-ray and electron
diffraction and diffraction contrast electron imaging have been used earlier to
measure modulation wavelengths, but these methods do not provide the very
important modulation compositions and gradients. The wavelengths observed are
small, typically about 20 to 70 atom diameters, thus very high spatial
resolution composition measurements are required. A new aberration corrected and
monochromated field emission STEM EMs fitted with precision EELs and EDX
spectrometers have demonstrated the required atomic spatial and chemical
resolution. These will be used in HAADF STEM/EELs/EDX line scan and spectrum
imaging modes to determine modulation composition amplitudes and gradients.
Earlier conventional microscopy also showed that modulations could occur in more
than one dimension and that complicated faults occurred in modulation
periodicity, but projection complications prevented a clear interpretation of
these features. HAADF STEM and HAADF STEM/EELs tomographic imaging will be used
to develop a more complete understanding of these features. &lt;br/&gt;The new
transformative high-resolution chemical imaging methods demonstrated on this
project are important for advancing research and development on diverse alloys
important for US manufacturing and defense applications and for graduate
education. Program results will be reported in archival journals and scientific
meetings, and will be incorporated into the highly regarded annual Winter School
for High Resolution Electron Microscopy and into the graduate education program
for materials and solid state science.