* 1710224
* Iron(III) Coordination Complexes as MRI Contrast Agents
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Janet Morrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2020
* USD 494,425.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B and the
Chemical Measurement & Imaging Programs of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Janet R. Morrow of the Department of Chemistry at the University at Buffalo,
State University of New York is developing new classes of iron (Fe) complexes as
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents. The goal of this research is
to obtain new iron-based agents that produce effective MRI contrast at the field
strengths found in the newest MRI scanners. Iron is a biologically relevant
metal ion that may be an alternative to the currently used gadolinium, which has
tolerance issues in imaging. The project lies at the interface of organic and
inorganic chemistry, as well as physiology and imaging physics and is therefore
well suited to the education of scientists at all levels. Professor Morrow has a
strong record of educating a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students. Outreach activities involving K-12 students and their science teacher
are also be part of the funded project.

Macrocyclic Fe(III) complexes are being developed as MRI contrast agents with
the goal of obtaining agents that produce effective T1 contrast at the
clinically relevant magnetic field of 3 Tesla (T). The complexes contain highly
stabilized Fe(III) centers that do not produce reactive oxygen species.
Complexes that contain one bound water or no water ligands are to be studied to
assess the effect of outer versus innersphere water on T1 relaxivity. A second
emphasis is to develop Fe(III) contrast agents that change paramagnetic
properties with temperature and pH. These spin state changes interconvert
Fe(III) paramagnetic CEST (Chemical Exchange Saturation Transfer) agents and T1
contrast agents. EPR (Electron paramagnetic resonance) and Mossbauer
spectroscopy will be used for characterization of the complexes. To study the
magnetic field strength dependence of relaxivity, the complexes will be studied
on MRI scanners at 1.5 T, 3.0 T and 4.7 T. A nuclear magnetic resonance
dispersion spectrum will be obtained for selected Fe(III) complexes. The most
effective Fe(III) contrast agents will be studied and compared to Gd(III)
contrast agents in biological samples.