* 1710875
* Do connections persist? A pilot study investigating the lasting impact of a physics course designed to facilitate connections with biology.
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Sara Hiebert, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 220,742.00

This project will study the effectiveness of new approaches for teaching physics
to future life scientists and medical professionals, in order to support the use
and improvement of these new curricula nationwide. These new, active learning-
based physics courses have been developed in response to calls by life science
and medical professional associations for introductory physics courses that help
students apply the physical sciences to the life sciences. With several such
courses having been developed recently, and with roughly 300,000 undergraduates
graduating each year with majors in the life sciences and health professions
nationwide, it is important to find out whether and how these physics courses
support students in their chosen fields.

The goal of this research project is to address two questions: (1) Do
introductory physics for life sciences (IPLS) students demonstrate a greater
ability to leverage physics competencies in their later biology coursework,
compared to their peers who have taken no physics or traditional introductory
physics? If so, in what ways? (2) Do IPLS students view physics as more relevant
and connected to their biology and chemistry coursework, compared with their
peers? If so, in what ways? This longitudinal study will analyze interviews,
surveys of students, and students' written work on tasks in their intermediate
and advanced biology courses. From these data, this project will develop an
understanding of how biology students draw upon their physics knowledge and
skills, and whether and how IPLS courses support them differently than
traditional physics courses do. As such a longitudinal study has not previously
been done, this project is important because it lays the groundwork for future
large-scale assessment. In addition, the project will develop intermediate and
advanced biology tasks with connections to physics, which will be disseminated
for both instructional use and for further research.