* 1710222
* Thermoplastic Electrodes for Sensing and Batteries
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Andrew Warnock, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 373,494.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation. Drs. Charles Henry and
Andrew Warnock of Colorado State University collaborate to develop new electrode
materials made from common carbon sources. These new electrodes may improve the
performance of a variety of electrochemical systems ranging from sensors to
batteries. While this research seeks specifically to develop sensing related
aspects of the electrode materials, this research applies directly to all carbon
electrochemical systems where fast speeds, high conductivity ,and low cost are
needed. Significant gains could also be made in low cost materials for
batteries, fuel cells, supercapacitors and other energy storage/generation
devices.&lt;br/&gt;From a student training perspective, the project provides an
excellent training opportunity for students to work at the interface between
materials chemistry, electroanalytical chemistry, microfluidics, and device
engineering. Fundamental studies of the resulting electrode behavior and
characteristics are performed, enabling the development of rationale design
principles. The effort may provide new materials for sensors and batteries used
in testing and monitoring human and environmental health. As part of this
project, hands-on science kits for K-12 students are created and distributed
broadly to Colorado schools as well as economically disadvantaged students in
Wyoming and South Dakota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
developing a new type of composite carbon electrode made from a
graphite/thermoplastic mixture referred to as thermoplastic electrodes (TPEs).
TPEs have very good electrochemical behavior. While the basic electrode
properties have been characterized, it is not understood why TPEs perform so
much better than traditional glassy carbon and screen printed carbon (SPC)
electrodes. The scientific hypothesis is that the graphite in these electrodes
contain a high density of defect and edge sites as well as possible oxygen
moieties that give rise to the exceptional performance. By fully characterizing
this material, it may be possible to understand key properties leading to the
superior performance. The applicability to advanced sensing applications may
also be demonstrated. In addition to the research activities, Professor Henry
collaborates with Dr. Warnock of the College of Natural Sciences Center for
Education Outreach (CNS-CEO) at Colorado State University, to create hands-on
science kits using a combination of the electrode materials and paper-based
microfluidic devices. The CNS-CEO is a K-12 outreach activity that hosts regular
visits for high school students to expose them to STEM activities as well as
sending out hands-on kits to schools in economically disadvantaged environments
in Wyoming and South Dakota.