* 1710697
* New Plasmonic Platforms for Nanophotonics: PT-symmetry, Geometry, and Dimensionality
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,11/30/2020
* Alejandro Manjavacas, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2020
* USD 233,782.00

The control and manipulation of light is a long-standing scientific ambition
with profound implications for the development of technology. Nanophotonics
offers a promising route to achieve this goal based on exploiting structures
with dimensions comparable to the wavelength of light. This project will bring a
new perspective to the field by investigating new concepts and systems that have
not been previously explored in the context of metallic nanostructures. These
are associated with the composition, geometry, and dimensionality of these
nanostructures, and include the study of systems displaying a balanced level of
gain and loss, ensembles of nanostructures arranged in complex geometries, and
elements with atomic thicknesses. In addition to contributing to the fundamental
understanding of a plethora of new physical phenomena, this research effort will
set the foundations for the development of new mechanisms to manipulate light at
the nanoscale, which is the key to realizing the next generation of nanophotonic
applications. This work will also have an educational impact through the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in the highly multidisciplinary
field of nanophotonics. A strong effort will be made to attract students from
underrepresented minority groups in New Mexico interested in pursuing careers in
STEM disciplines. The strong computational component of the proposed research
will serve to expose these students to state-of-the-art computational methods
and facilities, thus serving to broaden their future job opportunities in
research, academia, and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this proposal is to open new research paths in plasmonics that can lead to the
development of new applications in nanophotonics. To achieve that goal, a range
of unexplored concepts affecting the composition, geometrical arrangement, and
dimensionality of metallic nanostructures will be explored. The motivation is
twofold: first, to understand the fundamentals of these new physical phenomena
and, second, to exploit that knowledge to develop plasmonic systems with
capabilities beyond those of conventional structures that can be used to
manipulate light below the diffraction limit. The investigation will be
structured in three parallel research paths that will address the following
specific goals: (1) investigate parity-time symmetric plasmonic nanostructures
to achieve strongly asymmetric responses that can be used to gain new levels of
control over the electromagnetic field, (2) understand how the geometry of
complex arrangements of plasmonic nanostructures can produce strongly localized,
long-lived plasmonic resonances with enhanced near- and far-field responses, and
(3) study the unique characteristics of the response of low-dimensional
nanostructures and exploit them to create ultracompact plasmonic platforms.