* 1710491
* Deposition, Equilibrium Structure and Mechanical Response of Polyelectrolyte Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kenneth Shull, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 413,215.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes are large water-
soluble molecules that contain electric charges. When water solutions of
positively and negatively charged polyelectrolytes are mixed together, complexes
are often formed that have either liquid-like or solid-like properties. The
ability to tailor these properties has led to their use in a variety of
applications, ranging from personal care to industrial waste processing and
water treatment. This project is aimed at understanding how the relevant
properties of these materials originate from the detailed structure of the
components from which they are formed. This understanding will be generated by
developing a series of well-characterized model materials systems, and studying
their mechanical properties with several experimental techniques. In addition,
new processing methods will be developed that enable polyelectrolyte complexes
to easily be coated onto different material surfaces. The characterization
methods include the use of high frequency sound waves to probe the material
response. This technique is widely applicable to a variety of coatings with both
protective and aesthetic functions. The project is relevant to membranes for
water filtration and includes education and research training of students,
broadening participation, and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolyte complexes formed by the
interaction of oppositely charged macromolecules are an important class of soft,
polymeric materials. These materials are of interest largely because of their
mechanical and transport properties. The mechanical properties can span the full
spectrum of behaviors from low-viscosity liquids to tough viscoelastic materials
to brittle solids, in a manner that can be reversibly controlled through changes
in the salt concentration or pH. The primary aim of this project is to
understand the factors that control this behavior using well-characterized model
systems. A secondary aim is to use this information to develop surface
modifications to enhance the performance of membranes used for water
purification. The focus of the project is on polyelectrolyte complexes in thin
film form, both because of the utility of these materials as surface modifiers,
and because the thin film geometry is particularly convenient for the proposed
investigations. There are three aspects of these investigations, beginning with
new deposition mechanisms based on the electrochemical control of the pH at the
surface of interest. The second set of experiments is aimed at mapping out the
phase behavior of these materials, including the relationship between
equilibrium water content of a film and the salt concentration of the aqueous
medium with which it is in contact. The third element of the proposed program is
the most extensive, and involves mechanical characterization of the
polyelectrolyte complex films. Acoustic methods will be used to characterize the
linear viscoelastic properties of these materials on a time-scale of about 60
nanoseconds, approaching the timescale that is accessible by molecular dynamics
simulations, bridging the gap between experiment and computational modeling. In
addition, the nonlinear properties of these materials will be investigated using
creep and fracture experiments designed specifically for investigations of thin
films in the hydrated state.