* 1710379
* Computational Motivic and Equivariant Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Bertrand Guillou, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2020
* USD 139,765.00

Spheres are simple yet important objects of study in topology. One of the
central questions of algebraic topology is to classify all of the possible
mappings of a sphere of a given dimension onto a sphere of different dimension.
More recently, this question has received attention in other contexts: when the
spheres are considered in the realm of algebraic geometry, or when the spheres
have specified symmetries which must be preserved by the mappings in question.
Even more recently, greater understanding of how these various contexts impact
each other has emerged. The PI will endeavor to expand the range in which these
questions are understood, especially in the setting of spheres with a twofold
symmetry. Another component of the project focuses on an invariant known as
K-theory, which lies at the interface of topology and algebra. The PI will
develop a version of K-theory which is simultaneously equipped with symmetries
and multiplications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue his joint work
with Dan Isaksen on computations in the motivic and C2-equivariant stable
homotopy groups of spheres. The computation of motivic stable homotopy groups
over C is fairly similar to that of classical stable homotopy groups. From
there, the Bockstein spectral sequence recovers the motivic stable homotopy
groups over R. Finally, accounting for the "negative cone" in the C2-equivariant
homology of a point leads to the equivariant stable homotopy groups. In a
different direction the PI, together with May, Merling, and Osorno, will
continue to investigate the presentation of G-spectra as spectral Mackey
functors. A centerpiece of this theory is an equivariant infinite loop space
machine with good multiplicative properties. A number of tools that figure
centrally in applications, such as equivariantly commutative multiplications,
norm maps, and geometric fixed points, are not well understood in this model of
G-spectra.