* 1710102
* Advanced Real-Space Measurements with STM: Application to Molecular Monolayers, Monolayer Defects, and Surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Lloyd Bumm, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 12/31/2022
* USD 442,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Bumm and Huang and their students at University of
Oklahoma are investigating ways to improve measurements of the arrangement and
motion of molecules on surfaces to understand how these details affect the
chemical and physical properties of the molecules. The ultimate goal is to
understand how the properties of molecules, and therefore the surface on which
they reside, depend on how molecules pack together. Understanding this
relationship is crucial for design of unique surfaces of better bio
compatibility and the coatings for corrosion protection and lubrication. The
goal of this work is to develop improved tools for measurement and analysis with
high precision. This interdisciplinary team combines the research groups of Bumm
(experimental physical chemistry) and Huang (theoretical chemical engineering)
which provides a unique training ground for graduate and undergraduate students
working on the project. University of Oklahoma is a consortial member of the
Louis Stokes-Oklahoma Alliance for Minority Participation (LS-OKAMP) in addition
to operating the Multicultural Engineering Program (MEP). Both Professors Bumm
and Huang are working on actively recruiting students from underrepresented
minority groups to their programs, including Native Americans
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scanning tunneling microscope (STM) can image
surfaces with sub-nanometer resolution, revealing the arrangement of atoms and
molecules on the surface. Despite the remarkable resolution, accurate
measurements are complicated by the image distortion inherent in the STM. Recent
advances in image post-processing by the Bumm group can remove this distortion
to a level where accurate real-space measurements to be achieved. This project
builds on that success and develops new advanced image analysis methods to
characterize motion of molecules in sequences of images. The project develops
and tests these methods on self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)--a 2D crystalline
organic film, one molecule thick. SAMs are widely used in many areas of science
and technology. Although they are well studied, many fundamental questions
remain concerning their structure and properties. The analysis methods being
developed can measure the position of each molecule in the image to better than
30 pm. Analysis methods to study point defects introduced into SAMs are to be
developed and applied to fundamental characteristics of SAMs difficult to
perform in other ways. The Huang group provide expertise in molecular dynamics
and DFT modeling which is a critical component to bridge the observed STM images
with the underlying molecular structure.