* 1710560
* Workshop:   Addressing data management challenges within integrative biodiversity projects; Spring/Summer; University of Florida
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Ana Carnaval, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2019
* USD 16,783.00

The ability to identify common mechanisms regulating the diversification,
maintenance and/or loss of biodiversity in diverse ecosystems depends on having
relatable data across habitats, time-scales, levels of biological organization
and geographical regions. This workshop will bring together participants from
six Dimensions of Biodiversity projects spanning terrestrial to marine systems,
past and present time-scales, cellular to ecosystem levels of biological
organization, and diverse geographical regions to discuss the challenges in
making biodiversity data more comparable across projects. The ability to analyze
comparable biodiversity data across disciplines will offer new opportunities to
identify common themes across diverse ecosystems and enhance current and future
management practices for diverse habitats. Fifteen people will attend the
workshop including Full, Associate, and Assistant Professors, as well as
postdoctoral fellows and graduate students. Participation by early-career
scientists and groups under-represented in science will be prioritized. Four of
the six Dimensions of Biodiversity projects participating will be represented by
women researchers, and two of these six projects are based at Hispanic-serving
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will enhance interdisciplinary
work within diversity-focused projects and facilitate joint data analyses across
research teams. Dimensions of Biodiversity projects are fundamentally
transdisciplinary, integrating across genetic, phylogenetic and functional
aspects of biodiversity. Each of these core dimensions generates many different
types of data, including locality and abundance, genomic sequence,
environmental, paleoclimatic, and phenotypic information. Multiple projects also
gather these data across a range of geographic scales (local to continental) and
time periods (present day to thousands or millions of years in the past).
However, the volume and heterogeneous nature of the shared datasets strain the
current capacity to integratively address some of the most fundamental questions
about biodiversity. This workshop will provide participants an opportunity to
share challenges, findings, data management approaches, as well as discuss
potential solutions.