* 1710914
* Development of visible ultrafast mode-locked fiber lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Andy Chong, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2021
* USD 302,735.00

Abstract Title: Development of visible wavelength fiber lasers
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Laser light pulses
with femtosecond durations have a variety of industrial, medical and scientific
applications. Notable applications are machining micro-scale devices, imaging
biological samples, medical diagnostics and therapy, and materials spectroscopy.
Lasers generating ultrashort optical pulses are referred as mode-locked lasers.
Today, mode-locked lasers are mainly based on solid state amplifiers and optical
fiber amplifiers. In comparison with solid-state lasers, mode-locked fiber
lasers have the advantages of stability, compactness, efficiency and low cost.
This project is to develop novel approaches to making mode-locked fiber lasers
generating ultrashort femtosecond scale optical pulses at visible wavelengths.
Even though mode-locked femtosecond fiber lasers have many practical advantages,
a novel pulse forming principle is necessary in developing one in the visible
wavelength regime. Most mode-locked lasers shape pulses require that the
refractive index dispersion, called the group velocity dispersion, and fiber
nonlinearity work together. However, an optical fiber in the visible regime has
a very high group velocity dispersion relative to the fiber nonlinearity that
hinders the formation of pulses. In this project, mode-locked femtosecond fiber
lasers will be developed by manipulating unique pulse propagation phenomena at
normal group velocity dispersion to form ultrashort pulses. A mode-locked fiber
laser operating at visible colors will be a valuable tool for medical
applications such as general microsurgeries, eye macular degeneration, etc.
Graduate students will be trained for careers in laser science and technology
and actively be involved in the research project. An effort will be made to
recruit diverse groups to the project and to provide them with significant
scientific research experiences. Undergraduate students will also participate
and be exposed to the research process. With this experience they may consider
pursuing future careers in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Mode-locked fiber lasers
operating at visible wavelengths will be designed using Praseodymium (Pr)-doped
fluoride fibers by manipulating the self-similar evolution and the dissipative
soliton propagation in all-normal group velocity dispersion lasers. While the
main theme of the project is to generate visible wavelength mode-locked pulses,
femtosecond pulse generation beyond the gain bandwidth (BW) limitation will be
studied. A Pr-doped fiber has a very narrow gain BW around the wavelength at 635
nm, which is insufficient to support femtosecond pulses. However, by adopting
self-similar evolution, pulses with spectra much broader than the gain BW can be
created and much shorter pulses can be formed than the gain BW limitation.
Visible wavelength mode-locked fiber lasers are relevant for valuable scientific
applications such as fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy, time-resolved
photoluminescence spectroscopy, and visible frequency combs. The successful
outcome of the project will have a significant impact. The self-similar pulse
formation technique can be exploited to generate ultrashort pulses at
wavelengths where only continuous-wave lasers are available due to the narrow
gain BW limitations. This project has the potential to extend the wavelength
range of mode-locked lasers and to open the way for future applications.