* 1710408
* Manipulation of Intraparticle Charge Delocalization by Conjugated Metal-Ligand Interfacial Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2019
* USD 280,000.00

Nanoscaled particles, having dimensions on the order of a billionth of a meter,
show many technologically important properties, and are therefore actively under
research. Dr. Shaowei Chen of the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC)
studies transition metal nanoparticles that are stabilized with an organic
capping layer (the ligand), making the capped nanoparticles dispersible in
common solvents and useful in many applications. Dr. Chen's research shows that
the chemical bonds between the metal nanoparticle cores and the organic ligands
can be exploited as a new, effective way of manipulating nanoparticle
properties. In this project, Dr. Chen and his students are interested in
examining the fundamental chemical nature of the nanoparticle-ligand interfacial
bonds and examining the impacts of nanoparticle core metals and core size on the
formation of the bonds. Results from these studies are critical to the
establishment of a correlation between the nanoparticle structures and
properties that will enable the nanoparticles to be used in optical devices,
sensors and other advanced applications. As charge transfer is a fundamental
process in a wide range of important applications where nanoparticle materials
are unique building blocks, it is envisioned that research on nanoparticles may
have impacts on the electronics and energy industries, health care, and homeland
security. Dr. Chen involves high school, undergraduate and graduate students in
his research and actively participates in various outreach programs such as the
UCSC ACCESS, UC LEADS, (the University of California Leadership Excellence
through Advanced Degrees), the Summer Internship Program (SIP) and California
State Summer School for Mathematics (COSMOS) programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research program, Dr. Shaowei Chen of the University of California Santa
Cruz (UCSC) is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
(MSN) Program to study the impacts of metal-ligand interfacial bonding
interactions on the nanoparticle chemical and physical properties. Dr. Chen has
developed new surface adsorption chemistries in which metal-carbon, -oxygen, or
-nitrogen covalent bonds readily form to result in the passivation and
functionalization of transition-metal nanoparticles consisting of ruthenium,
platinum and copper and combinations of core/shell, and core/shell/shell
architectures. The reduced interfacial resistance resulting from the
functionalization facilitates interparticle charge transfer, in sharp contrast
to nanoparticles functionalized with the more commonly used mercapto
derivatives. In particular, the formation of conjugated metal-ligand interfacial
bonds leads to effective intraparticle charge delocalization between particle-
bound functional moieties, and the emergence of optical and electronic
properties that are analogous to those of their dimeric counterparts. Dr. Chen's
research advances the understanding of the fundamental chemical nature of the
interfacial bonds and examines the impact of nanoparticle core metals and core
size on the formation of conjugated metal-ligand interfacial bonds. Results from
these studies are critical in the establishment of an unambiguous correlation
between the nanoparticle structures and properties. Dr. Chen involves high
school, undergraduate and graduate students in his research and actively
participates in various outreach programs such as the UCSC ACCESS, UC LEADS,
(the University of California Leadership Excellence through Advanced Degrees),
the Summer Internship Program (SIP) and California State Summer School for
Mathematics (COSMOS) programs.