* 1710534
* Algebraic Structures in Equivariant Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* AnnaMarie Bohmann, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2022
* USD 159,917.00

Algebraic topology is an area of pure mathematics that approaches the study of
complicated and usually high dimensional spaces via the use of algebraic
invariants. It has connections to fields ranging from data analysis to physics.
The PI's research specifically focuses on the algebra used to study spaces that
have interesting symmetries. This type of structure has become increasingly
important in recent developments in algebraic topology but is still
comparatively poorly understood. The PI's work will advance state-of-the-art
knowledge in this area of pure mathematics. Her research program is centered on
developing the rich algebraic structures that arise in this context and using
these to construct and analyze both classical and new algebro-topological
deformation invariants of spaces with symmetries. Additionally, the funds from
this grant will assist the PI in her outreach activities designed to promote
women and underrepresented minorities in mathematics, including her work with
the newly formed Vanderbilt Women in Math group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
plans to conduct research in equivariant stable homotopy theory. This area is
primarily concerned with extracting features of spaces that are invariant under
deformations and symmetries. Recent developments in homotopy theory have
highlighted the importance of equivariance, as well as the many ways in which
equivariance is remains poorly understood. Equivariant homotopy theory is key to
modern computations in algebraic K-theory and in results in nonequivariant
homotopy theory, such as the recent solution to the Kervaire invariant one
problem. The PI's research program will develop new tools for extending these
kinds of calculations as well as deepening our overall picture of the surprising
ways in which symmetry manifests itself in homotopical considerations. A primary
component of her work will be establishing methods of constructing cohomology
theories with group actions from algebraic data in order to provide new and
improved tools for further research in the field. Her work will also focus on
developing algebraic structures inherent in equivariant cohomology theories with
commutative ring structures. This work will provide calculational tools for use
in a variety questions in homotopy theory. Additionally, the PI will investigate
a new cohomology theory for coalgebras, including its connections to equivariant
cohomology theories arising from algebras. The overall goals of these avenues of
research are to advance state-of-the-art knowledge in homotopy theory and more
concretely in group actions in a homotopy theoretic context.