* 1710761
* Bioinorganic Chemistry of Catechols: Siderophores, Adhesive Proteins and Biomimetic Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Alison Butler, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 10/31/2021
* USD 480,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Alison Butler from the University of California,
Santa Barbara to investigate the properties of compounds called catechol-
siderophores that are produced by bacteria. The compounds are similar to the
molecules that make it possible for mussels to cling tenaciously to rocks in the
ocean. This research examines the reasons for the recently discovered properties
that allow mussels to cling even to slick, wet surfaces. This project may
provide an understanding of the biological phenomenon and may lead to the design
of compounds that can adhere even under water. The role of catechol-siderophores
in iron acquisition by bacteria is also investigated. This research project
provides broad multidisciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate
students. Professor Butler and her students are involved in outreach workshops
including, CAMP (California Alliance for Minority Participation), an NSF-funded
program supporting minority undergraduate students in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics fields, and SCOPE (Science as a Career Outreach
Project Experiment), a program for graduate students to talk in local high
schools about undergraduate and graduate education and the value of the sciences
as a career choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is investigates
siderophores and analogs containing both catechol and amine functional groups
that mimic the strong wet adhesive properties of mussel foot proteins. The
overall goals of the first part of this proposal are to elucidate the
synergistic role of the catechol and the amine functionalities in displacing the
interfacial hydration layer that develops on mineral surfaces leading to robust
adhesion. The approach is to design and investigate the surface adhesive
properties of new biomimetic compounds through direct force measurements with a
surface forces apparatus. The goals of the second part of this research are to
investigate the biosynthesis, uptake, and iron(III) release mechanisms of
acylated tetra L-serine, and tris-catechol siderophores through investigation of
key fatty acid coenzyme A ligases, outer membrane receptor proteins, and
esterases identified in the genomes of the producing bacteria.