* 1710211
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Understanding transport in biomimetic carbon nanotube porin membranes for water treatment and osmotic energy harvesting
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Aleksandr Noy, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2022
* USD 510,000.00

Non-Technical: &lt;br/&gt;While most of the world is made up of water, water for
human consumption nearly always requires some form of purification before use.
Given the ever-increasing global demand, access to clean water is a world-wide
problem that requires novel technologies to keep up with demand at reduced
costs. Since the ocean remains the only truly inexhaustible water source,
reverse osmosis seawater desalination will remain a vital component of a
sustainable water solution in the US and beyond. Moreover, in places with scarce
freshwater resources, such as Israel, Middle East, or Western US, desalination
becomes a critical component. While desalination solutions have been on the
market for more than 50 years, most of commercial reverse osmosis desalination
installations still rely on decades-old membrane technology that has likely
reached its useful limit years ago. In this joint US/Israel project, the
investigators will develop a new kind of membrane that efficiently and quickly
removes salt from water by passing water molecules through very small carbon
nanotubes with diameters less than one-millionth of a human hair. Nanotubes are
not only small, but also extraordinarily efficient, passing water faster than
any other known pore. The propose studies also will take a radically-different
approach that imitates the structure of the best membrane biological membrane
'the outer membrane of a live cell' and should deliver significant improvements
over existing cell membranes for water purification. A vital part of this
investigation will involve educational outreach to undergraduate and K-12
students on the importance of water technologies, training US and Israeli
graduate students in the state of the art biomimetic technologies, and
developing a joint US-Israel summer school in which the students can learn from
global leaders in water purification research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, which brings together two US-based
biomaterials/nanopores groups (Noy, Wanunu) and an Israeli membrane science
group (Freger), will develop a robust biomimetic membrane platform that mimics
hierarchical organization of a cell membrane and exploits highly-efficient and
selective transport in carbon nanotube porins. Specifically, membranes that
comprise carbon nanotube porins (CNTPs) embedded in a thin matrix layer resting
on a permeable membrane support will be designed and fabricated. These
components mimic the three main structural elements of a cell membrane: (i)
membrane pore channels, (ii) lipid bilayer, and (iii) cytoskeleton. This study
will characterize water and ion transport in these membranes on ensemble and
single-pore scales, focusing mainly on the physical principles by which nanopore
confinement enables efficient and selective transport. This research will also
use chemical modification to alter selectivity of the carbon nanotube porins.
These membranes should enable enhanced membrane performance for reverse osmosis
(RO) water purification and osmotic power generation using reverse
electrodialysis (RED). They will also allow us to explore fundamental questions
in modern membrane science, such as the physics of water transport and ion
exclusion, the role of confinement in nanopores, effects of fixed charges, and
limitations imposed by concentration polarization. Finally, outreach efforts in
this project will allow us to highlight the importance of basic research and
disruptive technological advances for ensuring future availability of clean
water. This will be achieved through a) creation of a joint US-Israel summer
school that would be focused on new water technologies and fundamentals of
water-related science, b) training US graduate and undergraduate students about
water research in the global context.