* 1710898
* RI: Small: Dynamic Payload Transport and Manipulation by Teams of Cooperating Mobile Robotic-Cranes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/30/2016,08/31/2018
* Venkat Krovi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 192,469.00

We seek to investigate the systematic design and dynamic-control of cooperative
payload transport and manipulation by teams of semi-autonomous mobile robotic-
crane modules. The Intellectual Merit of the proposed research lies in its
contribution to the development of design and control theory for general
mechanical systems under various restrictions. First, the cooperative systems
under consideration require unidirectional control inputs. Second, the proposed
research will also contribute to the fundamental design and control theory for
multiple nonholonomic systems under physical constraints. Ultimately, the
proposed research also provides fundamental understanding of networked robotic
systems that must operate in complex, dynamic, and unstructured environments.
There is still relatively little work that treats the physical-interactions and
physical power-flows within the broad multi-agent-systems literature, which we
seek to remedy.

The Broader Impacts of this research are in application areas such as
cooperative payload transport, technologies to assist first responders at
accident scenes, search and rescue applications, and remote scientific studies
of many kinds, such as experiments conducted in undersea environments, rain
forest environments, or arctic environments. Remote construction, remote cleanup
of hazardous environments, land mine search and remote deactivation, are just a
few of the numerous applications that may be impacted by semi-autonomous
human/robot interaction. In adition, this project will develop courses, tools
and the human resource base to conceive, investigate, implement and validate
such systems-of-systems. In addition to graduate and undergraduate student
training, planned educational initiatives include: (i) developing and
integrating a new graduate course in robotics into the curriculum; (ii) creating
educational technology curricular modules for encapsulating knowledge and for
dissemination, and (iii) outreach within the university, with local high schools
and industry and the educational community at large.