* 1710009
* SNNnow: Probabilistic Learning for Deep Spiking Neural Networks: Foundations and Hardware Co-Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Durgamadhab Misra, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2022
* USD 380,000.00

Overview: Deep neural networks (DNN) have become the de-facto standard tool to
carry out complex learning&lt;br/&gt;tasks. DNNs belong to the second generation
of artificial neural networks (ANNs), which rely on neurons&lt;br/&gt;that
implement memory-less non-linear transformations of the synaptic inputs.
Motivated by the biological&lt;br/&gt;analogy with the behavior of neurons in
the brain, the third generation of neural networks, also referred
to&lt;br/&gt;as Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), was introduced in the nineties.
In SNNs, synaptic input and neuronal&lt;br/&gt;output signals are spike trains.
This proposal argues that the time for the use of SNNs as machine
learning&lt;br/&gt;tools has come, and sets forth a systematic approach for the
design and implementation of SNNs as learning&lt;br/&gt;and inference
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: SNNs have a number of unique
advantages as compared to ANNs: (i) They are event-based&lt;br/&gt;systems with
natural sparsity properties, which have the potential to make deep learning
machines feasible for&lt;br/&gt;energy-limited devices; (ii) They are uniquely
capable to natively process data that comes in the form of
timeencoded&lt;br/&gt;processes, for example, from bio-inspired sensors. The
main goal of this project is the establishment&lt;br/&gt;of a theoretical
framework to enable the design of flexible spike-domain learning algorithms that
are tailored&lt;br/&gt;to the solution of supervised and unsupervised cognitive
tasks, as well as their co-optimization on nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;hardware
architectures. To this end, this project puts forth a principled probabilistic
framework based on the&lt;br/&gt;graphical formalism of Directed Information
Graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The outcome of this research is
expected to have a profound impact on the increasing number&lt;br/&gt;of
practical applications that are based on the processing of time-encoded signals,
including biological sensors&lt;br/&gt;and next-generation communication
systems, and/or that require the adoption of computing solutions with
a&lt;br/&gt;significantly smaller power budget as compared to conventional DNNs.
The research methodology is based&lt;br/&gt;on a multi-disciplinary approach
that integrates machine learning, information theory, probabilistic
graphical&lt;br/&gt;models, neuromorphic computing and device/system
architecture at the nanoscale. The educational plan at&lt;br/&gt;the home
institution targets both undergraduate and graduate students via hands-on
learning and experimentation&lt;br/&gt;activities.