* 1710974
* Efficient and Scalable Methods for Multi-Stage Transmission Expansion under Uncertainty
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mort Webster, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2021
* USD 314,674.00

A critical component of the electric power system is the underlying network of
high voltage transmission lines that connect geographically dispersed generation
and load. The transmission network achieves two important objectives: reducing
the cost of energy by providing access to low-cost generation and maintaining
reliability by enabling many alternative generation sources and transmission
routes to serve load centers. Although utilities, and more recently regional
transmission operators (RTOs), have long engaged in transmission planning, the
current context requires planning for larger regions and over longer time
horizons. The uncertainties to which any new transmission lines should be robust
to changes in include the types and locations of generation as well as
variations in the spatial and temporal distribution of load, both driven by
rapid changes in technologies, market factors, and regulations. The potential
sunk cost of transmission lines that do not anticipate future conditions, as
well as the expected benefit of properly located transmission additions, can be
valued in the millions of dollars. The transmission planning tools commonly used
by utilities and RTOs are well suited for near-term tactical planning when
uncertainties are manageable, but are not appropriate to long-term planning when
the range of possible future conditions becomes large. This project develops new
methods for transmission planning over several decades and across a wide range
of possible futures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research team will
develop two alternative algorithms for solving multi-stage stochastic
transmission expansion problems: (i) Multi-stage schemes for smoothed nonconvex
problems, and (ii) Monte-Carlo and Importance Sampling-based Q-Learning schemes.
In the context of both schemes, convergence properties will be analyzed and
error bounds will be developed. Furthermore, both sets of schemes will be
implemented within a high performance computing environment (such as a network
of computing nodes) with an emphasis on asynchronous implementations. As part of
the project, the team will collaborate with the planning group at PJM
Interconnection and apply the methods developed to their network, consisting of
approximately 16,000 buses. The application of stochastic analysis will help to
identify long-term congestion issues that should be anticipated, and provide an
initial list of candidate lines that would be robust to the large set of future
scenarios. More broadly, the development and adoption of these methods will
enable planners for regional power systems across the nation to identify crucial
additions to the infrastructure that can reduce energy costs, maintain
reliability of energy supply, and enable and enhance the ability of new
generation technologies to reduce environmental impacts. The project will also
make contributions to education at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
Finally, this project will occur within the Penn State Initiative for
Sustainable Electric Power Systems, which organizes workshops and collaborations
with the power industry and other academic institutions.