* 1710782
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: The effect of intraspecific variation on interactions among species
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Akana Noto, Noto                    Akana
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Akana Noto, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow is being
mentored by Randall Hughes and Tarik Gouhier at Northeastern University. This
research aims to investigate the importance of biodiversity on ecological
communities, focusing on New England salt marshes. Scientists frequently study
species diversity (how many species are present), but research increasingly
shows that genetic and trait diversity within a single species can be similarly
important. Species containing more variation among individuals are less affected
by environmental change, and recover from change more quickly. However, the
effect of variation within a species on its interactions with other species
remains unclear. The fellow's research explores how diversity within species
affects competition among salt marsh plants and consumption by the herbivorous
crabs that eat them. Salt marshes serve many important 'ecosystem functions'
including filtering water and protecting shorelines from storms, and this
research will generate predictions to inform the best ways to manage and restore
this important threatened ecosystem. The fellow is developing educational
activities and lesson plans for local elementary and middle school students,
particularly those from low-income and underrepresented minority communities,
focusing on the importance of variation within species. These activities are
based in local ecosystems and help students from largely urban areas learn about
their local environment as well as important biological concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use a combination of field experiments
(1,2) and models (3) to ask the following specific questions about how
intraspecific variation affects plant communities via species interactions: (1)
How does intraspecific genetic diversity within a plant species affect
interspecific competition? (2) How does intraspecific trait diversity among
consumers affect plants, and is this effect mediated by plant genetic diversity?
(3) How will plant biomass vary with plant and consumer intraspecific diversity
across space? Salt marshes are a good model system because intraspecific
diversity is known to be important and easy to manipulate. These questions
provide a good basis for teaching students key concepts such as genetic
diversity and evolution, and this research will allow the fellow to receive
training in molecular techniques and development of mathematical and
computational models.