* 1710110
* Collaborative Research:   Development of Colloidal Group IV Doped and Alloyed Nanocrystals and Bulk- heterojunctions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Susan Kauzlarich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 10/31/2020
* USD 289,161.00

Ultra-small crystalline particles, called nanocrystals (NCs) have dimensions on
the order of 0.00000005 inches, and their small size results in interesting and
useful phenomena not seen in larger, macroscopic crystals. This project builds
on the collaborative efforts between Susan Kauzlarich, a Chemistry professor at
the University of California, Davis (UCD) and Sue Carter, a Physics professor at
the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) to develop new NC composites
that employ nanocrystals and a organometallic film of a metal halide perovskite,
where perovskite refers to the type of crystalline structure. The team designs,
synthesizes and measures germanium NC individual and composite properties. The
Kauzlarich lab is focused on nanocrystal synthesis and characterization of doped
and alloyed germanium with the goal of controlling size, surface and shape. The
Carter lab employs these nanocrystals in thin film metal halide perovskites with
a focus on their optical and electron transport properties. By understanding the
interfaces and electronics of the components, the PIs will judiciously combine
nanocrystals with films to gain new functionality in their optical and transport
properties relevant to their use as photovoltaics, with broader societal impact
in electrical generation and photoelectronic device technologies. This research
provides training for next generation scientists on materials synthesis, thin
film fabrication, device engineering, and property measurements, advancing
multidisciplinary research aligned with technology. The research will be
presented at national and international meetings and the findings published in
peer-review journals. In addition, UCSC and UCD faculty and students will be
involved in creating curriculum and hands-on laboratories in quantum materials
and printable electronics that will be offered through K-12 summer science camps
and science classes.

This collaborative project is focused on the development of soluble colloidal
dispersions of doped and alloyed germanium (Ge) nanocrystals (NCs) with size,
surface, and shape control and the fabrication and characterization of group IV
bulk-heterojunctions (BHJs) to achieve control of the recombination,
passivation, and charge transport. It combines the expertise of two PIs: Susan
Kauzlarich, a Chemistry professor at the University of California, Davis (UCD)
and Sue Carter, a Physics professor at the University of California, Santa Cruz
(UCSC). This study expands the chemistry of group IV with control of surface and
shape of the NCs and with fabrication of group IV bulk-heterojunctions from
solutions, with a focus on control over the properties of the constituent
components. As an understanding of the interfaces and relative bandgap energies
is achieved, the energy levels of the Ge nanocrystals are being tuned through
doping and alloying and the metal halide perovskite through lattice matching and
band tuning. Several optical, electrical, and structural methods are being used
to characterize these colloidal materials and their thin films. In addition to
characterization methods existing in the Kauzlarich and Carter labs,
collaborations on surface photovoltage (SPV) spectroscopy, ultrafast
spectroscopy, Scanning Transmission Electron Holographic Microscopy, and
Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure and X-ray Absorption Near Edge
Spectroscopy (EXAFS/XANES) are enabling further characterization of the
electronic and structure states of the NCs and BHJs. The PIs are judiciously
combining nanocrystals with films to gain new functionality in their optical and
transport properties relevant to their use as photovoltaics, with broader
societal impact in electrical generation and photoelectronic device
technologies. This research is providing training for next generation scientists
on materials synthesis, thin film fabrication, device engineering, and property
measurements, advancing multidisciplinary research aligned with technology. The
research is being presented at national and international meetings and the
findings published in peer-review journals. In addition, UCSC and UCD faculty
and students are involved in creating curriculum and hands-on laboratories in
quantum materials and printable electronics that are being offered through K-12
summer science camps and science classes.