* 1710848
* Broad-Scale Modeling of Complex Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Newman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 294,514.00

Many objects of interest in technology, science, and medicine can be represented
as networks, including the internet, the power grid, neural networks in the
brain, and the contact networks between individuals over which diseases spread.
Network theory, which is the subject of this research project, provides a
mathematical representation of systems like these which helps us to understand
and predict their behavior. This project focuses on modeling networked systems,
using mathematical models and computer models. Network models have seen
impressive successes in recent years, in areas such as computer and information
networks and epidemiology, but a fundamental shortcoming of previous work has
been an inability to accurately represent network structure at both small and
large scales simultaneously. This project develops new classes of models that
achieve this goal, thereby more accurately representing networks as they appear
in real life and improving our understanding and ability to predict their
behavior. Specific goals of the project include: development of new multiscale
mathematical and computer models of networked systems; testing and validation of
models to demonstrate how well they capture the features of the systems they
represent; model selection methods for determining how best to represent a
particular system; anomaly detection in networks; improved computational methods
to allow calculations to run efficiently on current computer hardware; and a
range of specific applications, for instance to modeling of network resilience
and the spread of disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
apply new classes of mathematical models for representing and analyzing
networked systems. Network models find wide uses in methods for the analysis of
network data, such as community detection, embedding, and visualization, and as
the foundation for simulation and modeling of network processes, such as
resilience of systems to failure of their components, the spread of diseases
over contact networks, or the design and refinement of network protocols and
algorithms. A fundamental shortcoming of current network models, however, is
their inability to capture network structure accurately on both small and large
scales. Models based on local structural motifs, such as the configuration model
or subgraph models, capture small-scale structure well, but fail with large-
scale structure such as communities, stratification, or core-periphery
structure. Models that capture large-scale structure, such as block models, are
normally locally tree-like and hence fail badly to capture the small scale. This
project will develop a new class of random graph models that naturally
integrates the large and small, along with methods for analyzing the models'
properties and for rapid Monte Carlo sampling. Maximum-likelihood fitting
methods will be developed to fit models to real-world network data, enabling
accurate generalization, link prediction, and network reconstruction.
Statistical methods for the models will also be developed, including goodness-
of-fit tests and model selection methods, along with specific applications, for
instance to anomaly detection, network resilience, and epidemic modeling.