* 1710663
* NSF Postdoc Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Exploring the evolutionary stability of larval type: a phylogenetic analysis of developmental patterns in extant and extinct sea biscuits
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Anne Armstrong, Armstrong               Anne           F
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

The fellowship supports research and training of the fellow that will utilize
biological collections in innovative ways. This project will further our
knowledge of how the diverse life cycles seen throughout organisms are generated
and maintained. The echinoid echinoderms (sea urchins, sand dollars, and sea
biscuits) display a wide variety of life cycles with some species producing
offspring that leave their mother as juveniles, while other species produce
offspring which spend over a year as a larva before developing into a juvenile.
These developmental differences have important impacts on the connection and
persistence of populations. This project will use biological collections to
investigate how the life cycles of echinoderms have changed throughout the
fossil record, how quickly developmental changes can arise, and how those life
cycles affect broader biological patterns such as species ranges and rates of
extinction. As part of this project, the fellow will partner with the education
department at California Academy of Sciences to engage elementary school
students. The fellow will add information about marine life cycles to classroom
kits for local teachers to use in their schools. She will also participate in
the Academy's distance learning program "Talk to a Scientist" which schools
across the US can teleconference into. This project will contribute to
undergraduate training, as the fellow will mentor REU students. Additionally
this project will contribute to the digitization of museum archives.

For this project, the fellow will create a phylogeny of the echinoderm genus
Clypeaster (composed of the sea biscuits) using both genetic and morphological
data. She will measure morphological features of extant and extinct species to
determine the egg size and larval type of each species. By combining a phylogeny
with these developmental data, the fellow will analyze how developmental
patterns have evolved throughout the history of this group, how stable
developmental type is, and how quickly changes in developmental type can arise.
The genus Clypeaster provides an exceptional and rare opportunity to test many
core Evo-Devo theories due to the extensive literature on the development of
extant species, its remarkably complete fossil record, and the ability to
determine developmental traits from fossilized adults. The phylogeny and
morphological database created for this project will serve as a resource for
other scientists. Results from the studies will be published in peer-reviewed
journals and shared at scientific meetings.