* 1710856
* Quantum Field Theory, Atomic Physics and General Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 292,265.00

This project will attempt to combine relativistic quantum theory of nanoscale
phenomena with the concepts of general relativity, a theory primarily designed
to cover astrophysical phenomena. One of the aims is to study the consequences
for relativistic geodesy, where one uses tiny frequency shifts in atomic
transitions, as a function of the altitude of an atomic clock, in order to map
out the Earth's surface. To accomplish this task, modern computer algorithms
will be developed in concert with an improved understanding of quantum field
theories to advance our quantitative understanding of quantum mechanical bound
states of atoms. Only by combining quantum field theory with the notion of
curved spacetime can our current understanding of the very large be reconciled
with our current understanding of the very small. This project will continue and
extend the PI's explorations of this synthesis of two world views. The
supervision of graduate students and the completion of an extensive monograph on
the subject matter will complement the research program.

The research planned for this project will cover theoretical physics research in
various related fields, including extensions of the Dirac equation to curved
space-time, pseudo-Hermitian extensions of Dirac theory, the use of highly
powerful parallel computer algorithms for the calculation of atomic properties.
Existing discrepancies between theory and experiment (the so-called muonic
hydrogen/proton radius puzzle and the enhancement of internal pair creation in
the decay of 8Be) will be analyzed theoretically, and higher-order corrections
will be studied. The Dirac formalism will be augmented by a coupling of the
bispinor to curved space-time, with special emphasis on consequences for
relativistic geodesy. Finally, investigations on atom-surface contact
interactions and non-contact friction effects will complement the research
program.