* 1710191
* Deciphering and reprogramming light induced double bond isomerization in proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Massimo Olivucci, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,120.00

Massimo Olivucci of Bowling Green State University (BGSU) is supported by an
award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division to
develop, benchmark, and apply a second-generation computational framework for
modeling light-responsive proteins and tuning their properties via controlled
sequence mutations. Only two biological systems are capable of exploiting light
as a source of energy: chlorophyll systems and rhodopsins. Chlorophyll systems
are complex, composed of dozens of protein and pigment molecules. Rhodopsins, on
the other hand, consist of one protein and one retinal molecule assembled in a
simple architecture. In spite of such simplicity, rhodopsins carry out a variety
of important light-powered functions such as ion-pumping, ion-channeling and
color-sensing in microorganisms, and vision in invertebrates and vertebrates.
These photoswitchable properties are of enormous interest in tailoring proteins
for use as specialized probes, actuators, and switches. This research uses a
sensory rhodopsin from the cyanobacterium Anabaena as a reference system.
Professor Olivucci's ARM (Automatic Rhodopsin Model) protocol is used to
construct a large number of computationally "mutated" rhodopsins, involving an
artificial amino acid substitution in the protein sequence. ARM is used to
simulate the mutated protein using a combination of classical and advanced
quantum mechanical techniques, and predict the relationship between the changes
in protein sequence and specific responses to light. Large numbers of mutated
rhodopsins can be computationally generated and simulated in parallel,
enormously extending the range and diversity of variants that can be explored.
This project will extend ARM to predict a range of new properties, with the goal
of developing a systematic theory of rhodopsin light sensitivity for application
to fluorescence microscopy, molecular evolution, and optogenetics. ARM is being
implemented by BGSU students as an online web-based server to facilitate open
student and researcher access to the protocol. This will allow high school
students and undergraduates to generate and explore sophisticated, atomic-scale
rhodopsin models without requiring significant theoretical background. Professor
Olivucci is integrating ARM into the BGSU graduate program in photochemical
science, to provide a novel introduction to structural and functional
photobiology using molecular visualization techniques complemented by 3D
printing capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This aim of this project is to
understand how proteins control elementary photochemical reactions by developing
a novel computational technology. Building on Professor Olivucci's ARM protocol
for the fast and automated construction of QM/MM models of light-responsive
proteins, a more accurate, second-generation version will be developed featuring
free energy calculation capabilities and an expanded benchmark set. The goal is
to learn how to reprogram protein spectroscopy and thermochemical and
photochemical reactivity by tailoring the chemical properties of a protein
reference system---in this project, a sensory rhodopsin from the cyanobacterium
Anabaena. The construction and analysis of sets of mutated models and their
experimental verification are expected to reveal novel engineering principles.
More specifically, and together with external collaborators, Professor Olivucci
is learning how mutations may control the excited state isomerization dynamics
and lifetime of the system and, among other applications, to use this knowledge
to design, and express in the laboratory, fluorescent rhodopsins that could be
employed as sensors in optogenetics. Specific aims of the research include
computationally screening large numbers of Anabaena sensory rhodopsin (ASR)
mutants, searching for ASR mutants exhibiting longer excited state lifetimes,
and improving the accuracy, applicability and automation of ARM to a level
suitable for dissemination and broad use by the scientific community.