* 1710737
* Direct Optoelectronic Imaging of Nanostructured Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Dong Yu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 368,304.00

Nontechnical Description: This project aims to investigate the charge transport
mechanisms in a promising photovoltaic material, halide perovskites. Halide
perovskite compounds, including methylammonium lead halide, have recently
demonstrated great potentials for solar energy conversion, with a power
conversion efficiency above 20%. However, the fundamental understanding of the
material physics is lacking. The project aims to extract fundamental science and
provides key insights on the charge transport mechanisms and guidelines for
identifying more stable perovskite compounds for cost-effective photovoltaics.
In particular, the principal investigator uses a novel experimental technique,
which maps the photogenerated current distribution by scanning a focused laser
beam. This direct imaging technique allows extraction of key information on how
light is converted into charge and how charge transports in these materials. The
fundamental understanding of the origins of the high conversion efficiency is
not only intriguing to fundamental science, but is also critical to developing
better perovskite materials with reduced toxicity and increased stability. The
study may lead to earth abundant materials that promise to open a new paradigm
for photovoltaics. This project educates and trains undergraduate and graduate
students in the rapidly advancing nanoscale and energy sciences, and offers
outreach activities targeting K-12 students, underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project investigates
the charge transport in single-crystal halide perovskite nanostructures and
distinguishes the dominant charge transport mechanism among ferroelectricity,
ion migration, and charge traps. Despite the demonstration of efficient power
conversion capability in these materials, material physics such as the origins
of long carrier lifetime and hysteretic photocurrent is not understood.
Nanowires and nanoplates composed of single-crystal halide perovskites can
remove the convolution of grain boundaries and allow better understanding of the
intrinsic properties. Devices consisting of individual nanostructures are
investigated by wavelength-dependent scanning photocurrent microscopy to
determine how minority carrier diffusion lengths depend on surface effects and
carrier concentration. Direct optoelectronic imaging of these nanostructures
under external electric field at various temperatures provides key insights for
distinguishing among different charge transport mechanisms. Piezoelectric
effects are studied in single-crystal nanostructures under an external strain.
The transport of different ions such as hydrogen and lithium in halide
perovskites is investigated by using a novel liquid gating method. The research
deepens the fundamental understanding of the origins of the high conversion
efficiency and allows formulating guidelines for choosing better molecules or
atoms to substitute the cations or anions in halide perovskites.