* 1710594
* SUPRAMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY OF SYNTHETIC AMPHIPHILES
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* George Gokel, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 503,123.00

All cells are surrounded by a membrane that keeps undesirable molecules (like
toxins) from entering, but allows the passage of nutrients into the cell, and
waste products out. The ability of nature to control the types of molecules that
pass through the membrane is central to biological function. Nature accomplishes
this task by embedding proteins with complex chemical structures into the
membrane. These proteins form small channels that allow specific molecules
through, but reject others. While the importance of natural channels in biology
is well-appreciated, the design of artificial channels that exhibit the same
functionality as their biological analogs is immensely challenging. In this
research project, Professor George Gokel at the University of Missouri-Saint
Louis is studying the transport capabilities of relatively simple molecules
inserted into lipid membranes. The ability to create artificial membrane
channels that mediate the passage of specific molecules could impact
applications ranging from biology and medicine to water purification, problems
with significant societal importance. In addition, this project is providing
scientific training of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in
interdisciplinary science.

Controlling insertion into a membrane, manipulating the selectivity and
direction of ion and molecule transport, and understanding the organization of
the membrane around the channels, present major challenges in supramolecular
chemistry. With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry program in the Division of Chemistry, the Gokel Lab develops a
variety of novel structures that penetrate lipid bilayers and selectively
transport cations and molecules through the membranes. This research enhances
understanding of membrane penetrating compounds by using a plethora of
techniques to interrogate their properties and functional mechanisms. The long-
term goal is to establish fundamental principles for designing synthetic
structures that can substitute complex proteins in mediating the passage of
specific molecules into specific types of cells.