* 1710460
* Elucidating Cell Signaling by Orthogonal Ubiquitin Transfer and Linkage-Specific di-Ubiquitin Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Thomas Cropp, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2021
* USD 665,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division of NSF is
funding Professor Jun Yin of the Georgia State University (GSU) and Professor
Thomas A. Cropp of the Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU). The research
seeks to understand the cell signaling mechanism carried out by by ubiquitin
(UB). UB is a protein that is connected to other proteins in the cell to
regulate cellular processes. Several different enzymes form a relay to transfer
UB to cellular proteins. These transfers occur in response to the changes that
occur within a cell. How these transfer enzymes select the targets of UB
transfer is poorly understood. Consequently, the cell signaling networks that
are aided by UB are vaguely defined. The team of Dr. Yin and Dr. Cropp is
preparing and implementing probes to figure out the substrate profiles of key
enzymes and their roles in cell biology. The investigators are also generating
UB chains of defined linkages to investigate the catalytic mechanisms of the
transfer enzymes. The project jointly trains undergraduate and graduate students
to investigate the chemical basis of cell biology. By contributing to this
project, the GSU and VCU students of diverse backgrounds obtain key research
skills in chemistry, molecular biology, and cell biology. Integrated outreach
programs provide research opportunities for middle school and high school
students in underdeveloped communities in the Atlanta area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint project takes advantage of the orthogonal UB
transfer (OUT) technology developed in the Yin laboratory and the unnatural
amino acid (UAA) incorporation technology developed in the Cropp laboratory to
study UB-mediated cell signaling. The Yin lab uses phage and yeast cell surface
display to engineer OUT cascades of key E3s enzymes for cell regulation such as
c-Cbl, Parkin, and E6AP. The OUT cascades is expressed in the cell and
proteomics is used to profile the substrates of specific E3s to reveal their
biological functions. The Yin and Cropp labs synthesize di-UB conjugates of
defined linkages by delivering UAA in various targeted positions in UB. The co-
crystal structures of E2s with di-UB conjugates are determined in order to
elucidate how E2s synthesize UB chains of diverse linkages. Overall the project
provides much-needed insights in UB signaling networks and the chemical
mechanism for "writing" the UB code.