* 1710561
* Stable Organic Interfaces Having Unnatural Compositions: Nanoscale Control of Heterogeneity
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2021
* T. Randall Lee, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 10/31/2021
* USD 450,001.00

Professor T. Randall Lee of the University of Houston is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry to design and synthesize new organic chemical agents. A major goal of
the proposed research is to tune the chemical composition of thin organic
coatings to afford surfaces with compositions that are not found in nature.
Given the unique compositions targeted, the coatings are likely to be
extraordinarily non-adhesive and therefore useful for coating not only
electronic devices (e.g., ultrathin cell phones, laptops, and flat-screen
televisions), but also artificial implants (e.g., heart stents) and
nanoparticles for medical applications (e.g., cancer therapy). During the grant
period, the PI seeks to broaden the participation of women and minorities
through several educational/outreach activities, including the Welch Summer
Scholars program, the UH STEM Center, the NSF-supported Houston Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (H-LSAMP) program, and visits to campus and
research mentoring for local high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research seeks to design, synthesize, and utilize multidentate
adsorbates for the generation of unnatural "conflicted" self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs) on gold. Three systems of current technological interest are
emphasized: (1) the design and synthesis of multidentate adsorbates for
fabricating highly stable thin-film coatings with uniquely controlled surface
composition of chemical entities that are either phase incompatible or
structurally dissimilar, for the purpose of generating homogeneously mixed
heterogeneous "conflicted" interfaces; (2) the use of specifically fluorinated
adsorbate molecules to generate nanoscale films having well-defined composition
and structure, with an ultimate goal of defining the critical elements (e.g.,
minimum degree of fluorination) needed to construct organic interfaces with
controlled hydrophobicity, anti-adhesiveness, and lubricity; and (3) the
generation and study of thin-film architectures, including surface-grafted
oligomeric films, in which the terminal functional groups mimic the backbones of
industrially relevant polymers, with the goal of evaluating the interfacial
properties and reactivity of well-defined polymer surfaces. Advantages offered
by the targeted multidentate adsorbates include films with markedly greater
stability than those derived from n-alkanethiols, leading in part to advances in
nanoscale lubrication, corrosion resistance, nanoparticle stabilization, and
anti-adhesive coatings. Furthermore, due to the restricted surface mobility of
the multidentate adsorbates, mixed monolayers of these adsorbates functionalized
with disparate chemical tailgroups offer "conflicted" organic nanoscale coatings
with tailored chemical heterogeneity and controlled nanoscale roughness.