* 1710621
* Hybrid Predictive Control for Distributed Multi-agent Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ricardo Sanfelice, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 415,437.00

This proposal presents a research plan to advance the knowledge on the
systematic design of algorithms that use prediction and optimization to make
distributed decisions in multi-agent systems. Due to the combination of
different types of dynamics (continuous and discrete) emerging from the physics
laws governing the behavior of the systems, the networks that link them, and
their on-board computing systems, the multi-agent systems are modeled as hybrid
dynamical systems. The combination of such mixed behavior, both in the system to
control and in the algorithms, is embodied in key future networks of multi-agent
systems. The future smart grid will have variables that change continuously
according to electric circuit laws, exhibit jumps due to controlled switches,
failures, and modeling approximations, while the control algorithms require
logic to adapt to such abrupt changes. Hybrid behavior will also emerge in other
networked multi-agent systems, such as self-driving cars and groups of
autonomous aerial vehicles, in particular, due to communication events, abrupt
changes in connectivity, and the cyber-physical interaction between
agents/robots, their environment, and communication networks. The results from
this project will enable the development of such networked multi-agent systems
with simultaneous robustness and optimality.

The impact of the proposed research plan stems from a novel use of hybrid
prediction in the controllers, one that guarantees simultaneous robust and
optimal behavior of the closed-loop system. The proposed hybrid prediction
approach efficiently exploits key robust stabilization capabilities of hybrid
feedback control and optimality guarantees of receding horizon control. The
design of the control algorithms will employ Lyapunov-based and optimization
techniques suitable to deal with the hybrid dynamics emerging from the system to
control or the algorithm. The proposed hybrid prediction technique will lead to
novel tools for systematic design of control and communication algorithms for
distributed hybrid systems prediction is a feature currently lacking in hybrid
control theory. These new tools will pave the road for the design of distributed
algorithms that operate robustly and optimally when applied to real-world
systems.

The proposed research plan is deeply integrated with teaching and training
activities that will significantly impact middle and high school education
levels by training students on control engineering, hybrid systems, cyber-
physical systems, and applications to networked multi-agent systems. A plan to
improve existing courses will incorporate state-of-the-art material on modeling
and predictive control in the classroom. Participation in these activities of
underrepresented groups will provide significant broad impact to the overall
project. Broad dissemination will occur through educational activities,
workshops, local industry, and international partnerships.