* 1710104
* Quantum Interference and Coherence Effects on Charge Transport in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Ryan Young, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 11/30/2020
* USD 337,454.00

Nontechnical description: This project addresses preparation and investigation
of new materials made of organic molecules possessing electronic properties that
enhance the performance of semiconductors. These electronic properties determine
how electrons flow along multiple possible pathways in the semiconductor, and
therefore are anticipated to affect the material's behavior. Optical probe
techniques utilizing ultra-fast lasers are implemented to understand the details
of electronic charge transport in semiconductors comprising these new organic
molecules. Such semiconductors may be utilized to significantly enhance the
performance of ultra-fast optical or electronic devices that are at the core of
communications and information technologies. These inexpensive materials, while
attractive for implementing improvements to device performance, may therefore
also have major impact on the economy. This project encompasses a wide variety
of disciplines in materials science, offering training opportunities to
scientists at all academic levels. Outreach plans further include ongoing
efforts at Northwestern University to integrate students in grades K-12 in
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Photo-
initiated charge transfer events in organic semiconductors can occur over a very
large range of timescales. However, the uniquely quantum mechanical aspect of
electronic coherence generally persists for only 10s to 100s of femtoseconds
(fs). This project designs and synthesizes new organic semiconductors to more
easily detect and exploit these electronic coherences, and to investigate how
the consequences of coherent charge transfer can be used to enhance charge
generation and transport in organic semiconductors. Femtosecond time-resolved
spectroscopies are used to study the charge transport dynamics at the earliest
stages, where the influence of electronic coherences is manifest. More
specifically, this project is investigating how coherent charge transfer from a
donor to two or more electron acceptors occurs within molecular building blocks
of organic semiconductors. Separately, the project investigates coherent charge
transfer in thin solid films of organic semiconductors. Additionally, the
influence of quantum interference in multi-path charge transfer processes on the
rate and efficiency of electron-hole pair production in organic semiconductors
is addressed. The ability to tailor the design and performance of organic
semiconductors via quantum coherence effects is anticipated to enhance
semiconductor device performance, therefore impacting electronic and photonic
devices commonly used in modern communications and information technologies.