* 1710920
* Collaborative Research:  CCSS:  Coding for 5G and Beyond: Limits and Efficient Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Mitchell, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 218,365.00

During the next couple of years, an exponential increase of data use per capita
will be experienced. For example, predictions by the cellular industry state
that the global per-capita information usage will grow from 15 GB in 2014 to
around 37 GB in 2019. Without significant technological advances to increase its
capacity, the existing telecommunications infrastructure will be unable to
support this vast data increase. The advent of modern error-correcting codes,
such as turbo codes, low-density parity-check codes, and polar codes, has
represented a quantum leap in error-correcting performance for wireless systems,
allowing reliable communication of information over noisy channels at data rates
close to capacity. However, improvements in this direction have been mostly
limited to the point-to-point case, and maximizing gains for the point-to-point
channel setup will not be sufficient to satisfy the high throughput and low
delay requirements of emerging communication systems, in particular of 5G
cellular systems and beyond. This project aims to tackle these issues by
extending coding schemes to the wireless network setting, thereby yielding
additional throughput gains beyond the classical point-to-point case. The
proposed research promises to provide a significant transformative impact on
many critical applications employing reliable networked wireless communication,
for example in the fields of healthcare, environmental monitoring, finance, and
so on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a comprehensive framework of
practical low-complexity, low-latency, capacity-approaching sparse graph codes
is proposed. These codes are able to leverage network gains for error
correction, thereby significantly reducing the amount of transmitted data. The
project aims to study the fundamental limits of these schemes as well as to
investigate practical coding algorithms to approach these limits. The proposed
research involves several fundamental themes related to the application of
sparse graph-based and polar codes to emerging future communication systems
which are not present in previous studies: analysis and design of nested codes
for canonical network communication problems; analysis of how performance scales
with various code and decoder design parameters; a theoretical understanding of
the implementation complexity versus performance trade-offs between algebraic
and random codes; an analytical investigation of iterative decoding failure
events; and the development of a novel high-speed field-programmable gate array
hardware decoding architecture.