* 1710225
* Design, Synthesis, and Properties of Open-Shell Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Eilaf Egap, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2018
* USD 410,000.00

Professor Eilaf Egap of Emory University is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop strategies for the preparation and investigation of open-shell
conjugated oligomers and polymers. The chemical and physiochemical properties of
these materials and the way they respond upon interactions with light are
investigated. The goal is to understand and be able to manipulate the factors
that influence their organic semiconducting properties. Organic semiconductors
are used in a range of technologies such as light-emitting diodes, sensors,
photovoltaics and integrated electronic circuits. The results of this research
project are expected to directly impact these technologies by reducing power
consumption, improving sensitivity, and enhancing data and energy storage.
During the course of conducting this project, students from underrepresented
minorities and undergraduate students from local historically-black colleges and
universities are involved in science research activities related to this
project. This is accomplished through an eight-week summer research and
mentoring program and a joint seminar series in the areas of physical and
materials chemistry. The students are actively involved in research and in
planning the seminar series as a motivation to keep them interested and fully
engaged in STEM areas.

This research program advances strategies for the synthesis and characterization
of organic open-shell conjugated oligomeric and polymeric semiconductor
materials based on polythiophene and quinoidal backbones, and including stable
long-lived radicals as spin resources. The chemical and photophysical properties
of these materials, including molecular packing and the dynamics and kinetics of
electron spins, are investigated. The materials are characterized using a
variety of techniques, including ultrafast transient spectroscopy and scanning
probe microscopy. An important goal of this project is to understand the
structural and physical factors that control photo-induced spin-alignment and
spin-polarization and to determine the molecular packing, structural orientation
and topology factors which influence hybrid states and spin-exchange in organic
oligomer/polymer semiconductors. Another goal is to understand and establish
design rules for modulating and predicting excited-states energy levels.
Theoretical calculations and computational modelling are used to help guide the
choice of targets and to support the spin polarization and the excited states
studies.