* 1710670
* A Data-centric Approach to Turbulence Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kenneth Jansen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 549,990.00

Turbulence or turbulent flow is commonly observed in many everyday phenomena,
such as airflow over a vehicle, billowing clouds, rising smoke or fast-flowing
waters. Understanding and accurately modeling turbulent flow is important for
design in applications as diverse as transportation (planes, cars, etc.), energy
generation (wind turbines or more traditional power plants), and manufacturing.
Turbulence evolves through interaction of a broad range of length and time
scales, posing significant challenges to engineers who model turbulent fluid
flow using computer simulations. High fidelity computational models, which
resolve turbulent motions, can require several months of time on the largest
supercomputer to simulate even a relatively simple flow. By contrast, low
fidelity models that attempt to predict only the net effects of the turbulence
can give results on complicated flows in seconds but the prediction has low
accuracy for many important flows. Â To effectively use simulations of turbulence
for design applications, engineers typically require flow solutions for
thousands of problem-defining parameter combinations. The need for a large
number of cases typically necessitates the use of lower fidelity models to keep
cost and time feasible. This proposal involves using the more detailed
information from a select, small number of higher fidelity simulations together
with a full set of inexpensive low fidelity simulations to collectively achieve
a substantially more accurate prediction for the thousands of parameter
variations needed. The scale-resolving simulations proposed lend themselves to
animations of fluid structures. While a full understanding is beyond students at
the K-12 levels, simulations that show macro- and small-scale fluid structures
are expected to be highly motivating to science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) areas. Therefore, visualization results from this research
are being packaged for direct outreach activities in coordination with the
Broadening Opportunity through Leadership and Diversity (BOLD) Center at the
University of Colorado Boulder.

This research project involves three main objectives: 1) using data-driven
machine learning from scale-resolving simulations to improve scale-modeling
closures, 2) developing multi-fidelity models that fuse data from O(1000) low-
cost simulations and O(20) higher-cost simulations to achieve an accuracy
approaching that of the higher-cost simulations for all O(1000) parameter
combinations at substantially reduced cost, and 3) combining these two
approaches. These developments are being demonstrated on flows that are
currently known to be beyond the predictive capacity of the low-cost models. The
focus is on adverse pressure gradient flows, including those that lead to flow
separation. The simulations performed in this project will advance the state-of-
the-art in adverse pressure gradient flow simulation. Specifically, simulations
are being executed at momentum Reynolds numbers of 6,000 for direct numerical
simulation, 30,000 for wall-resolved large eddy simulation, and 150,000 for
wall-modeled large eddy simulation. The data from all simulations is being be
made available to the science and engineering community to enable further
analysis and fundamental insight.