* 1710791
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Do sick frogs increase reproductive investment? A behavioral and physiological examination of the terminal investment hypothesis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Talisin Hammond, Hammond                 Talisin
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 207,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Talisin Hammond, is conducting research and receiving training that increases
the participation of groups underrepresented in biology, at the University of
Pittsburgh, and is being mentored by Cori Richards-Zawicki (sponsoring
scientist). This research explores how the reproductive behavior and physiology
of multiple species of frogs is affected by chytridiomycosis, a fungal disease
that has decimated many amphibian populations. In addition to improving our
understanding of how this disease impacts amphibians, which are currently highly
threatened by numerous environmental factors, this work also clarifies the role
of sub-lethal effects of disease on population dynamics and evolutionary
processes. As part of this project the fellow is working with a natural history
museum to teach student groups about science using sketch-noting. The fellow is
also designing a research-based educational module, which will be freely
available, and is working with an online network to find educators interested in
its implementation. Finally, the fellow is mentoring diverse undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildlife diseases impact populations both
directly, through mortality, and indirectly, through sub-lethal changes to host
biology. Disease-induced fatalities can be devastating, but sub-lethal changes
in behavior and physiology also have the potential to exert substantial pressure
on populations. The terminal investment hypothesis, which states that animals
with decreasing future reproductive potential should invest more in immediate
reproduction, predicts that sick animals with decreased longevity should elevate
reproductive effort, and that species with higher susceptibility should increase
effort more. The fellow's research is testing this hypothesis, focusing on
chytridiomycosis as the disease agent. The processes by which this disease kills
amphibians are better-understood than its sub-lethal impacts, and few studies
have experimentally described how chytridiomycosis impacts reproductive behavior
and physiology. This project uses three congeneric frog species with differing
disease susceptibility, using call recordings, behavioral choice tests, and
hormonal manipulations in conjunction with quantifications of pathogen load,
immune function and spermatic traits to characterize how the disease affects
male reproductive behavior and physiology, and female preference. This work is
generating novel insights into the role of sub-lethal, disease-mediated
behavioral and physiological effects on individuals. In addition to providing
training support for the fellow in a new field of study, this work also involves
significant outreach, including teaching student groups visiting natural history
museums, developing a research-related, online-available educational module, and
mentoring diverse undergraduate students.