* 1710574
* Designing Unnatural-Amino-Acid-Enabled Second-Generation Biomaterials: Advanced Surfaces, Biocatalysts and Biotherapeutics - An Integrated Computational/Experimental Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Bradley Bundy, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 389,990.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Proteins, in one form or another, are involved in all
processes sustaining life and can be used to control cellular function (e.g.
pharmaceuticals) or be used outside of cells to impart advanced function to
materials (e.g. detectors to identify bacteria or catalyzing reactions in an
industrial setting). Before using proteins outside of their native environment,
steps must be taken to stabilize the molecule to prevent degradation. Attaching
the protein to a solid substrate or adding polymer chains to the molecule can
overcome degrading effects, but such methods are not always effective because of
the many different options available for such alterations. This research uses
recently-developed computational models together with state-of-the-art
experimental methods to identify and target the most stabilizing locations on
proteins. This knowledge will then be used to create a process for rapid
development of biomaterials with specific function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential benefits to society of successfully achieving the goals of this
research are huge and improve many fields including sustainable chemical
processing, national competitiveness, defense, and medical care. An example in
the medical field is improved and cost-effective prescription drugs. Many newly-
developed pharmaceuticals are protein based, but their efficacy is limited
because they are quickly degraded in the body. Attaching polymers to the
proteins at the correct location (that would be provided by this research) would
increase the time that the drug remains in the body and reduce healthcare costs
by decreasing the amount of protein needed for a treatment. Another example from
the defense field is hazard detection. Many potential threats to homeland
security come from weaponized chemicals or biological agents (e.g. mustard,
anthrax, ebola, etc.). Attaching proteins to solid substrates, at the location
that preserves function, paves the way for the development of chip-based
detectors that can be placed in vulnerable areas such as mail processing
centers, airports, sports venues, etc. or could be sewed into the uniforms of
soldiers. Other benefits to society include creating hands-on modules to teach
biomaterials in K-12 classrooms and increased participation in pre-freshman
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating unnatural
amino acids (UAAs) into proteins, in place of their natural counterparts, can be
used to tether polymers to proteins or attach the protein to a surface at any
location desired. The challenge is to select the correct location that preserves
function because such substitution can destabilize the protein and no method
currently exists to predict the ultimate behavior. A combinatorial approach
cannot be used in most instances due to costs and time, so the objective of this
research is to create an integrated computational and experimental technology
that rapidly predicts and validates the optimal residues on a protein to be used
in a novel biomaterial. The work will proceed by first determining the effects
of UAA incorporation on function because such is not fully understood. Once this
is accomplished, efforts will be done to optimize polymer-protein interactions
for stability, active site accessibility, etc. The final stage of the project
will be to produce biocatalysts and smart surfaces by optimizing protein-surface
interactions. The key to accomplishing the computational work is to build on the
PI's expertise in coarse-grain protein modelling by developing such a model for
UAAs. This model will be parameterized and validated against experimental data
produced with the co-PI's novel method of UAA incorporation and
biofunctionalization called PRECISE (Protein Residue-Explicit Covalent
Immobilization for Stability Enhancement). This work will train two graduate
students and two to four undergraduate students on proper application of the
scientific method using state-of-the-art techniques in an interdisciplinary,
experimental/computational team environment.