* 1710769
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Parental programming via epigenetic modifications to female and male gametes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Hellmann, Hellmann                Jennifer       K
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 06/30/2019
* USD 0.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Jennifer Hellman Johnson, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology, at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and is being mentored by Alison Bell
(sponsoring scientist). The fellow's research explores how offspring development
is altered by maternal and paternal exposure to the stress of predation, prior
to fertilization. Recent advances in biology have demonstrated that parental
experiences can be transmitted to future generations without changes in
underlying DNA sequences. These parental effects may cause changes in the
appearance of offspring, which allow individuals to cope with the change.
Alternatively, the multigenerational nature of these parental effects may mean
that damaging stressors encountered by one generation can persist for multiple
generations, even after the stressor has passed. In either case, understanding
the influence of parental transmission of experiences prior to fertilization,
and the underlying mechanisms, will improve the ability to predict how organisms
adapt to variable and stressful environments. This research is elucidating if
maternal and paternal stress prior to fertilization alter offspring in similar
ways, whether maternal and paternal influences are additive or synergistic, if
parents' experiences reverberate through the generations, and what potential
mechanisms underlie these parental effects.

Using a well-studied fish species, the threespined stickleback (Gasterosteus
aculeatus), the fellow is generating offspring with either no predator-exposed
parents, predator-exposed mothers, predator-exposed fathers, or predator-exposed
mothers and fathers. The fellow is measuring offspring and grandoffspring for
differences in morphological and physiological traits and behavior. Further,
because sperm and egg non-coding small RNAs have been increasingly recognized as
an important epigenetic mechanism by which parents can influence offspring, the
fellow is injecting embryos with maternal and/or paternal miRNAs that are
differentially expressed due to predation experience. These injected embryos are
being measured for the same phenotypic traits as the F1 and F2 generation above
to determine if the effects of parents' experience on offspring and their
grandchildren are mediated by miRNAs, and to what extent (if any) other
mechanisms underlie these changes. This fellowship provides valuable training in
behavioral genomics for the fellow and an opportunity to participate in existing
diversity programs in the broader University of Illinois community, including
participation in mentoring LGBTQ students in STEM and elementary school girls in
local science clubs.