* 1710313
* Investigating Mixed Metal Chalcogenides for Electrocatalytic Water Oxidation: An Integrated Experimental and Theoretical Approach towards Materials Innovation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Manashi Nath, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 594,443.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The production of clean hydrogen is one of the
main challenges for large-scale and long-term implementation of a hydrogen fuel
economy. Using water splitting reactions to produce oxygen and hydrogen is
currently one of the most promising technologies for generating clean hydrogen.
However, the efficiency of the water splitting reaction is limited by the
kinetically slow water oxidation process (also referred to as oxygen evolution
reaction, OER) which necessitates the use of catalysts that can lower the
activation energy barrier. The OER catalyst needs to be designed such that it
can facilitate the reaction at low applied potential to increase the overall
energy conversion efficiency and, at the same time, be non-toxic, cheap,
abundant, and durable. Through this grant, co-funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research and the
Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry, the PIs employ a
hypothesis-driven integrated experimental and DFT-based theoretical approach to
design highly efficient OER electrocatalysts based on mixed metal chalcogenides
(selenides and tellurides) containing first row transition elements. Their
favorably tailored electronic and structural properties suggest that these
chalcogenide-based electrocatalysts outperform the conventional OER
electrocatalysts, which are based on precious metal or transition metal oxides
and show only modest catalytic activity. Such high-efficiency OER
electrocatalysts containing earth-abundant non-precious elements have a large
societal impact globally, especially in the foreseeable future, when alternative
energy generation in a sustainable and non-cost-prohibitive way is one of the
primary concerns of mankind. This multidisciplinary project involves
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers collaborating on cutting
edge approaches in chemistry, electrochemistry, physics, and surface science for
discovery of new catalyst compositions. To disseminate knowledge about
alternative energy generation, demonstration experiments are designed and shared
with the public through outreach activities set up at the St. Louis Science
Center, through Minority Introduction to Engineering (MITE) camps run by
Missouri S&amp;T, and through workshops organized during the summer for local
high school teachers, which include live demonstrations of an active water
electrolyser utilizing results from this project. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This project, which is co-funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry, is
centered on investigating electrocatalytic activities of ternary and quaternary
transition metal chalcogenides towards OER with the following specific aims: (1)
identifying new efficient OER electrocatalyst compositions through combinatorial
approach; (2) understanding their catalytic activities through experimental
measurements as well as electronic band structure calculations and developing a
proper insight of the structure-property correlation; (3) studying stability of
these electrocatalysts under conditions of OER. From a materials chemistry point
of view, the PIs investigate the hypothesis that transition metal chalcogenides
have better catalytic efficiency than the commonly used precious metal oxides
for OER due to several factors including: (i) increased degree of covalency in
the metal-chalcogen bonds which will alter the chemical potential of the metal
atom; (ii) structural richness of the chalcogenides resulting from extensive
metal-metal bonding giving rise to variable oxidation states, which will affect
redox potential of the catalyst site; (iii) variety of metal-chalcogen
coordination geometry exhibited by the transition metal chalcogenides that can
affect the nature of active sites for catalysis as well as creating anion
vacancies; and (iv) intricate electronic properties along with a smaller bandgap
making it more absorptive in the visible region. Transition metal chalcogenides
(selenides and tellurides), of binary, NixEy [E = Se, Te], ternary [Ni1-xMxEn; M
= Fe, Co, Mn], and quaternary [NixMIyMIIzEn; MI = Fe, MII = Al, Co, Mn]
compositions are synthesized (mainly by electrodeposition) and their catalytic
activities are investigated through detailed electrochemical studies with
support from this grant. Systematic electronic band structure calculations
provide an insight into the active catalyst sites and create in-depth knowledge
regarding structure-property relationships for these new catalysts. Special
emphasis is placed on the elucidation of the chemical composition on the
catalyst surface. Employing a variety of surface analytical techniques reveals
valuable insights regarding the stability of these chalcogenide catalysts under
conditions of OER and allows the identification of the actual catalytically
active species.