* 1710772
* Building Tools for Institutional Transformation of Biology Core Competencies Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Alison Crowe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 299,997.00

The message from biology educators, policy makers, and practitioners nationwide
is resounding: undergraduate biology education needs reform to ensure that
future graduates are diverse, skilled, and STEM-literate. An integral part of
preparing biology students for modern STEM jobs is ensuring that students
receive instruction not only in biology concepts, but also in the skills used by
practicing biologists. Such skills include scientific communication,
collaboration, quantitative reasoning, and problem solving. The fundamental
objective of this work is to produce tools that will facilitate the improvement
of undergraduate biology skills training. This project will produce two tools -
the BioSkills Guide and the Programmatic Survey of BioSkills Coverage - designed
to be used separately by instructors as they review and enhance their teaching
or together to help departments through the process of curricular reform. The
BioSkills Guide will translate general recommendations about skills training
into concrete descriptions of tasks that can be taught in the classroom,
clarifying what it means for a student to be competent in each skill. The
programmatic survey will reveal which skills are already well covered in a
department's curriculum, which are lacking, and in which particular courses each
skill is taught. Administrators can use data from this survey to make decisions
about where to target reform efforts and resources, and the BioSkills Guide can
support individual course or curriculum-wide redesign. The tools produced by
this project are intended to support educators nationwide as they train biology
students in the skills they need to be successful in the modern U.S. STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AAAS report Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education, published in 2011, identified six essential
skills, termed core competencies, around which college biology curricula should
be built. This project will elaborate the Vision and Change core competencies by
developing tools that will support individual and department-wide efforts to
improve core competencies teaching. Specifically, the proposed project will
develop two tools: the BioSkills Guide and the Programmatic Survey of BioSkills
Coverage. The BioSkills Guide will be a set of learning goals with examples of
supporting activities, elucidating each of the six core competencies. The guide
will be collaboratively drafted and iteratively revised, incorporating the
combined expertise of educators at a variety of 2- and 4- year institutions. The
final product will then be validated using a survey sent to hundreds of biology
educators and practitioners nationwide. To extend the value of the guide, each
learning goal in the final guide will be mapped to evidence-based instructional
practices and validated assessments from the literature. By translating core
competencies into specific learning goals that can be observed and assessed, the
BioSkills Guide will define what it means for an undergraduate biology student
to master those skills. By reaching a consensus among biology educators who
teach at diverse institution types, across a range of subdisciplines and course
levels, the guide will delineate which learning goals are most important for
biology majors. Alignment of BioSkills learning goals with existing assessments
will enable biology education researchers to prioritize development of novel
assessments addressing competency learning goals that lack appropriate testing
instruments. The validated BioSkills Guide will be adapted into a Programmatic
Survey of BioSkills Coverage, offering departments a means to obtain a more
fine-grained assessment of competencies coverage than existing tools. This
survey will enable biology departments to internally review curriculum-wide
coverage of competency learning goals. To ensure the survey has widespread
applicability, it will be iteratively revised following instructor interviews
and pilot implementations at multiple institutions. Together these tools can be
used to bring department practices into alignment with national standards
outlined in Vision and Change.