* 1710892
* Analysis and design of decentralized control systems in the presence of uncertain latency or system parameters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Laurent Lessard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 380,000.00

This research addresses the analysis and design of decentralized feedback
control systems. Such systems include: the power grid, wireless networks, and
medical tele-robotics. In these applications, distributed information-gathering
is taking place but decision-making is often made locally using small subsets of
the total information. The emphasis of this research is on controlling
decentralized systems in the presence of uncertainty, which can be uncertainty
in inter-subsystem communication latency or uncertainty in the dynamics or
parameters of the subsystems themselves. The intellectual merits of this project
are to advance foundational knowledge in the science of decentralized control
and to produce computationally efficient control algorithms. This research has
the potential to impact several different application areas and to serve as a
guide to practice for engineers and system designers.

Optimal decentralized control is generally intractable, yet certain broad
classes of problems can be efficiently solved. This project will leverage recent
structural results for these tractable instances with the goal of elucidating
universal architectures that allow for simple adaptations in the face of
uncertainty in the subsystems or latency in their communication. To achieve this
goal, the project will bring to bear tools and insights from the fields of
optimal control, robust and nonlinear control, delayed systems, and
decentralized control.