* 1710140
* Exploiting ion mobility and high performance mass spectrometry for in-depth characterization of neuropeptides in hypoxia and pH stress
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lingjun Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 08/31/2021
* USD 425,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Lingjun Li at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, is
developing new mass spectrometry-based technology to study neuropeptide changes
involved in environmental stress. Professor Li and her team focus on the study
of how the structures and the concentrations of neuropeptides in a crab change
under the lack of oxygen (hypoxia) or under acidic or basic conditions (pH
stress). As neuropeptides represent one of the most diverse and essential
classes of molecules that regulate various physiological processes, new
approaches and techniques are needed to enable a more complete description of
these signaling molecules and quantify their changes in response to
environmental stressors. Professor Li and her group develop a set of tools based
on ion-mobility mass spectrometry to separate different peptides of different
size-to-charge ratios. Cataloging different peptides detected will then help to
understand their roles in the brain. The funded research takes advantage of the
power of analytical chemistry tools to advance neuroscience research. It
provides excellent training opportunities to graduate students and undergraduate
students in Professor Li's group to pursue a research career at the interface of
chemistry and neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to exploit
novel use of the powerful ion mobility mass spectrometry (IM-MS) technology to
address several remaining technical challenges facing neuropeptide research.
Specifically, Professor Li and her team are funded to develop a novel multi-
pronged approach based on IM-MS coupling to microseparations, high-performance
MS, and molecular dynamic simulations for large-scale discovery, quantitation
and structural elucidation of neuropeptides. They plan to improve methodologies
for ion mobility assisted large-scale peptidomic analysis and accurate
quantitation, its coupling to various microseparation platforms and mass
spectral imaging for comprehensive neuropeptide analysis. Furthermore, they will
develop a unique IM-MS based strategies to probe novel posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) of neuropeptides such as D/L-peptide epimers and O-linked
glycosylation. The new methodology is to improve neurochemical signaling
analysis in response to hypoxia and pH stress. The technological advancements
resulting from this proposal will be applicable to large-scale analysis of
biochemical and peptidergic signaling in many nervous systems, including humans.
The molecular insights gained from probing neurochemistry in response to stress
could lead to a better understanding of neuroendocrine regulatory mechanisms
involved in adapting to environmental stress, a process that is highly conserved
among all organisms to maintain their survival in the face of both externally
and internally generated "stimuli".