* 1710639
* Terahertz Recollisions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 550,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy physicists explore the
structure of matter by colliding elementary particles like protons and
electrons. In solids, currents--like those generated in a photovoltaic cell
after illumination by sunlight--are usually carried by entities called "quasi-
particles." When acted on by a force, quasi-particles behave like particles, but
actually involve the co-ordinated motions of thousands to millions of atoms. If
an atom in a solid were scaled up to be the size of a person, then a quasi-
particle would look something like "the wave" in a large, full stadium. The PI's
group has recently discovered a method to accelerate and collide quasi-particles
about 1 trillion times per second (1 Terahertz). The experimental signature of
quasi-particle collisions is a rainbow-like spectrum of light that contains
dozens of frequencies, or sidebands, that are equally spaced like the teeth on a
comb. Each sideband, carries information about the speed with which the
quasiparticles have collided, and the quantum-mechanical properties of the solid
through which they have been accelerated before colliding. In this project, the
PI's group will carefully analyze both the intensities and polarizations of the
sidebands from a variety of electronic materials in order to elucidate the laws
that govern the motion of quasiparticles and to search for new phases of
strongly-driven matter. Possible applications of the proposed research include
faster and more energy efficient optical communications and internet, improved
optical clocks that are necessary in the global positioning system, and the
ability to rapidly and reversibly tune the properties of materials. This project
will support the training of two Ph. D. students and several undergraduates, who
will learn a variety of skills that are critical to preserving U. S.
competitiveness in the high-technology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses one of the grand challenges
of 21st century science--how does quantum matter behave when it is driven very
far from thermal equilibrium. The goals of this project are to take advantage of
new opportunities in the study of strongly-driven matter to (1) develop a method
of measuring the Berry curvature of bands in solids, which is critical to
understanding the dynamics of quasiparticles; (2) elucidate the nature of
quasiparticles in materials in which correlations between electrons are strong,
like the parent compounds of high-Tc superconductors; and (3) search for new
quantum-mechanical phases near the edges of materials that are driven by strong,
time-periodic fields. In order to reach these goals, this project will use the
recent discovery of high-order sideband generation (HSG) by the PI's group. Each
of the materials of interest will be illuminated by a NIR laser while it is
being driven by a strong THz-frequency electric field, and the intensities and
polarizations of the resulting HSG spectra will be analyzed. Experiments will be
closely coupled with theory to reach the project goals.