* 1710066
* CDS&amp;E - ECCS: Plane-wave Electronic TRAnsport (PETRA)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Massimo Fischetti, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 425,000.00

A great variety of consumer electronics, such as laptops and smartphones, rely
on tiny nanometer-size electronic switches. To further improve and develop new
electronic switches that can be manufactured more cheaply and consume less
power, new device concepts based on novel two-dimensional materials rather than
conventional silicon technologies have been proposed and new research is needed
to assess their potential properties. An important step in the development of
such new electronic switches is computer simulations incorporating the physical
elements that control the charge transport. Many important breakthroughs have
been realized in electronic transport simulations and quantum transport is
routinely simulated using a host of tools available to the community. However,
all of these currently available tools start from the chemist's "tight-binding"
viewpoint rather than from the physicist's "plane-wave" vantage point.
Unfortunately, certain physical processes that are important in two-dimensional
materials are difficult to be treated correctly using the tight-binding basis.
The goal of this project is to transform the way quantum transport is studied by
moving from the tight-binding basis to the plane-wave basis. This project will
develop a plane-wave based quantum transport code capable of studying novel
electronic devices. The project will also include a study of conventionally-
scaled electronic devices as well as newly proposed devices and materials that
present important routes toward the realization of a more energy-efficient
electronics. This project will also generate a pipeline of students motivated to
study science and engineering at universities through participation in various
outreach programs at the University of Texas at Dallas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will develop a plane-wave based
code capable of studying quantum transport in nanoscale devices such as
nanowires and nanoribbons. Efficient plane-wave algorithms to reduce
computational memory and time requirements and a robust capability of studying
the effects of spin-orbit coupling will be implemented in the code. Electronic
dissipative scattering in these nanoscale devices will be dealt with using the
Pauli Master equation. Important physical phenomena that will be incorporated
are: scattering with phonons, defects, and edge roughness. Of particular
interest is scattering with the flexural out-of-plane phonons which are hard to
describe in a localized basis set. The atomic-scale dielectric response in these
low-dimensional systems will also be studied. Using the developed quantum
transport code, a wide variety of devices, such as conventional field-effect
transistors, tunneling-based field-effect transistors, and topological-insulator
field-effect transistors, will be studied. The research will elucidate the
impact of flexural out-of-plane phonon modes on the electronic-transport
characteristics of low-dimensional materials. The effects of spin-orbit coupling
on transport will be determined. How the interplay between spin-orbit coupling
and the electron-phonon interaction affects transport will be clarified.
Finally, the research will also unravel the important physical processes in
future field-effect transistors and determine how to deal with possible
detrimental effects such as line-edge roughness.