* 1710472
* Multi-stacked hybrid graphene and quantum dot films for high response photodetection
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Oscar Vazquez-Mena, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Title: Hybrid graphene and quantum dot films for high response
photodetection&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Conversion
of light to electricity is at the core of photodetection and photovoltaic
devices that are critical for cameras, fast communications, information
processing, biodetection, biomedical instruments, and energy harvesting. One of
the main challenges for light detection is developing new technologies with low
power consumption that can be thin and flexible to facilitate its use on
wearable and portable devices. This project aims to develop a hybrid and
ultrathin technology combining the strong light absorption of semiconducting
nanoparticles (quantum dots) with the high electrical conductivity of one-atom
thick carbon layers (graphene). The strategy for this project is to use quantum
dots to collect light and generate electrical charges that will be collected by
intercalated graphene layers for efficient charge transport. The intercalated
graphene layers will serve as an efficient network of highly conductive paths
for electrical charges inside the photodetector. Combining these nanomaterials
would allow ultrathin photodetectors with high sensitivity and low power
consumption that can be implemented on flexible and wearable devices. This
project will also set a platform to train a new generation of students and
engineers on the properties and applications of nanomaterials for
optoelectronics and sunlight energy harvesting applications. Furthermore, this
project will also help to disseminate new advances in nanotechnology for
underrepresented communities, especially in high-schools in Hispanic communities
in the region of Southern California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The goal
for this project is to develop lead-sulfide quantum dot photodetectors with
enhanced photoresponse using intercalated graphene layers for efficient current
collection. It is a well-known restriction that for efficient current extraction
with conventional top/bottom contacts, the thickness of the absorbing layers
should not exceed the carrier diffusion length. If the films are thicker, then
the photocarriers recombine before being collected by the top/bottom electrodes.
This project aims to overcome this restriction by using intercalated layers with
spacing shorter than the carrier diffusion length, allowing the efficient
collection of photocharges before they recombine. This is an innovative strategy
to break the limitation that diffusion length imposes on light absorbing layers
and therefore boost the performance of optoelectronic devices. The first goal of
the project will be to study the charge transfer dynamics and photoresponse at a
graphene/quantum dot interface. Both materials have been largely studied, but
their joint hybrid heterojunction is still largely unexplored. Since both are
quantum confined systems with strong surface dependent behavior, the charge
transfer can substantially differ from normal 'bulk' junctions. The technology
to build the intercalated quantum dots and graphene devices will be developed
based on low-temperature processing compatible with both nanomaterials, such as
spin coating of quantum dots and graphene transfer. Integrating different
nanomaterials in a single device can open a new route to develop high performing
nanoscale devices combining their properties. Our analysis of the devices will
be based on light absorption, photoresponsivity, and quantum efficiency
measurements. The measurements will focus on studying the performance
enhancement as function of the thickness of the absorbing layer and the spacing
between graphene layers. This project has the potential to develop a new
architecture for optoelectronic devices with superior carrier collection
efficiency.