* 1710613
* Collaborative Research: Mapping and Tracking Conformational Control of Nitric Oxide Synthase Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Carey Johnson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 03/31/2022
* USD 327,612.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Carey Johnson from the University of Kansas, Dr. Brian
Smith from Medical College of Wisconsin, and Dr. David Arnett from Northwestern
College. The project investigates shapes (conformations) and shape changes of
the enzyme nitric oxide synthase (NOS). The importance of conformational changes
in the function of complex enzymes like NOS has become increasingly recognized.
NOS activity requires a sequence of electron transfers between different domains
of the enzyme. The hypothesis is that these events are controlled by
conformational dynamics. In this project, the conformations and conformational
changes of NOS are tracked by time-resolved and single-molecule fluorescence
techniques. Mass spectrometry shows how domain interactions are regulated by
binding to NOS of a calcium signaling protein, calmodulin. The results may show
how multi-domain enzymes function through conformational changes. The project
provides training in advanced fluorescence and mass spectrometric techniques for
graduate students at Kansas University and the Medical College of Wisconsin.
Undergraduate students from all participating institutions are trained in
interdisciplinary science research. The project also offers training for members
of the UKanTeach program which trains science majors as high school science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exploits the spatial and temporal
resolution inherent in time-resolved and single-molecule fluorescence to
identify and track the conformational states of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). NOS
is a homodimeric enzyme that catalyzes formation of nitric oxide by shuttling
electrons from modules in one monomer to the heme in the oxygenase domain of the
other. Electron transfer in both domains depends on calmodulin binding. Because
electron transfer only occurs when the electron donor and electron acceptor are
in close proximity, conformational changes must occur to bring different donor
and acceptor couples together sequentially. The time scales of interchange among
conformational states are not known, nor is it clear how the observed
conformational changes correlate with the catalytic cycle of the enzyme. The
methods of the project correlate conformations and dynamics detected by
fluorescence with knowledge of inter-domain interactions at the peptide level.
These inter-domain interactions are observed from hydrogen-deuterium exchange
(HDX) mass spectrometry. To identify and assign conformational states observed,
selected site-directed mutants that disrupt specific subdomain interactions are
probed by both fluorescence and mass spectrometry. The project may lead to a
detailed model of NOS function that describes the conformational sequences and
rates of conformational changes. The project may also demonstrate how the
conformational sequences are related to enzyme regulation. The project provides
training in advanced fluorescence and mass spectrometric techniques for graduate
students at Kansas University and the Medical College of Wisconsin.
Undergraduate students from all participating institutions are trained in
interdisciplinary science research. The project also offers training for members
of the UKanTeach program which trains science majors as high school science
teachers.