* 1710112
* Hierarchical Assembly and Dynamic Transitions of DNA-Coated Colloids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* William Rogers, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 568,793.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloids--microscopic bits of matter
dispersed in a fluid--are powerful model systems for studying phenomena in
condensed matter physics, as well as promising building blocks for
nanomaterials. Like atoms, they form bulk phases of matter such as gases and
crystals. But unlike atoms, colloidal particles can be encoded with information
that can be used to tell them how to assemble into useful structures. The
ultimate goal of this project is to improve methods for directing, or
programming, colloidal self-assembly by relating the information stored in
particles to the assembly pathways and complex structures that emerge. The
research team uses DNA sequences grafted to colloidal particles, together with
other DNA sequences dissolved in solution, to control interactions between
particles, and investigates how these particles assemble to form various
structures. The results could prove especially useful in nanotechnology, where a
central goal is to manufacture materials and devices by growing them directly
from solution. The research trains doctoral and undergraduate students in the
emerging, interdisciplinary field of programmable self-assembly, and educates
roughly 120 undergraduate students in the life sciences per year through
engaging, open-ended labs focused on applying introductory physics concepts to
problems in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA-coated colloids can assemble into interesting
structures and phases, and are one of the most promising experimental systems
for studying phase transitions and self-assembly in soft condensed matter. This
experimental project investigates and advances an underexplored paradigm, in
which colloids interact by free DNA strands in solution instead of direct
binding of grafted strands, and elucidates the fundamental rules governing
assembly in such systems. The principle investigator's research team takes a
hierarchical approach, studying quantitatively the entire flow of information
from the molecular scale to interactions at the colloidal scale, and then from
the colloidal interactions to the phase behavior that emerges at the system
scale. The central questions being addressed are: how does the emergent phase
behavior depend on details of the pair interaction, and how does the pair
interaction in turn depend on the attributes of DNA strands dissolved in
solution? To answer these questions, the research team uses a variety of modern
optical techniques, including optical microscopy, total internal reflection
microscopy, and differential dynamic microscopy, and develops quantitative
models to interpret and unite their observations. Understanding how DNA
sequences are compiled into structure and function is essential to the ultimate
goals of engineering and manufacturing materials from the bottom up. The project
will train doctoral and undergraduate students in soft matter physics and
applied optics, and educate undergraduates in the life sciences through a series
of inquiry-based labs using optical microscopy.