* 1710298
* Polarization-Driven Electron-Hole Bilayers in Quantum Wells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Debdeep Jena, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical description: This project aims to discover new electronic and
optical phenomena hidden in a material system that is currently used in solid
state lighting, in communication systems, and power electronics, and is in
almost all iPhones and iPads. The research focuses on electrical charge carriers
of opposite signs located very close to each other in gallium nitride quantum
structures. The carriers of opposite signs maintain separate identities, until
they receive a command (for example through a small voltage or a current), upon
which they mix strongly to either emit light, or flow as currents with very
little energy dissipation. This sort of phenomena has been long desired for
making low-power or ultrafast and energy-efficient electronic switches, for
photonic devices, and potentially for sensor environments. Thus, findings of
this project have a potential to impact the electronics and photonics
industries, and environmental health and safety systems. The project trains
graduate students in a fascinating emerging field at the intersection of
physics, materials science, and electrical engineering. In addition to expanding
existing outreach programs, new activities are considered with a special focus
on the high-school students and underrepresented groups, including direct school
visits and in-class demonstrations. The dissemination of research results in
journal publications, presentations at conferences and inclusion in courses
taught by the PI made available online ensures the outreach to the widest
possible audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project
explores the quantum transport and optical properties of III-nitride quantum
structures and their potential applications in electron-hole bilayer systems,
driven by large polarization fields. Such bilayers are difficult to create in
other material systems either because of the lack of polarization, doping
limitations, or because of low breakdown fields. When created (for example, in
two-dimensional layered materials), additional challenges occur related to their
chemical doping and contact reliability. In this project, the PI takes advantage
of unique recent technological progress in epitaxially regrown contacts to two-
dimensional electron and hole gases in novel compressively strained GaN quantum
wells on AlN substrates to explore bilayer physics in a fundamentally new
platform. Parallel two-dimensional systems of electrons and holes boast rich
physics at several levels of complexity - from uncoupled two-dimensional
electron-gas / two-dimensional hole gas p-n diodes that could lead to new
electronic and photonic devices, to weakly coupled systems, exhibiting Coulomb
drag, to strongly coupled systems that have shown glimpses of excitonic or Bose-
Einstein condensation. And with the tantalizing possibility of polarization-
driven topological edge states, the outcomes of the project has a potential for
significant scientific and technological advances for ultra-low power
electronic, photonic quantum information-processing applications.