* 1710557
* Shanks Workshop on Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jonathan Campbell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This NSF award provides support for graduate students, early-career researchers
and members of underrepresented groups to participate in the Shanks Workshop on
Homotopy Theory at Vanderbilt University on March 25-26, 2017. The workshop will
foster collaboration and exchange of ideas among researchers throughout the
field of algebraic topology, a branch of mathematics that stands at the
intersection of several fundamental areas of research. This workshop's invited
speakers reflect the diversity of current work in the area and include
researchers at a variety of career stages in order to best capture a cross-
section of the field today. The workshop will help establish ties between the
growing community of topologists in the south, including Kentucky, Georgia and
at Vanderbilt, with the long-standing community of researchers in the Midwest.
These types of research connections are the building blocks for progress in
mathematical research. Participants with established or emerging research
programs will have a forum to publicize their work and more junior participants
will have the opportunity to integrate into the wider topology community. The
schedule of the conference is designed with breaks to encourage collaborations
and informal mathematical interactions among the participants. Such
opportunities are especially important for mathematicians early in their career.
Incorporating young mathematicians and members of underrepresented groups into
the scientific discourse is key to building a truly representative community of
mathematicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference speakers represent a range
of research in the field, from computations via chromatic homotopy theory to
foundational development to algebraic and topological K-theory. Bringing
together mathematicians from these areas will facilitate collaborations between
Midwestern and Southern algebraic topologists working across the spectrum of
homotopy theory today. Additionally, the speakers' research includes several
areas of homotopy theory that have fruitful connections to other areas of pure
mathematics, such as geometric group theory and dynamics. This workshop will
serve to publicize these connections to researchers in Tennessee and surrounding
states, where there has historically been little homotopy theory. Thus, a
conference at Vanderbilt showcasing the range of present homotopical research
will allow the establishment of mathematical ties both within the discipline and
to other fields. More information can be found at the website:
https://my.vanderbilt.edu/homotopytheory2017/