* 1710711
* Steric Frustration at the Nanoscale: Self-Assembly, Chirality, and Fluctuations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 12/31/2021
* USD 550,000.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The packing of odd-shaped three dimensional
objects can lead to steric frustration, meaning that it's hard to fill space. If
the objects are molecules, however, thermal agitation samples all of the packing
possibilities, either finding unexpected new arrangements or remaining
disorganized. A recently discovered example of this is the heliconical nematic
phase, a liquid in which banana-shaped molecules fill space by arranging
themselves into molecular-scale helical structures. In this project bent
molecules will be designed and synthesized and their phase behavior studied with
the goal of exploring the geometrical and statistical principles that govern how
such steric frustration is accommodated in materials. The resulting design
criteria would have wide ranging applications in the development of new
materials based on the control and use of steric frustration. This project will
provide its junior scientists (undergraduate student, graduate student, and
postdoctoral researchers) with opportunities to participate in broadly
interdisciplinary research in an exciting area of soft materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Rod-shaped molecules form
nematic liquid crystal phases, three dimensional fluids in which steric packing
of rods induces long-range orientational order in thermal equilibrium. But
introducing a simple chemical change to make the rods bent in shape produces an
exotic new (heliconical nematic) phase in which the molecules spontaneously
organize into chiral helical lattices of varying molecular orientation and
nanoscale periodicity. The project hypothesis is that these distinctive new
structures are a result of steric frustration: the bent molecular shape creates
pockets of space which are difficult to fill, thereby attracting the most
strongly fluctuating molecular sub-components. This newly formulated organizing
principle will be explored in a broad-based, coordinated program of molecular
design, chemical synthesis, physical characterization, and computer simulation
of heliconical nematic phases. In particular, resonant soft x-ray scattering
will be used to characterize their nanoscale orientational structure, and will
be extended to probe molecular orientational fluctuations at the nanoscale. What
is learned will be applied to a variety of soft matter systems, including liquid
crystals, polymers and nanofabrications, with the intention of creating broadly
useful, powerful means of probing and understanding nanoscale molecular
orientational dynamics. The strong collective nanoscale chirality of the
heliconical nematic phase makes it attractive for application in separation of
enantiomers of chiral guest molecules, and as a templating medium for asymmetric
synthesis. These applications of the heliconical nematic phase will be explored.