* 1710618
* Developing a New Paradigm for Quantitative Genetic Modeling: Integrating Molecular, Physiological, and Environmental Variation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jacob Washburn, Washburn                Jacob          D
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The host institutions for the fellowship are
Cornell University and the University of Queensland, and the sponsoring
scientists are Dr. Edward S. Buckler and Dr. Graeme Hammer.

Modern technologies and computational approaches have led to predictive crop
models with the potential to shorten breeding cycles and increase the efficiency
of crop improvement. However, these tools are in their infancy and usually
underperform in actual field conditions where variable environmental conditions
exist. This project will incorporate available forms of biological and
environmental data into an improved modeling framework to more accurately
predict plant growth and to enable more efficient crop production. To assist in
this method development, the Fellow will receive training and mentoring in
statistical, computational, and mathematical modeling from two of the world's
foremost experts in these areas. The Fellow will also develop and conduct
training workshops to assist others in using the newly developed methods.

Quantitative genetic models are critical to understanding how molecular and
environmental factors interact and contribute to phenotypes. They provide a
mathematical and theoretical paradigm for research on, and prediction of,
complex and economically important traits in agriculture, conservation and
medicine. However, they often perform poorly when predicting complex or emergent
properties, hybrid progeny phenotypes, and traits strongly influenced by the
environment. The current paradigm also ignores a great deal of biological
knowledge from genomics, transcriptomics, physiology, evolutionary biology, and
elsewhere. This project will develop new quantitative genetic methods that
better incorporate biological data from genomics, transcriptomics, physiology,
and dosage models. All data and methods generated through the project will be
made publically available in peer reviewed journal articles, national
repositories, and open source software version control platforms.