* 1710221
* GOALI: Plant-derived Biogenic Sulfur Emissions to the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Robert Cody, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 565,000.00

This award is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation. Professor Rabi Musah of
the Chemistry Department at the State University of New York at Albany (UAlbany)
and collaborators at JEOL USA, Inc., a world leader in mass spectrometry,
microscopy, and other analytical instrumentation, collaborate to develop new
instruments that will measure volatile organosulfur compounds (VOSC) in the air
in real time. Organosulfur species enter the atmosphere from both plants and
other combustion processes and once in the atmosphere, VOSCs produce pollution,
acid rain and cloud formation. The tools to be developed facilitate the study of
not only the identity of organosulfur compounds in the atmosphere, but also
their fate in the overall global sulfur cycle. The analytical tools and data
processing software that are developed may find broad utility for analyses
relevant to a range of other fields including chemistry, biochemistry, forensics
chemistry, food sciences, agriculture, and medicine. Additionally, commercially
available hardware and software are developed. The unique collaboration with
JEOL USA Inc., extends the research capabilities of the UAlbany team. The
fundamental research being performed by the team at UAlbany (i.e. investigations
into the VOSC emission chemistry of vascular plants, and the study of the
reactions of these compounds with other species in the environmental), occurs
alongside more applied investigations at JEOL that are associated with extending
the application of novel mass spectrometry technologies to solve a number of
analytical problems in environmental science. Students and postdoctoral fellows
benefit from immersion in both academic and industrial experiences, which serves
to enhance their professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New ambient
ionization mass spectrometric approaches are being developed to enable detection
of individual plant-emitted volatile organosulfur compounds (VOSCs) in air in
real time. The techniques are used for laboratory studies of the kinetics and
products of the reactions of these newly discovered plant-derived VOSCs with
environmentally-relevant free radicals. The developed analytical tools are
expected to find broad utility for analyses relevant to a range problems in
other fields. This work is performed in collaboration with scientists at JEOL
USA Inc. The fundamental research is performed by the team at UAlbany, while
JEOL pursues more applied investigations aimed at extending the application of
novel ambient ionization mass spectrometry technologies to solve analytical
problems in environmental science. Additionally, students benefit from immersion
in both academic and industrial experiences, which serves to enhance their
professional development.