* 1710514
* OP: Collaborative Research: Active Speckle Control and Fast Speckle Statistics to Drastically Improve the Contrast Ratio of Exoplanet Direct Imaging
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Fitzgerald, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2020
* USD 101,955.00

Astronomers would like to image habitable planets around other stars. Turbulence
in Earth's atmosphere is the main obstacle to achieving this goal. Such
turbulence blurs and confuses light from bright stars with their nearby, dim
planets. Adaptive optics can partially correct for turbulence. However, even
adaptive optics pushed to its limits (Extreme Adaptive Optics, ExAO) is still
insufficient to deliver the required high-contrast images. Mazin and
collaborators will develop an innovative control algorithm that makes use of
new, highly responsive detectors. This approach will enable ExAO images to
separate exoplanets from their parent stars. The resulting algorithm will be
tested and used at several observatories. This technology may enable
breakthrough advances in ground-based astronomy and allow the discovery of
habitable worlds outside our solar system.

This proposal is a continuation of Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detector (MKID)
research and development that was supported by previous NSF awards (1308556
and1654105). These previous awards supported the instrument development and
deployment at Palomar Observatory. This award will develop algorithms and
methodology to use the instrument to increase contrast in Extreme Adaptive
Optics (ExAO) images of exoplanets. Increasing contrast is the main technical
challenge for imaging exoplanets with ExAO. The greatest obstacle is short
timescale atmospheric speckles that are uncorrected by the AO system. This
proposal will use the fast time response of the MKID detectors to remove
speckles from images ex post facto using the photon arrival time statistics.
Direct detection and study of Earth-like exoplanets would realize a major goal
of astronomy in the coming decade.