* 1710079
* Optimizing Environmental Perfluoroalkyl Acid Degradation by Elucidating Mechanisms: A Coupled Computational and Experimental Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Shubham Vyas, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 417,643.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation. Prof. Professor Shubham
Vyas and his students investigate the mechanisms by which perfluoroalkyl acids
(PFAAs) are transformed in the environment. PFAAs are synthetic chemicals that
are used as coating for carpets, textiles and paper, and fire extinguishing
foams. Because PFAAs are very unreactive chemicals, they are extremely
persistent compounds in the environment. They also pose threats to human and
ecological health, for instance as pollutants in drinking water. The overall
goal of this project is to test various chemical conditions in which one can
improve the destruction of PFAAs in aqueous environment. At the same time, the
energy demand for such a process should be reduced. Several undergraduate and
graduate students are getting trained during this project as they engage in
multidisciplinary research in environmental chemistry. Furthermore, the
investigators actively use research strategies and findings from this project to
reach out to K-12 students and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Vyas
and his team employ a coupled experimental and computational approach to carry
out this project. They use two representative PFAAs, perfluorooctanoic acid
(PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS). Chemical computations using density
functional theory and post-Hartree-Fock-based calculations provide guidance for
experimental efforts. The experiments iteratively feed findings back into the
chemical computations. This improves the models and explains unusual
experimental findings. The Vyas lab studies the degradation of PFAAs using
superoxide radical anion, hydroxyl radical, and persulfate radical anion in the
presence of transition metal cations. These reactions are likely facilitated by
heat or by external light. Time-resolved absorption spectroscopic measurements
provide information on reactive intermediates and the efficiency of light
triggered reactions. Mass spectrometric and chromatographic measurements are
used to monitor reaction products. Students participating in this inherently
interdisciplinary research project acquire a unique skill set that incorporates
elements of computational and experimental environmental chemistry, providing
them with skills for their future careers. This project is also used as a
vehicle to incorporate concepts of environmental computational chemistry into
undergraduate and graduate chemistry curricula.