* 1710063
* Reaction Limited Synthesis of Atomically-Defined Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Mikhail Zamkov, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,788.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal nanostructures are emerging as
attractive candidates for low-cost processing of next-generation optical and
electronic materials. Their characteristic size falls within the unique length
scale where inorganic semiconductors exhibit tunable, molecular-like properties
while retaining a good thermal and photo-stability. The chemical synthesis of
semiconductor nanostructures typically results in a large variety of particle
shapes and sizes, which negatively affects the ensuing device performance. To
address this issue, the project aims to explore an alternative synthetic
strategy for growing uniform, atomically-defined semiconductor nanoparticles.
The innovation lies in employing chemical rather than thermal growth, which
benefits from reaction-controllable, incremental steps in the particle
formation. This strategy enables an unprecedented precision in controlling both
the shape and the uniformity of semiconductor nanostructures. The development of
a synthetic methodology for growing atomically-defined colloidal nanoparticles
can potentially affect a wide range of emerging technologies relying on solution
processing of semiconductors. It is expected to result in improved electrical
and optical performance of materials for the solar fuel generation and solid
state lighting. The educational aspects of this project are planned to focus on
elucidating students through research activities and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to explore a reaction-limited growth of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals in
an effort to achieve a controllable evolution of particle shapes and sizes.
Nanocrystal synthesis is typically performed via thermal activation of
precursors which benefits from a fast, low-defect crystallization. As a
diffusion-limited growth mechanism, however, the hot-injection strategy makes it
inherently difficult to control the nanoparticle size dispersion, ligand
coverage, and the cation-to-anion ratio across the sample. As a result, distinct
optoelectronic properties of individual nanoparticles become inhomogenously
broadened in assemblies. The present strategy employs the sequential deposition
of fully saturated cationic and anionic monolayers onto small-diameter clusters,
which leads to focusing of particle sizes with the increasing diameter. Each
ionic layer is grown via a colloidal analog of the atomic layer deposition to
keep precursors and nanocrystals in separate phases. As a result, a self-limited
monolayer deposition becomes very effective leading to stoichiometrically
defined surfaces at each ion growth cycle. It is expected that an improvement in
nanoparticle uniformity down to atomically precise structures is attainable
through this strategy. An improved control over the nanoparticle size dispersion
is likely to advance the development of light-emitting devices, whereas a well-
defined surface composition could avail film-based nanocrystal applications
(solar cells, transistors).