* 1710589
* SusChEM: Pro-Active Networks from Degradable Acetals (PANDAs) via Thiol-ene Photopolymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Derek Patton, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Synthetic polymers are typically resistant to degradation and far outlive the
useful lifetime of the use for which they are designed - a problem that results
in the accumulation of plastics in landfills and oceans. Even upon degradation,
the byproducts of plastics are sometimes toxic and serve no useful or active
purpose in the environment. The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry (MSN) program of NSF Chemistry Division supports the efforts of
Professors Patton and Mavrodi at the University of Southern Mississippi to
advance the design of degradable polymers. Essential oil derivatives are used as
primary building blocks of the polymers. The materials are designed to undergo
complete degradation under mild conditions resulting in regeneration of
essential oils. Stemming from the broad-spectrum antimicrobial and antifungal
activity observed for many essential oil constituents, these degradable
materials are potentially useful for a range of pharmaceutical, biomedical, and
agricultural applications. The researchers have established active outreach
programs to local K-12 schools including the ?What is a Polymer? program
(impacting &gt; 500 students annually) and the ?Discover Nature? summer science
camp. A new outreach initiative and collaboration with the local 3D (Dynamic
Dyslexia Design) School is initiated. ?Science Nights @ 3D? engage dyslexic
students (and their families) with hands-on activities that require visual,
kinesthetic, and auditory processing while introducing fundamental, grade
appropriate science and math concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this project is the design, synthesis, and characterization of degradable
polymer thermosets called "pro-active networks from degradable acetals (PANDAs)"
via thiol-ene photopolymerization. The approach is rooted in the design of
multifunctional acyclic and cyclic acetal monomers derived from essential oil
precursors that enable control over network chemistry and network structure for
tunable degradation profiles. PANDAs covalently incorporate aldehydes (e.g.,
vanillin, anisaldehyde, citronellal) and phenolic compounds (carvacrol, thymol)
derived from essential oils directly into the polymer network via an acetal
linkage - either as pendant groups (cyclic acetal) or as an integral part of the
polymer backbone (acyclic acetal). Exposure to conditions conducive to acetal
degradation (e.g., change in humidity/pH) regenerates the essential oil building
blocks. Degradation profiles are determined to ascertain the erosion mechanism
(surface vs. bulk) and aldehyde/phenol release kinetics, and to correlate
degradation/release profiles with chemical and physical properties of the
polymer network (e.g., hydrophobicity and crosslink density). The project
actively trains a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary research environment and engages local K-12 schools, in
outreach. This includes a collaboration with the local Dynamic Dyslexia Design
(3D) School.