* 1710450
* Shape Discovery for Convex Bodies: Measures, Invariants, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Erwin Lutwak, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2021
* USD 458,955.00

This research project concerns constructing a geometric shape from either
indirect measurements or a set of design requirements. Such construction
problems arise not only in mathematics, but also in science, engineering, and
medicine. Examples include identifying organs and tumors in the human body or
designing the shapes of radar antennas or jet airplanes. The Brunn-Minkowski
theory is at the heart of the mathematical and computational tools used in such
applications. Central to the Brunn-Minkowski theory are isoperimetric
inequalities, which express relationships between different types of geometric
measurements (such as the surface area and volume) of a body, and Minkowski
problems, which ask whether a shape can be reconstructed from a set of geometric
measurements (such as the curvature of the boundary). The investigators will
continue their work connecting ideas in information theory with Brunn-Minkowski
theory. This work has generated interesting questions that are accessible to and
can be explored by high school and undergraduate students. Graduate students
also are involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall theme of the
research is to develop both extensions and duals of the classical Brunn-
Minkowski theory. In one project, the investigators aim to build upon prior
results showing that, for each value of a real parameter p, there is an Lp
Brunn-Minkowski theory. Just as the Minkowski problem for the surface area
measure is a central focus of the classical Brunn-Minkowski theory, the
Minkowski problem for Lp surface area measure is central to the Lp Brunn-
Minkowski theory. While most work been limited to when the parameter p is
greater than 1, the investigators and collaborator are exploring the singular
case, when p is 0, and aim to extend the work to non-positive p. A second
project concerns analogues of Federer's curvature measures within the dual
Brunn-Minkowski theory. Surprisingly, this newly discovered family includes two
already known but important cases: the cone-volume measure and Aleksandrov's
integral curvature measure. For each such dual curvature measure, there is a
corresponding dual Minkowski problem, which is a fully nonlinear elliptic
partial differential equation. The investigators aim to further explore the dual
Minkowski problem. A third project further investigates Lp analogues of
Aleksandrov's integral curvature; the investigators aim to solve completely the
Minkowski problems associated with these measures. The investigators will
continue their efforts to extend previous work on the parallels between
information theory and both the Lp and dual Brunn-Minkowski theories. The
investigators will also continue their work toward establishing the log-Brunn-
Minkowski inequality, which to date has been established only in the plane.