* 1710509
* Nanoparticle-based Artificial RNA Silencing Machine
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Y. Charles Cao, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2022
* USD 560,000.00

Non-Technical: The general goal of this project is to develop a new class of
bioinspired nanomaterials (called Nanozymes or nanorobots). The PI has shown
that this nanorobot technology complements the Nobel Prize-winning RNAi-based
methods and has the potential to become a general experimental tool for
fundamental biomedical research and an effective therapeutic tool for combating
human diseases such as cancers and viral infections. However, the drawback in
the current nanorobots due to the use of weakly bound wild-type RNase A has
substantially slowed down their use in biomedical research and applications. To
overcome this drawback, the PI plans to use bioengineered RNase A, which can be
attached onto gold nanoparticles with strong multiple chemical bonds to
construct a new generation of nanorobots. The research team will systemically
maximize the target selectivity and enzymatic RNA cleavage activity of
nanorobots through optimizing the sequence and structure of DNA
oligonucleotides, the loading number of RNase A, and the size of gold
nanoparticles over the next three years. These proposed research efforts are
further integrated with educational efforts for training graduate and
undergraduate students in multidisciplinary bio-nanotechnology research areas,
which is important for future job creation and national economic growth. The
educational efforts will also include educational outreach for high school
students, with a focus on promoting their interests in science by improving
their competitive ability in regional and international science and engineering
fairs. In addition, the educational efforts are integrated with NSF-funded
education programs (AGEP and REU) at the University of Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project aims to develop a new class of
bioinspired nanomaterials (called Nanozymes). Their preliminary results have
shown that this nanozyme technology complements the RNAi (RNA
interference)-based methods and can potentially become a general experimental
tool for functional genomics and an effective therapeutic tool for combating
human diseases such as cancer. However, these nanozymes were prepared using
weakly bound wild-type RNase A, which have substantially slowed down the
nanozyme's use in biomedical research and applications. To overcome this
drawback, the PI plans to use recombinant RNase A, which will be attached onto
gold nanoparticles with multiple gold-sulfur bonds, to construct a new
generation of nanozymes. The research team will maximize the target selectivity
and enzymatic RNA cleavage activity of nanozymes through systemically optimizing
the sequence, structure and loading number of DNA oligonucleotides, the loading
number of RNase A, and the size of gold nanoparticles over the next three years.
These proposed research efforts will be further integrated with educational
efforts. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the proposed
multidisciplinary research. Based on the proposed research, the PI plans to
create a computer game (called NanoBot) as a tool to teach undergraduate and
graduate students how to design effective nanozymes. In addition, the
educational efforts include outreach to high school students and are also
integrated with NSF-funded education programs (AGEP and REU) at the University
of Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Biomaterials
Program in the Division of Materials Research and the Genetic Mechanisms Program
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.