* 1710565
* Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Richard Schoen, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 514,090.00

One aspect of the planned research has to do with optimal shapes of surfaces. If
we think of the surface as a drumhead which vibrates freely at certain
frequencies, then, roughly speaking, the more complicated a geometry we have the
smaller will be its fundamental frequencies. This suggests the problem of
looking for geometries which maximize the fundamental frequency for their area.
This extremal question is a difficult and much studied problem. It turns out
that the geometries which arise are related to surfaces of least area (soap
films). The principal investigator will investigate such extremal configurations
for surfaces with boundary. The other main area of investigation concerns the
Einstein equations of general relativity. These equations describe the
gravitational field for massive bodies in the universe. The theory is purely
geometric and is a wave theory with an initial value formulation. The proposer
is planning to investigate the geometry of solutions to give conditions under
which gravitational collapse takes place and black holes are formed. Such
questions lead to important geometric questions involving gravitational energy
and curvature of spacetime. The proposed research is at the interface between
differential geometry, general relativity, and partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main theme of the research in geometry will be
the study of spectral geometry. One project aims to construct metrics on
surfaces and certain higher dimensional manifolds subject to an area or boundary
length constraint which maximize the first eigenvalue. This is a nonstandard
type of variational problem since it involves maximizing and minimizing over
infinite dimensional spaces of competitors. The principal investigator will
study the geometry of such maximizing metrics to determine the optimal shapes
with largest fundamental frequency. Work in relativity will continue
investigations into the construction proposed by Bartnik of mass minimizing
extensions of compact domains and static vacuum metrics. The principal
investigator also intends to study geometric properties of initial data sets to
address the question of whether they can contain non-compact stable trapped
surfaces. The principal investigator intends to investigate global properties of
the moduli space of solutions of the constraint equations which define the
possible initial data for the Einstein equations. A range of questions will be
pursued concerning minimal submanifolds satisfying free boundary conditions and
connections to eigenvalue problems. In a continuing study of minimal Lagrangian
and special Lagrangian submanifolds of Kaehler-Einstein manifolds the principal
investigator will attempt to prove a conjecture concerning the invariance of the
subgroup of the integral homology of a Calabi-Yau manifold which is generated by
minimal Lagrangian cycles when one deforms the ambient Calabi-Yau structure.