* 1710956
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Impacts of social breeding on the evolution of cognition
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Angela Medina-Garcia, Medina-Garcia           Angela
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Angela Medina-Garc√≠a, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Rebecca Safran at the University of Colorado-Boulder. This
project seeks to understand how social breeding impacts the evolution of wild
animals' ability to acquire and use social information. The fellow will fill
this gap in scientific knowledge by evaluating how birds (barn swallows) of
different colony sizes acquire and use social information, and how these
abilities help them reproduce. Animals need to constantly obtain and process
environmental information to survive and reproduce. Many animals live in dense
colonies, which requires them to pay attention to the actions of others and use
this environmental information (i.e. social information) to increase their
ability to successfully raise their young. The fellow is also providing
invaluable research training to undergraduate students from underrepresented
minorities. In addition, elementary and high school students from
underrepresented groups are being engaged by observing swallow colonies while
learning basic bird biology. The fellow is also developing exhibits at the
University of Colorado Museum of Natural History, a bilingual website on avian
cognition ('aviancognition'), and an interactive online program for reporting
barn swallow colonies ('Swallow Tracker'), which involve students of all levels
and help increase appreciation for birds and biological field research among the
general public.

Barn swallows (Hirundo rustica) breed either in solitary pairs or in colonies
with multiple breeding pairs. Therefore, this species is an ideal system to make
ecologically and phylogenetically controlled comparisons of cognitive traits
among individuals of the same population with a varying degree of sociality. The
impacts of social breeding on the evolution of cognitive traits will be tested
along a sociality continuum, with the following objectives: 1) Measure
individual variation in cognitive traits and reproductive success; 2) Test natal
and environmental influences on cognitive traits. Naturally occurring anti-
predator behaviors will be used to measure cognitive traits that reveal
selective acquisition of social information. The adaptive value of cognitive
traits will be evaluated by measuring reproductive success. The influences of
natal and social environments on cognitive traits will be examined by conducting
a partial cross-fostering experiment between social breeding groups of different
sizes. Quantitative genetic models will be employed to estimate variance
components due to both natal and rearing environments.