* 1710638
* Magnetostructural Coupling in Itinerant Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Part 1: Non Technical

Certain materials show large changes in their temperature when they are brought
close to strong magnets. In recent years, there has been a recognition that such
effects can be employed in cooling, for example, in air-conditioning or
refrigeration, and that these magnetic cooling technologies can potentially even
replace more conventional ways of cooling involving compression/expansion
cycles. This fundamental study of the structure of known and new materials as
they are exposed to changes in the temperature and the strength of the magnetic
field is carried out with funding from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program. The goal of this project is to identify how known materials can be
expected to perform in useful devices, as well as inform the search for new and
improved materials that could lead to further improvements in efficient cooling.
Estimates are that cooling technologies consume as much as a fifth of the total
energy used. Better materials and a better understanding of processes for
cooling, both of which are target goals of this project, are therefore of
national interest in terms of the US staying at the forefront of this important
emerging technology.

Part 2: Technical

Changes in the temperature of magnetic materials due to applied magnetic fields
were noted as long ago as 1881, the huge interest in the utility of this effect
in employing magnetocaloric materials for cooling near room temperature is
however more recent. While paramagnetic materials can be employed for cooling at
very low temperatures, for applications near room temperatures and for
applications of modest magnetic fields, the strongest effects are observed in
materials close to their ferromagnetic Curie temperatures. The systems of
interest in this project are 3d transition-metal based ferromagnets with Curie
temperatures near room temperature. The main focus of the proposed work is on
materials with structure types derived from the aluminum diboride structural
aristotype, and are characterized by their ability to host two magnetic atoms.
Typically, one of the two magnetic atoms is manganese. In many magnetocalorics,
the magnetic transition appears to be associated with a structural change. To
investigate this further, this research is guided by answering the following two
questions: (i) How do the crystal structures change as ferromagnetic transitions
are traversed with magnetic field or by cooling through the transition
temperature, and what are the implications for magnetocaloric cooling? and (ii)
Can metamagnetic transitions (i.e. spin-state transitions) be designed into
materials in such a way that the entropy change associated with turning on a
magnetic field is enhanced? The experimental aspect of the research focuses on
known magnetocaloric materials as well as the discovery of new ones. Density
functional theory-based methods are employed to co-design material compositions.