* 1710354
* Solvent-structuring at the interface between crystals and mixed organic-aqueous solvents
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Peter Vekilov, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 510,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Solution crystallization underlies a broad
range of industrial, laboratory, and physiological processes. In recent years,
organic and mixed organic-aqueous liquids have garnered increased interest as an
alternative solvent for the preparation of crystalline materials and separation
(or purification) by crystallization, in particular for high-value materials
such as pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals. In contrast to crystallization from
aqueous solvents, the level of understanding of the fundamental processes of
crystal growth from organic solvents is severely limited. The lack of insight
into the relevant fundamental mechanisms and pathways has emerged as the main
obstacle to a rational approach to the optimization and control of
crystallization in organic and mixed organic-aqueous media. The objective of
this project is to provide understanding of the molecular processes comprising
crystallization from mixed solvents focusing on the thermodynamic and kinetic
consequences of potential solvent structuring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The roles that organic and mixed solvents play in
crystallization are the open question addressed in this project. The solvent
structures at the crystal-solution interface are characterized by advanced
atomic force microscopy imaging and correlated with their effects on the
thermodynamics of crystallization. How the chemical properties of the solvent
affect the crystallization mechanism is elucidated by determining the steps that
a solute molecule takes en route to a crystal growth site. The nature of the
activation barrier for incorporation of molecules into the crystal is elucidated
to establish whether solvent structuring and interactions with solvent molecules
are the primary mechanisms underlying the existence of this barrier. Determining
the steps in the molecular mechanism and their respective governing parameters
provides tools to optimize and control crystallization from organic and mixed
solvents and suppress defect-inducing instabilities. Comparing data for several
porphyrin-solvent pairs elucidates the roles of the chemical moieties in the
solvents and their abilities to form hydrogen and van der Waals bonds in the
formation of solvent structures. Untangling the interlaced chemical and physical
processes comprising crystallization and identifying the relevant governing
parameters represents a new paradigm in the rational design of organic crystals.