* 1710400
* CDS&E: Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy with Compressed Sensing: Beyond the Point Probe
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* John Wright, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 463,845.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division. Professors Daniel Esposito and John Wright of Columbia
University are developing new approaches to scanning electrochemical microscopy
(SECM) that will enable high resolution chemical imaging over large areas. SECM
is a scanning probe microscopy (SPM) technique that has become invaluable for
studying chemical processes across the chemical, physical, and biological
sciences. Despite the success of SECM, it is not well suited for high resolution
imaging over large areas. This limitation arises because conventional
electrochemical probes are scanned in a sequential, point-by-point manner across
the area of interest, meaning that high resolution imaging over large areas
takes prohibitively long times to complete. The current project aims to break
these tradeoffs and enable efficient, high-resolution imaging of large samples
by using a combination of new sensing strategies and advanced signal
reconstruction methodologies. This approach will greatly reduce imaging times
and thereby expand the utility of SECM for many applications. The research plans
are tightly integrated with educational and outreach activities.

SECM has become an invaluable tool in many fields of study. However, a major
shortcoming of SECM, shared by many SPM techniques, is the trade-off between
spatial resolution and areal scan rates. SECM imaging is commonly performed with
nanoscale resolution, but such high resolution imaging is typically limited to
very small areas (typically << square millimeters). The slow areal scan rates of
conventional SECM arise from the fact that the scanning ?point probes?, or
ultramicroelectrodes, must be scanned across every (X,Y) location within in an
area of interest in a sequential, one-at-a-time manner. This project aims to
develop a new approach to SECM imaging that combines i.) non-local continuous
line probes (CLPs) and ii.) advanced compressed sensing (CS) signal analysis
techniques. While the CLP geometry enables SECM signal to be rapidly measured
over large areas, CS serves the critical role of constructing images from the
convoluted SECM signal generated by the CLP. The project is organized around
three primary objectives: i.) demonstrating the core benefits of combining CLP-
SECM with CS, ii.) establishing the theoretical and practical limits of this new
approach, and iii.) achieving chemical imaging with nanoscale resolution over
macroscopic areas. Research and education are tightly integrated within this
interdisciplinary research project, with a strong emphasis on educational
activities and workforce training that targets the emerging industries in
nanotechnology and signal processing / data analytics.