* 1710371
* CDS&amp;E: SuperSTARLU - STacked, AcceleRated Algorithms for Sparse Linear Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Richard Vuduc, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2022
* USD 516,000.00

Computing systems and associated software have long had to make trade-offs in
terms of performance due to an imbalance between fast processors and their
slower memory hierarchies. Newly released technologies for 3D stacked memories
provide an opportunity to reduce this imbalance by providing higher memory
bandwidths and novel ways for accessing memory. One of the most promising
techniques for using 3D stacked memory involves "memory-centric" computation
that moves computation as close as possible to main memory. However, there is
little understanding of how to best use these new memory technologies in
libraries and applications, even as this hardware is slated to be integrated
into near-term exascale supercomputing systems. The goal of this project is to
understand the techniques and approaches that are needed to fully utilize 3D
stacked memories and to demonstrate a useful set of computational primitives
that can serve as a template for accelerating large scientific codes with these
new memory components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research considers the specific
problem of using "memory-centric" processors effectively to implement sparse
primitives as part of a library that supports a number of key scientific
applications including radiation transport, fluid flow, and fusion simulations.
This library, SuperLU_DIST, is a sparse direct solver library designed for
distributed memory multicore systems that has previously been accelerated on
both NVIDIA?s graphics co-processors and Intel?s Xeon Phi co-processor. While
this prior work has thus far yielded promising speedups, it has also revealed
critical and fundamental algorithmic performance bottlenecks related to memory
data transfers. This research project will investigate whether these bottlenecks
may be mitigated by using emerging memory-centric co-processors. Such co-
processors, which include Micron?s Hybrid Memory Cube (HMC) and High-Bandwidth
Memory (HBM), combine 3-D stacked memories and FPGAs to provide lower latency,
higher bandwidth data transfer, and support for near-memory data processing. The
project will use high-level languages like OpenCL to take advantage of such
technologies and will utilize a mix of algorithmic advances and software library
development to improve application performance. Additionally, this work will
lead to a new, open-source release of SuperLU called Super Stacked, Accelerated
LU (SuperSTARLU), which will be made available to application developers and
will be demonstrated on one of the next-generation systems with memory-centric
co-processors, such as NERSC?s Cori.