* 1710538
* Collaborative Research: Using protein function prediction to promote hypothesis-driven thinking in undergraduate biochemistry education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Anya Goodman, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 34,739.00

One of the fundamental challenges in STEM education is teaching students what it
means to be a scientist. This project will demonstrate that engaging in
hypothesis-driven experimental science is a powerful tool in educating students
to become scientists. The objective of the project is to train students to think
and act like scientists - to propose hypotheses, to design experiments, to
analyze data, to draw conclusions, and to communicate with other scientists.
Students on six campuses (Rochester Institute of Technology, Hope College,
California Polytechnic Institute, Ursinus College, St. Mary's University, and
SUNY Oswego) will engage in computational and wet lab approaches to predict
protein function. In a previous project, the team of principal investigators
created a series of modules to guide student inquiry and video instructions for
the computational techniques, which were deployed in biochemistry teaching
laboratories across the six campuses. In the present project, the faculty team
will classify and characterize the research behaviors that students display
during the course and will develop and validate methods for understanding
students' development as scientists. Because the students are participating in
authentic research, results from their experiments will also be collated into a
database that can be used by future students to pursue biologically relevant
protein functions, such as the potential discovery of drug targets for
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of the project is to
introduce cutting-edge biochemistry research into the classroom to investigate
whether getting students to participate in hypothesis-driven experimental
science is a useful tool in educating students to become scientists. In this
second phase of a course-based undergraduate research experience, students'
learning and growth as scientists will be assessed by local biochemistry faculty
and evaluated by educational researchers at Purdue University, to ascertain
students' understanding of research methods, visualization, biological context,
and mechanisms of protein function. The faculty team will develop validated
assessment tools to measure these objectives, and will balance the homogeneity
of curricular materials needed to ensure sound education with the flexibility
needed for adaptation in different institutional settings. The course
instructors and project evaluators will collaborate using education research
techniques to monitor both students' development of research behaviors and
changes in instructors' teaching approaches. The refined and tested curriculum
will then be ready for wider dissemination into the biochemistry teaching
community. The need for significant improvement in undergraduate STEM education
and for the inclusion of a more diverse population is widely recognized. The
project team includes faculty from a Hispanic-serving institution and from an
institution with a large number of deaf and hard-of-hearing students; inclusion
of these faculty ensures that the needs and concerns of these communities will
be included in the project.