* 1710344
* Photo-reconfiguration of Topological DNA Origami Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Jong Hyun Choi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 04/30/2021
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical: This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research to Purdue University is to develop new principles for
synthetic molecular topologies from DNA-based origami self-assembly. DNA-based
origami is just like paper-based origami of folding and shaping into different
forms. The focus of this award is in preparing DNA-based geometric figures with
properties that are not changed by mechanical deformations such as stretching,
bending, and/or twisting. Topological structures, in general, they are physical
representations of geometrical theories. Studies of molecular topologies and
relevant shape-changing mechanisms could advance several scientific disciplines
including mathematics, chemistry, and materials sciences, and also lead to
revolutionary engineering strategies. This research will demonstrate a new class
of macromolecular topologies and their relevant shape-changing mechanisms, by
exploiting the excellent programmability and predictability of DNA self-
assembly. This award supports fundamental research in developing new principles
for synthetic molecular topologies via DNA self-assembly with a focus on
programmable reconfigurations using external light irradiation. The scientific
broader impact of the project could be in developing novel technologies with
potential applications in mobile nano-devices, biophysical tools, synthetic
molecular motors, environmental/ biochemical sensors, DNA computations, and drug
delivery systems. This project will integrate research efforts with educational
and outreach activities designed to advance the public understanding of
biomolecular nanotechnology. Outreach and educational activities include
development of a new hands-on module on DNA self-assembly. The PI will be
actively involved in recruiting female and underrepresented minority students at
the individual level as well as through campus-wide programs such as Women in
Engineering and Minority Engineering Programs at Purdue University.

Technical: Biomolecular topologies are abundant in nature. Their structures and
reconfiguration mechanisms have significant implications in biomolecular and
cellular properties and functions. In contrast, synthetic molecular topologies
and their dynamic structural transformation remain challenging despite
significant efforts in the past two decades. This research aims in developing
novel scientific knowledge and strategies for DNA-origami based macromolecular
synthetic topologies capable of on-demand structural transformation,
particularly in response to external light signals. The three objectives of the
project are to: 1) construct topological DNA origami nanostructures; 2)
demonstrate on-demand reconfiguration by photo-controlled base-pairing; and 3)
elucidate shape-changing mechanisms of photo-activated intercalation. The
outcome of the proposed studies includes new principles of photo-regulated
shape-changing mechanisms including photo-controlled base pairing and photo-
activated intercalation. Furthermore, this award is expected to elucidate the
correlations between structural rigidity, and the necessary energy sources
required for the mechanical deformations through combined experimental and
theoretical studies. These reconfiguration of dynamics will be examined as
functions of photo-responsive agents and transformation modes such as
stretching, bending and twisting, as well as topological designs and
environments. If successful, this research may transform both scientific
community and industry by providing new principles and technologies for
structurally adaptable materials which can be programmed to perform specific
tasks. This interdisciplinary program will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in cutting-edge research, some of them through campus-
wide activities.

This project is jointly supported by the Biomaterials and BioMaPS Programs of
the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for Physical and
Mathematical Sciences, and the Genetic Mechanism Cluster and the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.