* 1710475
* GOALI: CDS&amp;E: Sensitively Quantifying Trace Crystallinity and Crystal Form within Pharmaceutical Formulations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Charles Bouman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 438,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships, Professors Simpson and Bouman at Purdue University, Dr. Danzer at
AbbVie, and Dr. Gualtieri at Formulatrix are working on advancing spectroscopic
imaging methods for probing polymorph crystals. polymorph crystal forms are
ubiquitous in chemistry. In food science, the crystallinity of starches within
potatoes and pasta directly dictate bioavailability of the stored energy
content. In renewable energy, biochemical degradation of biomass is greatly
affected by the degree of crystallinity. Biomineralization also relies on
careful control over crystal phase, often resulting in selection of metastable
structures. In pharmaceutical materials, physical solid state form can
profoundly affect bioavailability and drug efficacy. Reliably measurement and
monitoring of how crystal forms and transforms requires tools capable of
reporting crystalline content at low levels. With the support of this grant,
Professors Simpson and Bouman work closely with their industrial partners to
develop fast and sensitive imaging tools to do just that. Through close
partnership with AbbVie and Formulatrix, the developed approach is expected to
bring impacts in pharmaceutical formulations development and other areas, such
as pretreatment of biomass for energy conversion and artificial
biomineralization. In addition to working with their undergraduate and graduate
students closely on the project, professor Simpson also organizes an intensive
summer short-course program on nonlinear optics that more than 160 students have
participated in the past ten years. Professor Simpson plans now to produce short
videos on the topics discussed at the short course program and makes it
available to a much broader audience through YouTube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the present work, Professors Simpson, Bouman, and their groups work on reducing
the detection limits of Raman spectroscopy by several orders of magnitude to
enable analysis of glassy metastable assemblies, targeting detection limits in
the parts per million (ppm) regime. Three complementary approaches are pursued
to achieve this objective, all of which center on signal to noise enhancement
through background reduction. In the first, SHG is used to rapidly identify
regions of interest for targeted Raman analysis, building on the inherent speed
and selectivity of SHG for chiral crystals. In addition, a dynamic sampling
strategy is adopted for analysis of the SHG-inactive components of formulations,
in which spatially sparse sampling informed by the preceding set of outcomes is
used for efficient hyperspectral imaging reconstruction. Finally, a spectral
sparse sampling strategy for beam-scanning imaging using a photomultiplier tube
array allows low-noise measurements for hyperspectral Raman imaging.
Complementing these spectral characterization approaches, triboluminescence
detection will be developed for fast screening. All efforts greatly benefit from
close partnership between collaborators working in pharmaceutical formulations
development (AbbVie) and instrumentation companies (Formulatrix) positioned to
transition innovations in the research laboratory to viable commercial products.
While the primary focus of the work is on metastable systems of relevance to
industrial collaborators, the results of this work provides a foundation for
expansion to other metastable biological assemblies, including pretreatment of
biomass for energy conversion, crystallinity in edible products, and
fundamentals of biomineralization. Professor Simpson organizes a week- long
intensive program, Chautauqua on Nonlinear Optics for graduate student from
research groups worldwide. The program focuses on in-depth understanding of the
theoretical and practical fundamentals of nonlinear optics and aims to build a
community operating within a common framework for performing and interpreting
nonlinear optical measurements.