* 1710667
* RUI: Engineering Nanoscale Disorder in Polymer-Semiconductor Nanocrystal Composites for Minimized Optical Losses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Rider, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research is developing new approaches for
the design and preparation of high performance polymer- nanocrystal composites
engineered to minimize optical losses. Polymer-nanocrystal composites are
employed in a wide range of applications, such as for lighting and displays, as
scintillation detectors, light-emitting diodes, and solar concentrators. This
research is integrating theory, synthesis, and materials characterization, to
enable improved polymer-nanocrystal composites for the most demanding optical
applications. Western Washington University (WWU) is a primarily undergraduate
institution where undergraduates comprise the majority of the scientific
workforce and are involved in every phase of the research. About five
undergraduates per year are participating in the project, receiving a strong
foundation in materials and synthetic chemistry, optics, and mathematics, as
well as the chance to experience the excitement of independent, creative
scientific investigation. The research also involves outreach to 5th and 6th
graders, and to underrepresented groups in local high schools, as well as other
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
research is developing new approaches for the design and preparation of densely-
packed, high performance polymer-luminescent semiconductor nanocrystal (NC)
composites engineered to minimize optical losses through nanometer- to micron-
scale control of interparticle spacing distributions. Polymer-NC composites are
employed as optically-active elements in a wide range of applications, such as
downshifting layers for lighting and displays, as scintillation detectors,
hybrid organic/inorganic light-emitting diodes, and luminescent solar
concentrators. These and related applications often require a higher volumetric
density of NCs, along with better nanoparticle dispersion, than is currently
achievable, in order to minimize aggregation-induced optical losses from light
scattering and interparticle energy- and charge-transfer. Purely random
dispersions fail to minimize optical losses from several important mechanisms
characterized by a non-linear dependence on particle spacing, including elastic
light-scattering, and quenching caused by near-field interparticle energy- and
charge-transfer, because these processes are dominated not by the mean
interparticle separation, but instead by fluctuations around the mean. The
development of high performance polymer-NC composites for the most demanding
optical applications necessitates a careful balance of order and disorder,
managed over nanometer- to micron-length scales, requiring more careful design
and control over interparticle spacing statistics than has generally been
recognized or pursued. This research is integrating theory, synthesis, and
materials characterization, in order to identify, measure, and control the key
statistical properties of luminescent NC spatial distributions which govern non-
linear distance-dependent loss mechanisms. The overall results are new concepts
and new materials for high performance polymer-NC composites needed for the most
demanding optical applications. Western Washington University (WWU) is a
primarily undergraduate institution where undergraduates comprise the majority
of the scientific workforce and are involved in every phase of the research.
About five undergraduates per year are participating in the project, receiving a
strong foundation in materials and synthetic chemistry, optics, and mathematics,
as well as the chance to experience the excitement of independent, creative
scientific investigation. The PIs encourage students to explore and understand
implications of their work beyond science by participating in regional business
plan contests with product concepts derived from this undergraduate research.
Additional outreach activities include laboratory tours and hands-on activities
with 5th and 6th graders through WWU's Compass-to-Campus program; direct
involvement of high school students in the research; and outreach to local high
schools, especially those serving large populations of Hispanic students.