* 1710049
* Fundamental Understanding of Growth and Inhibition of Calcium Oxalate Kidney Stones
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Reza Shahbazian-Yassar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Millions of Americans are afflicted by kidney stones
and related diseases. Currently the sciences involved in the formation,
composition and growth of kidney stones are not known. Hence, there are no well
developed treatments, and how to prevent their formation and growth. Current
treatments for the prevention of this disease using different inhibitors show
inconsistent results among patients who often have similar symptoms. Calcium
oxalate (CaOx) crystals are the main constituents of kidney stones. These
crystals undergo nucleation and growth starting from atomic scale, and
progresses to millimeter or centimeter scales. Most of the available therapeutic
treatments are designed to address the presence of crystals that may be detected
through standard imaging techniques. At this stage of the crystal growth, these
crystals become very stable and are difficult to breakdown or dissolve. The
proposed research aims to understand the sciences involved in the nucleation and
growth of crystals with the goal to understand the chemical and physical changes
to these crystals at nanoscales. Understanding the nanoscale crystallization of
CaOx, and the mechanisms through which different crystal structures are formed
could provide clues why some medications are effective in treating only some
kidney stone patients. The proposed advanced microscopic studies could provide
insight into kidney stone formation and growth, and sciences from these studies
could in turn develop novel prevention and treatment protocols, if this research
is successful. Additionally, these materials research studies would be
invaluable in other sciences for which crystal formation and growth are
critical, such as polymers, pharmaceuticals, food products, geosciences and
electro optic materials. Through the course of this research, particular
attention will be given in recruiting and mentoring female and underrepresented
students to work in the principal investigators' research laboratory. In
addition, the research findings of this project will be incorporated in relevant
undergraduate and graduate classes to further stimulate a new generation of
students with the fundamental knowledge to engage in this field. To increase
public awareness, the PIs plans to disseminate the new results of this project
through social media, press coverage, and news
releases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to gain a better understanding of the basic sciences in the formation mechanisms
of calcium oxalate (CaOx) minerals that are responsible for kidney stone
disease. This disease affects approximately 20 million people in the United
States. The current treatments show inconsistent results for these patients
indicating that more fundamental understanding must be gained on how these
crystals formed and how one can prevent the growth of such minerals. Using
liquid electron microscopy with subnanometer scale resolution, this program will
study the formation of calcium oxalate crystals in liquid solution. A unique
advantage of this study is the ability to monitor the local chemical and
structural evolutions with the state-of-the art aberration-corrected
transmission electron microscopy equipped with imaging and spectrometers
sensitive to single atoms. The proposed research is expected to yield a new
understanding on the growth kinetics of Calcium crystals under different
environmental conditions. The scientific broader impact of these studies could
benefit further understanding in crystal formation and growth of polymers,
pharmaceuticals, food products, geosciences and electro optic materials. The
broader impacts with respect to outreach activities of this award would be the
inclusion of students at both undergraduate and graduate level in training and
education on the state-of-the art microscopy techniques for health sciences in
improving the quality of life. As part of the planned outreach activities,
minority and underrepresented students will be included for scientific visits
and hands-on experience in the lab activities. The finding of this research will
be incorporated in a bioengineering graduate course that has been developed for
senior undergraduate and graduate students. The PIs are committed to recruit
female/minority students for undergraduate education through well-established
outreach programs at the University of Illinois at Chicago.