* 1710214
* Synthesis, Properties and Structure-Function Relationships in Ferecrystals: New Compounds Composed of Stacked 2D Layers with Designed Nanoarchitecture
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: A grand challenge in materials research is the
preparation of novel compounds with designed properties. The ability to create
stable layered materials with complicated layering schemes provides an
unprecedented ability to probe the interplay between structure, composition, and
physical properties of the constituents. This research produces a rich
collection of new materials with diverse and highly unusual properties and an
improved understanding of structure-property relationships in compounds
containing structurally different layers. A goal is to understand the dependence
of physical properties on the identity, thickness, and the sequence of
individual layers. A second goal is to understand the fundamental aspects of the
synthesis approach that result in the preparation of stable products. Current
and future technologies crucial to international competitiveness depend on being
able to both prepare and characterize stable layered materials to obtain
enhanced properties, which are not found in any of the individual components.

Technical Abstract: This research extends a synthesis approach to create new,
layered solids containing two or more structurally different constituents with
atomically abrupt interfaces between them. Designed precursors enable
kinetically stable heterostructures with designed nanoarchitectures to be
prepared over large areas. The project goal is to understand the dependence of
transport properties on nanoarchitecture in heterostructures containing
electrically isolated two dimensional layers of transition metal
dichalcogenides, bismuth chalcogenides and related ternary structures. Large
band gap spacer layers of varying thickness electrically isolate the
dichalcogenide monolayers and adjacent magnetic layers are used to perturb the
monolayers. This research is timely, as recent discoveries promise advances in a
variety of technologies including tunnelling transistors, flexible electronics,
photodetectors, photovoltaics and light-emitting devices with unprecedented
characteristics and/or unique functionalities. This research provides a broad
technical background for graduate students in deposition technologies, thin film
characterization techniques, and physical phenomena that occur in 2D
heterostructures. This training enables them to thrive in careers in high tech
industries, academia or national laboratories.