* 1710884
* Poisson Manifolds of Compact Types and Geometric Structures on Stacks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Rui Loja Fernandes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Poisson geometry lies at the intersection of mathematical physics and geometry.
Its origins go back to the mathematical formulation of classical and quantum
mechanics, where the notion of a Poisson bracket emerged. In more recent times,
the study of spaces equipped with these brackets, called Poisson manifolds,
developed into a branch of geometry, with important applications to other areas
of mathematics, as well as other fields. For example, one can find Poisson
brackets in the formulation of dynamics within field theory in high-energy
physics, and in various models for population and evolutionary dynamics within
biology. Understanding global properties of these spaces is a challenging
problem due to the convergence of some unusual mathematical aspects: one finds a
special type of geometry in certain directions, so that some directions in a
Poisson manifold are distinguished from others; as well, some points in the
space possess a rich set of local symmetries not present at other locations.
This project aims to study global geometric and topological properties of
Poisson manifolds, arguably the most central issue in modern day Poisson
geometry. This project includes collaborations with various researchers in
Poisson geometry working in Europe and South America, and aims to promote
interaction between mathematicians, physicists and groups with different points
of view working on related areas, through a UIUC seminar and through a series of
regional conferences in Poisson geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
global aspects of Poisson structures and related geometric structures are
studied, primarily from the perspective of Lie groupoid theory and drawing on
ideas and techniques from foliation theory, equivariant geometry, and from
symplectic and integral affine geometry. These new ideas, together with results
and techniques developed in the last decade, should lead to new methods to
attack some long standing fundamental problems in Poisson geometry, such as the
existence of regular Poisson structures, the classification of Poisson manifolds
of compact type, and the existence of normal forms around symplectic leaves. The
project also aims at breaking the current boundaries of Poisson geometry by
advancing new interactions with other mathematical areas, such as exterior
differential systems, integrable systems and the theory of geometric stacks.