* 1710302
* Magneto-optoelectronic response in 2D atomic-layered materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Ramesh Mani, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 05/31/2021
* USD 370,404.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The United States has
the highest Gross Domestic Product in the world because it has been the leader
in technological breakthroughs. Relatively recent advances such as the personal
computer, the World Wide Web, the cell phone, high definition television, the
forth-coming autonomous car and artificial intelligence, all have roots in
government funded research and development. The meteoric growth in these areas
has been made possible by the rapid advances in semiconductor capability for
both electronics and photonics. To access new areas for growth, there is now a
need to develop flexible, faster, thinner, and more power efficient
semiconductor materials with new capability. This aim has led to the so-called
van der Waals bonded materials, which are materials that can be peeled, layer by
layer, down to the thickness of a single 2-dimensional (2D) atomic layer. Such
materials promise high speed, greater power efficiency, flexibility, and novel
electro-optic properties not found in materials utilized thus far. Thus, this
research aims to study their material properties with a view towards
applications. &lt;br/&gt;The research is to be carried out in the Physics &amp;
Astronomy Department of Georgia State University [GSU], one of the most diverse
universities in the nation. The undergraduate Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) educational component of this proposal aims to translate
the abilities of general university students from historically underrepresented
groups and women in STEM fields, into the pursuit of a career path in a STEM
field, by providing them early exposure to a supportive, confidence building,
research experience through mini-science projects in the 2D materials area. Such
education/training provided in a southern urban inner-city academic institution
in downtown Atlanta, Georgia, will help to add underrepresented sections of
society to the nation's science and technology skill base for the electronics,
photonics, defense, and wireless communications industries. &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Single atomic layers of bulk van der Waals bonded
crystals, and stacks built up by van der Waals epitaxy including a number of
single atomic layers with differing electronic, optical, spin, and
superconducting properties, offer the possibility of obtaining new physical
properties not available in existing bulk materials' properties that can be
utilized to address outstanding technological problems in low power and flexible
electronics, sensing, and photonics. Thus, this research will experimentally
examine the magneto-optoelectronic response under steady state photo-excitation
of 2D atomic-layered materials including mono-layer and bilayer graphene,
atomically thin hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), mono- and bilayer-molybdenum
disulfide (MoS2), and other transition metal-dichalcogenides. A research team
consisting of graduate students and a postdoc, with help from undergraduates
participating in mini science projects, will build up 2D atomic-layered crystals
by van der Waals epitaxy; fabricate devices by electron beam lithography, plasma
etch, and metallization; and examine the properties of electrically contacted
and non-contacted devices in the presence of a magnetic field under microwave,
mm-wave, and terahertz photo-excitation. Here, some specific problems of
interest include the mm-wave magneto-response of graphene, the electric field
effect on photoresponse in h-BN encapsulated graphene and MoS2, and the study of
the spin properties in graphene across the neutrality point. Such studies are
expected to provide insight into the electronic structure of 2D materials, their
photo response, spin-g-factors, spin lifetimes, and the dependence of induced
bandgaps on applied electric and magnetic fields - attributes that would
identify the suitability of such systems for various desirable applications.
Potentially transformative results could include the observation of novel
radiation-induced magnetoresistance oscillations in graphene, the realization
and measurement of long spin lifetimes in h-BN encapsulated graphene, and the
measurement of bandgaps in electric field biased bilayer h-BN encapsulated
graphene or MoS2 or other transition metal dichalcogenides in the small bandgap
limit.