* 1710950
* Mechanics of Materials: Facilitating a Hands-On Learning Experience with 3D Printing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,163.00

The robustness and safety of the built environment is heavily dependent on
engineers' understanding of the behavior of solid objects when they are subject
to stresses and strains. Mechanics of materials, the study of how solid objects
behave when forces are applied to them, is an important foundational course in
many engineering disciplines. It is a required course for mechanical, civil,
aerospace, environmental, and nuclear engineering majors. Currently, in most
engineering undergraduate programs, this subject is taught in a very theoretical
way, relying primarily on textbook analyses, illustrations and examples to
communicate key concepts. In contrast, hands-on learning has been shown to be
highly effective at engaging students in the classroom, leading to better
retention of engineering majors, particularly persons underrepresented in
engineering such as female students. The proposed project will enhance
undergraduate education in mechanics of materials by using hands-on learning
techniques. Specifically, 3D-printed artifacts will be created and manipulated
by the students. Additionally, a website and an e-textbook will be made
available to students and faculty. The hands-on learning approach will be
implemented with partner institutions nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities to be carried out include the
development of practical, accessible instructional materials for facilitating
undergraduate learning of concepts in mechanics of materials through the use of
3D-printing technology, incorporation of the instructional materials into the
undergraduate curriculum to support the hands-on learning experiences, and
dissemination of instructional materials to partner institutions. The project
team will also conduct research on the impact of the hands-on learning approach
on student learning, self-efficacy, knowledge retention, and satisfaction in the
undergraduate level course in mechanics of materials.