* 1710512
* Investigation of Magnetic Skyrmions and Magnetic Polarons in Oxygen Deficient EuO(1-x)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jinke Tang, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 595,360.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates novel magnetic
states in a unique magnetic semiconductor - oxygen deficient europium monoxide
EuO(1-x). These novel magnetic states found in EuO(1-x) have promising
applications as next generation small magnetic memories with topologically
protected stability and minimal energy dissipation. Revealing and understanding
the atomic-scale as well as macroscopic features of these magnetic states
advance the sciences in an area of technological importance. The physics pursued
here also provides significant insight into the roles of the oxygen vacancies as
oxygen vacancy engineering is becoming an attractive way to realize practical
devices using various types of oxide materials. The project offers unique
research and educational experiences for students in condensed matter and
materials physics and trains students in a collaborative learning environment.
Students visit high schools in Wyoming and partner with high school teachers to
integrate new knowledge of research into the current standard science
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;There are
undeniable signs that suggest magnetic skyrmions may exist in oxygen deficient
EuO(1-x). It is hypothesized that the observed magnetic ordering above 69 K is
due to the formation of magnetic polarons (magnetic ordering in a paramagnetic
environment), which transitions to magnetic skyrmions (nontrivial spin texture
in a ferromagnetic host) when T &lt; 69 K. The goal of this project is to take
several novel approaches to probe the potential skyrmion formation and
investigate the mechanisms for their formation. This is achieved by a
combination of material synthesis and oxygen vacancy control followed by direct
observation via spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy and
characterization with transport measurements that aim to detect topological Hall
effect. In addition, the experimental studies are aided by computational
investigations. Three specific approaches are taken: 1) probing magnetic
polarons and skyrmions and determining their correlation with the oxygen
vacancies; 2) testing magnetic skyrmion and polaron formation mechanisms across
the first Curie temperature (69 K); and 3) establishing the magnetic phase
diagram for EuO(1-x).