* 1710727
* Collaborative Research: Information Geometry for Model Verification in Energy Systems with Renewables
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Mark Transtrum, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2021
* USD 218,846.00

Emerging communication and computation capabilities have the potential to
profoundly change and improve infrastructures such as electric power systems.
The architecture and composition of modern power systems have been undergoing
significant changes recently. These include new sources, such as gas-fired
plants and co-generation facilities, and from new loads connected through power
electronic converters and tightly controlled through local communication
networks. The programmable nature of new sources and loads offers new
capabilities, but at the same time necessitates frequently repeated model
verification. Models preferred by energy engineers are often motivated by the
physical properties of components and sub-systems. These models are typically
nonlinear in terms of parameters. However, reliable identification of parameters
from measurements is a challenging problem that is largely unsolved for the case
of nonlinear models. This project aims to deploy new model verification tools
that combine profound mathematical foundations (differential geometry and
information theory) with modern computational algorithms. This project will have
direct implications on other branches of engineering that use similar types of
models. Within energy systems, this project has the potential to result in
economic, environmental, and resilience benefits by enabling more precise
operation of future electricity markets and control in actual power plants and
customer sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on computational
advances in differential geometry, and offers a new, global characterization of
challenges frequently encountered in system identification and model reduction
of energy systems. The premise of this approach is that a model with many
parameters is a mapping from a parameter space into a data or prediction space.
A key difficulty in dealing with models of complex systems is the highly
anisotropic nature of the mapping between the parameters and data spaces,
meaning that small variations in parameter space may lead to dramatic changes in
the measurement (data) space while other variations in parameters can lead to no
discernable change in the in the model behavior. This project will use event
recordings from daily operation (e.g., from phasor measurement units following
line switchings and load variations) to motivate new model validation and
selection algorithms. The long-term vision is to develop global and semi-global
identification procedures for nonlinearly-parametrized energy components and
systems, to establish limits of performance with phasor measurement unit
sensors, to develop novel model reduction procedures, and to lay the groundwork
for identification of large-scale energy systems. Specific goals include: 1)
parameter identification for wind and solar plants, including more detailed
manifold maps; 2) parameter identification for conventional sources (synchronous
generators) and loads; and 3) re-parametrization and reduction for models that
are typically employed in dynamic studies. Simulations will use industry-
standard and custom software and recordings of hardware experiments to quantify
progress. Anticipated results will be relevant for microgrids, virtual entities
(virtual utilities, energy hubs) that are often considered essential in the
long-term evolution of smart grids, and future electricity markets that will
likely operate on shorter time-scales and thus depend on model fidelity of
system dynamics.