* 1710128
* GOALI: Nanostructure-enabled Quasi-Phase-Matched Counter-Propagating Optical Parametric Oscillator
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Wm Randall Babbitt, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Abstract ECCS-1710128&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: GOALI Nanoscale Fabrication of
Nonlinear Optical Devices &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear optical devices play a critical role in a wide range of
optical systems, enabling signal amplification, wavelength/frequency conversion,
and all-optical control or modulation of light. These devices have an immense
range of applications, including communications, medical imaging, remote sensing
and quantum information systems. One common approach to implement nonlinear
optical devices is through quasi-phase-matching (QPM) or periodic poling. This
method entails precise, small-scale modifications in the optical properties of
nonlinear optical materials (poling) in order to dramatically improve their
efficiency, and has revolutionized the field of nonlinear optics. The goal of
this project is to develop new methods to reproducibly fabricate smaller poling
domains in QPM nonlinear optical devices, potentially greatly enlarging the
range of applications for these devices. Smaller poling domains would enable
wavelength conversion devices capable of working with at different optical
wavelengths, greatly enlarging the operating wavelength range in communications
or medical imaging applications. Such devices would facilitate the detection of
very weak optical signals at longer wavelengths and enhance the performance of
remote sensing or quantum information systems. This work will be performed in
collaboration with an industrial partner, AdvR Inc., under the framework of the
Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program. This
academic-industrial partnership will leverage the capabilities and resources of
both partners to achieve the project goals. The associated education and
outreach efforts will promote student participation, from underrepresented
minority groups, in the Montana Apprenticeship Program. In addition, the GOALI
collaboration will allow students to have strong research interactions in both
academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop nanoscale fabrication methods that will
lead to the next generation of nonlinear optical devices. Optical waveguides
using periodic poling have revolutionized nonlinear optics by providing
significantly higher efficiency and enabling engineering of the optical
properties of devices. Lithium niobate material (LN), especially doped with
magnesium oxide (MgO:LN), has been frequently used due to its relatively strong
nonlinear properties that lead to higher efficiency and power- handling
capability. The basic goal of this project the process development to enable
sub-micron scale poling and structuring of MgO:LN. Periodically poled nonlinear
optical waveguides with nanoscale domains would facilitate parametric wavelength
conversion with higher efficiency and with greater control over the operating
wavelengths (e.g. operation in the infrared). Once the methods to produce
nanoscale poling domains and to control structural features in MgO:LN have been
established, further investigations to enhance the nonlinear performance of
these devices will be pursued, such as dispersion engineering and wavelength-
selective resonant cavities. The proposed work will enable the realization of a
mirrorless optical parametric oscillator (OPO) that would enable high-efficiency
nonlinear optical processes with relatively short interaction lengths and
significant flexibility in operating wavelengths. Such OPOs would significantly
broadened range of applications for nonlinear optical devices.