* 1710736
* Exploring Deformation Mechanisms in Metallic Nanostructures Under Extreme Conditions of Temperature and Strain Rate
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Vijay Gupta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Description:

Understanding the mechanical behavior of nano-crystalline metallic solids under
extreme conditions of pressure and low temperatures is of great interest to
engineering applications involving fusion reactors (for alternative energy),
blast loadings and armors (national defense), and asteroid impacts (progress of
science), among others. Under such loading a typical engineering material,
notably a metal, fails in a brittle glass-like manner even though at ambient
conditions it fails in a plastic fashion by absorbing substantial energy. The
mechanical behavior of metals is dependent upon the size of the grains that
collectively form its structure. By simulating individual grains by isolated
nanopillars we will study if these pillars (and eventually individual grains)
will deform in a ductile fashion even when they are subjected to aforesaid
extreme conditions. If they retain the same ductility as under ambient
conditions then this research would have taken the first major step to develop
new metallic materials that could revolutionize the design of energy-absorbing
blast resistant civil, nuclear, and defense structures, including personal
protective equipment (helmet and body armors) for reducing traumatic brain
injuries. This research should also lead to fundamental scientific advances in
the area of high energy materials physics.

The work proposed here is a true collaboration between material scientists
employing advanced nano-fabrication and microscopy techniques; physicists using
state of the art multi-scale modeling strategies that encompass basic principles
which govern the inter-atomic structures and forces; and mechanical engineers
employing the most sophisticated optics and experimental techniques for
characterizing the mechanical behavior of engineering solids. As such, it
provides excellent training for graduate students and undergraduates in the area
of interdisciplinary science and technology. As these students go into the work
force, they will be more able than their peers to cross boundaries and combine
basic science and high level engineering. To bring the research ideas and
results more broadly to the community, graduate students funded under this grant
will also participate in the High School Summer Research Program at UCLA. This
project will thus support the societal needs of encouraging and training young
talents into the fields of science and engineering.

Technical Description:

This project will develop understanding the mechanical behavior of nano-
structured metallic solids under extreme conditions of pressure, high rates of
loading (blasts and explosions), and low temperature (below freezing). The above
goal will be accomplished by carrying out a series of novel experiments, backed
by multiscale modeling and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis, by
loading TEM-ready single crystal nanopillar samples of fcc (Cu) and bcc (Mo)
metals of varying lengths (50 nm to 100 nm) and aspect ratios (50 nm to 100 nm
in diameter) by laser-generated stress waves of sub-nanosecond rise times, under
extreme conditions of stress (greater than 20 GPa), strain rate (higher than
108s-1), and temperature (cryogenic). A new method is proposed to load the
nanopillars directly under uniform tension. This should eliminate the lattice
friction and local pressure effects present under compression. When combined
with cryogenic testing, loading under uniform tension should substantially
increase the internal stress in the material. This should result in newer
dislocation nucleation and mobility mechanisms and provide further insights into
the present dynamic performance limits of these metals. Because of very high
internal stress, this study is likely to provide the first ever experimental
evidence for dislocation-free plasticity in shocked solids.

To bring the research ideas and results more broadly to the community, graduate
students funded under this grant will also participate in the High School Summer
Research Program at UCLA. This project will thus support the societal needs of
encouraging and training young talents into the fields of science and
engineering.