* 1710461
* Exploring Spin-Orbit Coupling and Correlated Phenomena in Iridate-Based Ferroelectric Transistors and Tunnel Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Xia Hong, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,012.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In heavy transition metal oxides such as
iridates, the electron spin is strongly coupled with its orbital motion. This
effect, when competing with other interactions involving the charge and
structural order, can significantly alter the material's electronic and magnetic
properties. This research project explores two material strategies to
understand, control and enhance these couplings in iridate-based composite
materials. The gained knowledge can be utilized to design novel nanoscale
devices that transcend the performance limits of the current information
technology. The research provides exciting research opportunities for students
at the graduate, undergraduate and high school levels, exposing the students to
cutting-edge nanoscience and materials research. The integrated outreach
components aim at promoting the K-12 STEM education and disseminating science to
the general public. The efforts include creating a web-based comic story
centered around a teenage girl learning the related device concept and its
application in modern electronic technology, and contributing a post on the
related topic to the Funsize Physics website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to probe and control
the spin-orbit coupling and correlation-driven phenomena in epitaxial thin films
of the 5d transition metal oxides SrIrO3 and Sr2IrO4 using two prototype device
structures, the ferroelectric field effect transistors and the ferroelectric
tunnel junctions. The research activities include examining the individual roles
of carrier density, lattice strain, and defects in the spin transport of SrIrO3,
modulating the magnetic anisotropy in Sr2IrO4, searching for carrier density-
driven metal-insulator and magnetic phase transitions, and exploring the
tunneling characteristics of iridate-based tunnel junctions. This research
involves advanced epitaxial deposition of complex oxide heterostructures,
nanoscale device fabrication, scanning probe microscopy, variable temperature
magnetotransport and tunneling spectroscopy studies. The proposed efforts stand
to advance the fundamental understanding of spin-orbit coupling and its
competition with various correlated energies in the heavy transition metal
oxides. The gained knowledge can be leveraged to develop novel oxide-based
nonvolatile or multifunctional electronic and spintronic applications.