* 1710008
* Photonic Curing of Semiconductor Nanocrystals for High-Performance Flexible Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Sarah Swisher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2020
* USD 362,409.00

ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental goal of this research is to make revolutionary advances in the
emerging field of flexible electronics. The core building blocks of cell phones
and tablet computers are computer chips that are fragile, rigid, and expensive
to manufacture. In contrast, new materials and manufacturing methods are being
explored that will enable these computer chips to be built on thin, flexible,
plastic sheets. These flexible electronic systems that can bend, roll, fold, and
move with the human body will enable tools that are simply not possible with
rigid chips and circuits. Flexible displays, electronic textiles, biosensors,
and wearable medical devices are just a few applications that will benefit from
lightweight, low-cost, flexible electronic devices. In this research, the
investigators will explore how nanometer-sized particles -small enough to fit
10,000 of them end to end across the width of a single human hair- can be heated
with brief flashes of intense light to make superior materials for flexible
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This research will
explore novel materials and fabrication methods to enable high-performance
flexible electronics. The investigators will synthesize solution-based
electronic materials ("inks") of indium-gallium-zinc-oxide (IGZO), then
fabricate flexible transistors by depositing the ink directly onto plastic
substrates. After deposition onto the substrate, the materials undergo a heat
treatment to improve their electrical characteristics. Higher temperatures
generally result in higher quality materials, but the flexible plastic
substrates typically cannot be heated above ~200C. A technique called photonic
curing -using flash lamps to transiently heat the thin film to a high
temperature without heating the substrate enough to cause damage- will be used
to help address this tradeoff. The key research objective is to understand how
the morphological and electronic properties of metal oxide nanocrystal thin
films on flexible substrates are affected by photonic curing. That knowledge
will be used to design high performance transistors on flexible substrates. The
proposed research is a collaborative project between the principal
investigator's research group at the University of Minnesota and NovaCentrix
Corp., effectively bringing together expertise in nanomaterial synthesis, thin
film characterization, and transistor design with the industry leader in
photonic curing. The investigators will perform detailed characterizations of
the materials and devices to achieve a fundamental physical understanding of how
photonic curing affects the morphology, crystallinity, composition, and
electronic characteristics of metal oxide nanocrystal thin films. This research
will elucidate the physical mechanisms that lead to observed transistor behavior
and identify the factors that limit thin-film transistor performance so they can
be mitigated. A deeper fundamental understanding of photonic curing as an
alternative to traditional thermal treatments of ceramic thin films could result
in game-changing advances in a wide array of flexible electronic systems.