* 1710646
* Activity Microscopy: From single filament to bulk mechanics in biopolymer networks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Ernst-Ludwig Florin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2023
* USD 419,999.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;A major part of our body consists of proteins
that form fiber networks. These networks fulfill a multitude of essential
functions, such as providing elasticity to our skin and preventing it from
overstretching. Understanding how these macroscopic properties arise from the
networks' individual components is thus crucial to our understanding of basic
physiological processes, our ability to treat diseases, and the future design of
novel materials that mimic biological tissue. Such an understanding remains
elusive, however, due to a lack of experimental techniques that can resolve
fibrous networks with single filament resolution, while also quantifying their
contribution to the large-scale network. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims
to establish a microscopy technique that can resolve the contribution of each
filament to the overall large-scale properties of the network. It will be
applied to collagen networks with and without cells, and to tissue samples from
bioprosthetic heart valves.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is expected to
provide material researchers with a better understanding of micromechanical
processes in fibrous biopolymer networks. This work could result in the
development of novel materials for guiding cell growth, artificial skin and
organs, and new methods for drug delivery that rely on the behavior of
biological tissue under mechanical stress. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in an interdisciplinary environment on a unique state-of-the-art
instrument, and female high-school students will participate in research as part
of an outreach program. These high-school students will furthermore benefit from
direct contact with other researchers at the university through lab visits and
research presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;The
development and application of the novel optical microscopy technique is
expected to result in the visualization and quantification of the transition
from individual fiber to bulk properties in biopolymer networks. Assumptions
made in theories about the micromechanical behavior of this important class of
materials will be tested. &lt;br/&gt;Because the method is diffraction limited,
networks with mesh sizes larger than the dimensions of the focal spot will be
chosen. Networks will be imaged and the stress distribution along filaments will
be quantified and visualized. The fiber-precise resolution will be used to study
the force generation of cells in collagen gels. Fibrous tissue samples of
bioprosthetic heart valves will be tested for signs of degeneration.
&lt;br/&gt;The more detailed understanding of the micromechanical behavior
displayed by biopolymer networks opens a new opportunity to control cell growth
and tissue formation by rationally designed biocompatible and biodegradable
materials. &lt;br/&gt;The novel microscopy technique will enable the study of
force generation of cells in fibrous networks with single filament resolution,
as well as the observation of their force-mediated communication. New insight
into mechanical signaling between cells in the extracellular matrix is expected,
as well as into the degeneration of bioprosthetic heart valve tissue.
&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in an
interdisciplinary environment on state-of-the-art instrumentation in a field
that directly benefits national health and prosperity.