* 1710353
* In situ evaluation of deformation and failure in pure metals and alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Krishnaswamy Ravi-Chandar, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 412,608.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metals and alloys form one of the
most important classes of engineering materials that affect various industries
such as energy production and distribution, transportation, civil
infrastructure, and national defense. In view of the large role these industries
play in the economy, there is a great need in the scientific and engineering
community for improving the efficiency and reliability of structural and
material design. This requires the development of robust predictive models of
the mechanical deformation and failure behavior of these materials that can be
used in conjunction with quantitative methods of structural and material design,
and safety and reliability assessment. The proposed effort will delve into
material characterization and modeling through the combined use of quantitative
microscopy and numerical simulation techniques. The research will leverage on
recently developed experimental tools for characterization of material behavior
at multiple length scales and combine them with computational models to advance
greatly our ability to predict mechanical deformation and failure in materials
used in engineering applications. This research will also influence education
and human resource development in the STEM areas through the involvement of
students; one graduate student will work towards a doctoral degree while one or
two undergraduate students will be introduced to materials research as part of
the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will integrate quantitative multiscale experimental
characterization of deformation and damage in metallic materials with modeling
and simulation. The main hypothesis of the proposed investigation is the
following: deformation in polycrystalline materials occurs through heterogeneous
deformation (discrete slip) at the subgrain scale; we postulate that the
persisting (and evolving) heterogeneities - i.e., the fluctuations in the
deformation rather than the mean-field deformation - dictate the deformation and
particularly failure of these materials. Hence, the research effort is aimed at
developing a mechanistic understanding of deformation and failure coupled with
quantitative measurements on the one hand, and developing microstructurally
motivated models on the other hand. The main tasks of the research project are
as follows: (i) to perform in situ SEM experiments on selected metallic
materials and alloys to identify, understand, and quantify the deformation and
failure mechanisms. (ii) to develop/calibrate macroscale phenomenological as
well as mechanistic models based on continuum plasticity, representative volume
models, and discrete dislocation dynamics based heterogeneous models. Towards
this end, the behavior of two pure metals (copper and tantalum) and two
engineering alloys (Al 5083, Ti6Al4V) will be investigated.