* 1710859
* Data-driven distributed control of mobile robotic networks: Where machine learning meets game theory
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Minghui Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Mobile robotic networks; (e.g., fleets of unmanned aerial vehicles) offer
expanded capabilities for recognized military uses as well as a wide variety of
civilian uses. There are several factors that contribute to their increasing
potential and importance. In particular, technological advances have enabled
smaller platforms with increased sensing, communication, and processing
capabilities. In addition, autonomous operations offer several competitive
advantages such as persistent surveillance that exceeds human fatigue
limitations or remote operation capabilities without the logistical transport
costs for assets and personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Distributed control becomes key to fully realize the potentials of mobile
robotic networks. Current distributed control paradigms are mainly model-based
and inadequate to handle significant uncertainties, including (1) environmental
uncertainties; i.e., unforeseeable elements in unstructured environments where
mobile robots operate; (2) dynamic uncertainties; i.e., inaccuracies of the
physical dynamics of mobile robots. To bridge the gaps, this project will
leverage reinforcement learning, an area of machine learning, and game theory,
initially developed in economics, to develop a new data-driven (more
specifically, model-free) distributed control framework. The developed framework
is model-free, fully distributed, autonomous, and its performance is rigorously
provable. The framework will significantly improve the autonomy of mobile robots
when they face significant environmental uncertainties and dynamic uncertainties
especially in long-term missions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Successful completion of this research will provide engineering guidelines in
analysis, synthesis and prototyping of mobile robotic networks which can
effectively operate in unstructured environments. The research findings
profoundly impact a variety of engineering disciplines, including scientific
data collection, homeland security operations and intelligent transportation
systems. The proposed research is interdisciplinary and involves interactions
among game theory, machine learning, control, robotic motion planning and
distributed algorithms. This will lead to educational and training opportunities
that cross traditional disciplinary boundaries for high-school, undergraduate
and graduate students in STEM. The collaborations with industrial partners
stress the potentials to make an impact beyond academia.