* 1710024
* Calibration-Free Ion Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Philippe Buhlmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2022
* USD 404,600.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry. Professor Philippe Buhlmann of the University of
Minnesota - Twin Cities is developing redox buffer polymers and redox buffer
nanoporous carbons to demonstrate their application for sensors. This approach
extends the sensor lifetime and requires no calibration. Chemical sensors are
used to measure the concentration of chemical species in water, food, industrial
liquids, and biological samples in a similar way as a thermometer is used to
measure temperature. In particular, electrochemical sensors with high
selectivities are used for billions of measurements of ion concentrations
annually. Unfortunately, conventional ion sensors must be recalibrated
frequently, which requires a constant supply of reagents and either automation
or trained personnel. This complicates point-of-care applications and raises
cost. This work eliminates the need for recalibration. Broader impacts are also
evidenced through the inclusion of high school students in the research
activities and outreach activities that introduce sensors in hands-on-activies
in community libraries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers and nanoporous carbon
materials with a redox buffer capacity at a well-defined electrochemical
potential offer a unique way to prepare calibration-free sensors. The materials
developed in this project exhibit features distinguishing them from previously
reported polymers and carbons with redox-active groups: they exhibit batch-
independent electrochemical potentials with a high reproducibility and good
long-term chemical stabilities. These properties result from two design
principles: (i) the redox buffer polymers and nanoporous carbons incorporate
both the oxidized and reduced form of a distinct redox couple in equal
quantitities, defining the potential as given by the Nernst equation. (ii) the
redox-active groups are specifically selected to be stable under ambient
conditions both in the oxidized and reduced form. The response mechanism of
potentiometric sensors using these new materials is thoroughly investigated,
which includes the quantification of electron and ion conductivities in the
redox buffer polymers as well as the interfacial electron and ion transfer
kinetics.