* 1710598
* Hydrodynamics and Actuation of Magnetic Bacteria in Confined Geometries:Single cells to swarms
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Steven Lower, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2022
* USD 344,164.00

In order to navigate their environment, many bacteria and other living micro-
organisms swim by rotating a flagellum, a slender helix-shaped attachment
connected to the cell body. Near surfaces, the wake produced by this rotating
flagellum produces complex forces and torques that act on the bacterium. This
gives rise to a range of movements that depend on the orientation of the cell
relative to the surface, as well as its rate of rotation and physical geometry.
Understanding these interactions at surfaces is important in the study of
individual motile bacteria as well as in the development of technologies that
can controllably manipulate large micro-organism populations in fluid
environments. The proposed investigations will take advantage of the unique
features of an inherently magnetic bacterial species, M. magneticum AMB-1, of
the magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) group. Their natural magnetism allows them to
be externally manipulated, providing a new means of probing the fluid-based
forces arising near surfaces. Experiments that explore the role of cell geometry
and orientation, magnetic content and flagellar thrust will underlie the
development of models for the swimming behavior of MTB and associated fluid flow
patterns. MTB are also promising candidate organisms for biologically powered
micro-actuation and robotics. In this vein, large scale cell assemblies permit
several magnetic field-based devices such as "living liquid crystal" displays
and bacterial "conveyor belts" to be developed. The project will undertake
outreach activities for several high school teachers in the form of an annual
summer workshop. Through these activities, high school students will be able to
create a connection between a fun, familiar device, an Xbox controller for
example, and concepts in physics, environmental science, biology and engineering
disciplines (e.g. magnetism, bacterial habitats, microorganisms, Archimedes
principle) in the classroom and laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization
of functional biology-based robotics at the microscopic level would introduce a
paradigm shift in areas as diverse as materials manufacturing, nanotechnology
and medicine. The proposed work will make major advances in this direction by
investigating fundamental fluid-surface interactions of a model bacterial
species (M. magneticum AMB-1) with innate magnetic properties. Together with
micro-magnetic and micro-fluidics techniques, their magnetic organelles allow
individual living bacteria and swarms be confined and guided to yield
quantitative measures of the hydrodynamic and magnetic forces as well as torques
that are central to their dynamics. These quantitative parameters will serve as
the foundation for developing models of their hydrodynamics on scales ranging
from single cells to swarms. Integrating actuation and control of living
organisms in low Reynolds number surroundings will serve as the basis to enable
several novel biological and bio-hybrid machines that operate in a micro-fluidic
environments. The in-situ management of the relative positions of individual
cells through designed magnetic surface patterns provides for a novel means to
explore pairwise cell-cell interactions that have led to the discovery of novel
collective behavior such as rotating filamentary bacterial clusters, living
liquid crystal magneto-optical modulators and momentum generating "conveyer-
belt" tracks in these environments where viscous forces dominate. The flow
fields generated by the propulsion of these flagellated swimmers will be managed
to construct microscopically tunable pumps, mixers and hydrodynamic assemblers.
The project will undertake stimulating outreach activities for high school
students and teachers that link physics, environmental science, biology and
engineering disciplines both in the classroom and laboratory.