* 1711706
* RET Site: Joule Fellows: Sustainable Energy for an Inclusive Society
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Kazem Kazerounian, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 517,882.00

This renewal RET Site at the University of Connecticut entitled Joule Fellows:
Sustainable Energy for an Inclusive Society, enables K-14 teachers, the "Joule
Fellows", to experience innovation first hand through research in Sustainable
Energy (SE) technologies and provides a rich professional development experience
to facilitate effective translation of the research experience to the classroom.
The program components comprise a six-week summer experience including: in-depth
laboratory research; laboratory tours, demonstrations, and energy facility
visits; seminars and workshops with industry focusing on SE practice;
professional development workshops focusing on fostering inclusivity and
diversity in the classroom; and preparation of laboratory units that can be
shared with other educators. The summer program is followed by academic year
engagement between fellows and research advisors to facilitate teaching of
lesson plans that they developed collaboratively over the summer. The Joule
Fellows program empowers K-14 teachers to effectively engage and interest
students in STEM and to encourage students to pursue BS degrees in STEM fields.
Teachers from minority-serving districts are targeted to promote diversity in
and access to STEM education. The program establishes relationships among
teachers across schools, districts, and the state to promote distribution of
information and lesson plans, thereby promoting the program beyond the cohort of
participants. The Joule Fellows program directly contributes to national
priorities for strong, diverse STEM education that prepares students to meet the
complex challenges in sustainable energy confronting our society. This program
builds on UConn Engineering's successful current and prior NSF RET
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed RET Site provides a powerful,
holistic summer research and professional development experience for teachers
that incorporates research in critical sustainable energy technologies, exposes
teachers to industrial practice in sustainable energy, and offers workshops that
introduce teachers to education research and practices that promote inclusivity
and diversity in the classroom. Diversity in this context encompasses not only
students' racial, ethnic, and socio-economic profiles, but also unique learning
characteristics, i.e. neurodiversity, that affect students' participation in
classroom activities and learning. Teachers will be exposed to groundbreaking
research at UConn that investigates the opportunities and challenges posed by
students with ADHD, who often present exceptional creative potential, but are
largely underserved by the current educational system, particularly in STEM
fields. The combination of SE research, inclusive classroom strategies, and
industry perspectives provides teachers with an effective toolkit to inspire
students to pursue higher education and careers in STEM.