* 1711087
* Low Latency Anomaly Detections with Imperfect Data Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Jingxian Wu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Anomaly detection has a wide range of applications, such as fault detection for
critical infrastructure, intrusion detection for cyber-physical systems, and
fraud detection for financial services. Detection delay, which is defined as the
time difference between the occurrence and detection of an anomaly event, is
critical for many practical applications. A longer detection delay might lead to
catastrophic results, such as the collapse of a bridge or the loss of power to
millions of people. With a shorter detection delay, remedial actions or
countermeasures can be carried out in a timely manner to significantly reduce
the damages caused by faults, attacks, accidents, or disasters. This project
will develop a new paradigm of low-latency anomaly detection methods that can
minimize the detection delay while maintaining satisfactory detection accuracy.
This is different from most current anomaly detection techniques, which focus
solely on detection accuracy with little or no attention given to detection
delays. The proposed low-latency anomaly detection methods can be applied to a
wide range of civil, industrial, scientific, and military applications, such as
power plants, communication networks, surveillance, structure health monitoring,
and financial transactions. Outcomes of the proposed research work can
significantly reduce the response time to anomaly events, thus minimizing the
damages and economic losses caused by cyber-attacks, system failures, fraudulent
activities, or natural disasters. Technologies developed through this project
can improve the safety and security in both the physical and cyber-space, and
promote the competitiveness and economic development of the United States.
Expertise gained through the proposed research work will be used to facilitate
the development of new course materials and student research projects, and
enhance students' learning experiences from the perspectives of both technology
innovations and social impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to develop low-latency anomaly detection methods with imperfect data models. The
design objective is to minimize the detection delay while maintaining
satisfactory detection accuracy. One of the most formidable challenges faced by
low-latency anomaly detection is the accurate modeling of the data used during
detection. Since a decision needs to be made with minimum delay, there is
extremely limited amount of data that can be used for model training or model
selection, especially for data generated by the anomaly events. In recognition
of the paramount difficulty in obtaining the precise data models, this project
aims to proactively develop new detection methods tailored specifically for
imperfect data models. The proposed research activities will transform the
research on anomaly detection from the following perspectives. First, using
detection delay instead of detection accuracy as the primary design metric can
significantly reduce the amount of time required to detect an anomaly event,
while still maintaining satisfactory detection accuracy through additional
design constraints. Second, the low-latency detection algorithms are designed
specifically for systems with imperfect data models. The fundamental performance
limits imposed by model uncertainty on the detection latency are analytically
characterized by using the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the true and
imperfect models. The analytical results are used to guide the design of
parametric and non-parametric low-latency algorithms, which can provide a
theoretical guarantee on the worst case delay. Third, the newly developed
theories and algorithms will be applied to the fault detection of electrical
machines and the intrusion detection for smart grids, where the designs are
performed by considering the unique challenges and opportunities of these cyber-
physical systems.