* 1711773
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site for Machine Learning to Enhance Human-Centered Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Jeffrey Popyack, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2020
* USD 599,979.00

This award renews an exemplary Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site on
human-centered computing research at Drexel University. The RET site nurtures a
long-term partnership between Drexel and greater Philadelphia Metropolitan Area
high schools and community colleges to advance science and engineering education
by providing cutting-edge summer research experiences to cohorts of high school
teachers and community college teachers in the areas of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The research projects will focus on machine
learning to enhance human-centered computing. THE RET Site will provide hands-on
experiments and regular interactions with faculty mentors who are actively
involved in leading-edge research related to the RET Site theme. The
participating teachers will translate their research experiences and knowledge
into classroom practice by developing instructional modules and course materials
that they will introduce in their classrooms and share with other teachers in
their school district. These activities all contribute to the formation of a
community of practice partnership between the Drexel faculty and the surrounding
high schools and community colleges that has the potential to significantly
enhance and improve STEM education in the greater Philadelphia
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RET participants will attend a 6-week summer
institute to participate in cutting-edge research projects with mentoring from
computer science faculty who lead human-centered computing projects. The
projects focus on areas such as brain-computer interfaces, smart garments for
health care, driver distraction, and smart textiles. The objectives of the
program include: building partnerships between high schools, community colleges,
industry, and the university; introducing teachers to cutting edge computer
science research with social impact; informing and exciting teachers about
computer science principles and computational thinking; producing learning
materials which emphasize social relevance for use in high school and community
college STEM curricula; and expanding the pipeline of students studying STEM and
computing curricula in college. The RET Site project will provide a platform for
the participating teachers to develop effective practical problem-based
instructional materials and laboratory modules that they will share with other
teachers in their school district during the academic year. The teacher-created
modules and lessons will be disseminated locally through the Drexel REThink
project web site and nationally through TeachEngineering.org, a nationally
recognized repository for searchable, standards-based engineering curricula, as
well as the Advanced Placement Computer Science Principles Teacher community.
The RET Site project will boost the quality of instruction in the Greater
Philadelphia area high schools and community colleges and strengthen the
curricula. The excitement of learning about innovative computing technologies
can inspire the students to pursue further computing education and related
careers. The Drexel RET Site program can synergize community computer science
education initiatives that lay the foundation for quality computing education in
the schools and provide for the future computing workforce needs of the
community.