* 1711823
* High Performance Receiver Designs in Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access Networks for New Generations of Wireless Services
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2022
* USD 330,000.00

This research project addresses some critical and emerging challenges in future
generations of wireless communication networks to serve the need of the
widespread Internet of Things (IoT) applications. Unlike existing cellular
networks, IoT applications are expected to connect a massive number of smart IoT
devices under severe bandwidth constraint. This massive scale and need of IoT
wireless devices, along with many other rising wireless applications such as
vehicular to everything (V2X) strongly motivates highly effective utilization of
network capacity. To substantially expand network capacity, non-orthogonal
multiple access (NOMA) is a cutting-edge technology that integrates the concepts
of superposition coding at transmitter and successive interference cancelation
(SIC) at receiver, respectively. NOMA has attracted much attention for its high
spectral efficiency. However, the NOMA throughput gain comes at the price of
having to overcome substantial co-channel interferences (CCI) among wireless
network nodes. Despite the widespread and idealized receiver assumption of
perfect interference cancellation, practical success of NOMA receivers depends
critically on the successful detection and decoding of signals in the presence
of substantial CCI. This research project aims to develop highly effective and
practical joint detection and decoding receivers to deliver the much needed
network performance for successful deployment of NOMA in future 5G and IoT
wireless services. Specifically, the project develops optimized design of joint
detection and error correction receivers by leveraging the knowledge of user
forward error correction codes to substantially improve receiver performance
against CCI under channel uncertainties. The research findings can contribute
importantly to the service improvement of high speed wireless networks and to
broadening their applications in many practical fields where quality,
efficiency, and service decentralization are paramount. The success of the
project can lead to new system designs, new tools, and results that can impact
other science and engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus
of this project is to develop a new receiver design methodology that unifies
signal detection and forward error correction in multiple-input-multiple-output
(MIMO) wireless communications and diversity networks against poor wireless
channel conditions. Unlike traditional approaches, this new investigation into
the rather classic but open problem centers on novel optimization formulations
that can incorporate Galois field codeword constraints imposed by the forward
error correction (FEC) codes within the maximum likelihood detection principle
for unified receiver optimization. This novel framework is general and
encompasses many wireless models, including distributed MIMO, opportunistic
cooperative networking, and retransmission diversities as well as their
integrations. This innovative direction emphasizes critical integration of
multiple constraints from incompatible fields through effective constraint
relaxation and novel objective function formulation. Reformulating the
optimization of joint detection and decoding problems into convex optimization,
the proposed approach to receiver design integration represents a fundamental
and practical design paradigm that can fully leverage various practical
signaling and code constraints for joint detection and decoding against channel
and other non-idealities to achieve high performance, efficiency, and
reliability. To confront practical challenges of channel estimation errors and
fast channel fading in wireless networks, the project team shall develop fast,
effective, reliable, and robust algorithms for coded MIMO transmissions under
strong co-channel interferences subject to different practical limitations and
network configurations, with respect to complexity and performance tradeoffs.
The research findings are expected to have significant broader impact on a wide
range of wireless applications including high speed cellular, IoT, and V2X
services.