* 1711847
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Elucidating the role of enhancers in hominid craniofacial evolution and diseases
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jaaved Mohammed, Mohammed                Jaaved
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 207,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Jaaved Mohammed, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Dr. Joanna Wysocka at Stanford University. The goal of this
research project is to characterize craniofacial mutations (those of the head
and face), and to understand their impact at the molecular level. The head and
face are remarkably distinctive organs that set humans apart from each other and
from other species. Enhancers are a class of DNA elements that play important
roles in craniofacial differences, yet mutations in enhancer sequences that
underlie these differences remain poorly understood. This research project will
benefit the scientific community, the general public, and individuals
underrepresented in science and technology. First, the basic biology knowledge
gained from this proposed work will be disseminated to audiences of varied
technical expertise via journal articles, conferences, and print and social
media. Second, this research will produce a database of DNA mutations that may
be implicated in craniofacial disorders. Third, the proposed research will help
our society learn about our distant ancestry. Specifically, it will address how
DNA of Neanderthal origin, introduced into the genome of modern humans when our
ancestors and Neanderthals interbred in ancient Eurasia, led to beneficial human
adaptations and our increased risk of diseases. Finally, the fellow will mentor
students underrepresented in science and technology in his research lab.

To characterize nucleotide differences within enhancers that contribute to
craniofacial differences across hominids via regulation of transcription factor
binding, epigenetic modifications, and gene expression, the fellow will utilize
Cranial Neural Crest Cells (CNCCs) and the Neanderthal genome. CNCCs are a
relevant model for addressing this goal because CNCC derivatives become the
embryonic face. Furthermore, the recent availability of the Neanderthal genome
facilitates the study of human morphology and traits at a finer resolution, than
comparisons to the chimpanzee. Using these systems, the fellow will employ an
interdisciplinary strategy to identify enhancers that have evolved adaptively,
to quantify the potency of enhancer variants on transcription exogenously, and
to understand the effect of Neanderthal enhancers on CNCC behavior, and
ultimately, morphology.