* 1711794
* OrphanCap: Massive-scale Evolutionary Study of Germplasm Databases Using the Orphan Crop Amaranthus as a Case Study
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sandra Hoffberg, Hoffberg                Sandra         L
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The host institution for the fellowship is
Columbia University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Deren
Eaton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite advances in agricultural technology,
sustainable access to food remains a major problem throughout many parts of the
world. Orphan crops are regionally important food sources that are often
genetically diverse and adapted to harsh environments, yet remain understudied
because they are not exported widely. They are important targets for new plant
breeding programs aimed at developing crops for sustainable agricultural
practices. Vast resources exist for studying orphan crops in the form of large-
scale and exhaustive seed collections (germplasm databases). This research will
investigate the genus Amaranthus, which includes grain amaranths and herbicide-
resistant weedy relatives, as a case-study and resource for demonstrating how
new massive-scale genomic sequencing methods can be used to exploit and
understand the diversity of orphan crops in germplasm databases. Broader impacts
include developing a workshop (OrphanCap) and website detailing the protocol,
and teaching wet-lab and phylogenomic data analysis to high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the novel library preparation method, RADcap, which
can efficiently and economically allow for unprecedented sampling of thousands
of genomic markers from thousands of individuals, genomic data from a
comprehensive sampling of Amaranthus species will be sequenced. Combining this
dataset with new phylogenomic methods, the Fellow will (1) Reconstruct species
relationships, the history of domestication, and introgression within and
between different species and landraces of Amaranthus; (2) Compare genetic
diversity in historical accessions versus contemporary field-collected samples
at neutral loci, and at loci sampled from known herbicide resistance genes; and
(3) Develop a workshop and online resource (www.OrphanCap.org) to demonstrate
and teach the laboratory and bioinformatic workflow for developing massive-scale
RADcap libraries and their analysis. Raw data will be deposited in the NCBI
sequence read archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), phylogenetic trees will
be uploaded to TreeBASE (http://treebase.org), and code will be available at
www.OrphanCap.org.