* 1711201
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Evolution of complex characters: elucidating morphological correlates to the origin of luminescent courtship behaviors of ostracods
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Jessica Goodheart, Goodheart               Jessica
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Jessica Goodheart, is
conducting research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections
in innovative ways, and is being mentored by Dr. Todd Oakley at the University
of California, Santa Barbara. The fellow's research focuses on the use of
bioluminescence during courtship, in crustaceans called ostracods. In the animal
kingdom, courtship displays using bioluminescence are relatively rare, yet occur
in many types of organisms, including mollusks, arthropods, polychaetes and
fish. Evidence suggests that the evolutionary origin of these displays is
associated with an increase in biodiversity, within all of these different
groups. This increase suggests that bioluminescent courtship behavior is an
important character for speciation and evolution. The fellow seeks to determine
the differences in body shape and form that may be associated with the origin of
bioluminescence in ostracods and its use in this behavior. This research has the
potential to provide important information regarding speciation and evolution as
a general process. Finally, the fellow will be participating in multiple
outreach activities, including K-12 teacher professional development and public
interaction at the Marine Science Institute at the University of California,
Santa Barbara.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ostracod crustaceans of the family
Cypridinidae exhibit some of the most complex courtship displays in the marine
realm, which incorporate bioluminescent pulses. It is clear that there is
variation in the use of luminescence during these courtship displays (e.g. peak
timing of courtship and intensity of the luminescence). However, little is known
about the evolution of morphological characters that may be associated with the
displays. To address these gaps, this research includes two objectives: 1)
generate a well-supported phylogeny of Cypridinidae, and 2) determine the
differences in morphology that may be associated with the origin of
bioluminescence and its use in courtship within this family. A robust phylogeny
will be generated using targeted sequence capture, followed by the collection of
morphological data using nano-CT technology. These data will be compared among
species in the new phylogenetic framework. The fellow will be trained in
targeted sequence capture and nano-CT techniques, as well as several
phylogenetic comparative methods necessary for this work. In addition, the
fellow will train undergraduates from groups underrepresented in the biological
sciences and will lead a workshop with K-12 teachers to develop a teaching
exercise on evolution based on this research.