* 1711139
* Acoustic energy transfer for wireless charging of low-power sensors, control devices, and communication networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Muhammad Hajj, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2024
* USD 476,080.00

Energy transfer without the use of physical plugs or wires, referred to as
contactless energy transfer, is a transformative technology with potentially
endless applications. It is particularly relevant in applications where wired
electrical contact is dangerous or impractical. Furthermore, it would enhance
the development, use and reliability of low-power sensors, control devices and
communication networks in applications where wired connections or changing
batteries are not practical or may not be a viable option (e.g. medical
implants), add to the complexities associated in the systems design and
operation (e.g. homes, cars and airplanes) or may pose their own hazards (e.g.
fire hazard). As an alternative to the relatively well-studied method of
contactless energy transfer, namely the inductive method, ultrasonic acoustic
energy transfer, which is based on the propagation of acoustic waves at
ultrasonic frequencies to a piezoelectric receiver, offers the potential for
wireless charging systems over increased transmitter-receiver distances, with
reduced power losses, and elimination of hazards associated with electromagnetic
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research to
establish an experimentally-validated mathematical framework for the acoustic-
electroelastic dynamics of piezoelectric transmission and reception when
subjected to an acoustic medium over broad ranges of low-to-high electrical and
acoustic excitation levels. The proposed experiments and analytical multiphysics
modeling approach aim at filling a knowledge gap in terms of considering
nonlinear effects associated with high excitation levels in ultrasound acoustic
energy transfer systems. These effects include the coupled nonlinear acoustic
field with non-conservative electroelastic structural responses along with
reflections due to impedance mismatch that lead to spatial resonances, energy
loss and appearance of higher harmonics during wave propagation in a nonlinear
dispersive medium. This research will lead to new understanding of resonant
acoustic-piezoelectric systems that will influence the design of ultrasonic
acoustic energy transfer systems for various applications -- through innovative
mechanisms for wireless charging of low-power sensors by an acoustic-based novel
power delivering system, selectively and noninvasively. The research team will
provide recommendations at the fundamental level for enhancing system
performance through addressing power output for different transducer designs,
resistive and resistive-reactive loading, acoustic impedance matching layers,
and the material and nonlinearity effects. The output of the research effort
will help in the design of optimal acoustic systems that can transfer higher
power levels at higher efficiencies in various applications. This project will
also reach and inspire a large number of underrepresented and minority students
through a complementary and engaging educational plan, prepared in collaboration
with Center for Enhancement of Engineering Diversity at Virginia Tech.