* 1711386
* RET Site: Wearable Research for In-Service STEM Teachers (WRIST)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Jong-Hoon Youn, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/28/2022
* USD 598,539.00

This award renews an exemplary Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site on
wearable computing research at the University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO). The
RET site nurtures a long-term partnership between UNO and Omaha Public Schools
to advance pre-college science and engineering education by providing cutting-
edge research experiences to cohorts of high school teachers in the areas of
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The research projects
will focus on emerging wearable technologies and provide hands-on experiments
and daily interactions with faculty mentors who are actively involved in
leading-edge research on wearable computing. The participating teachers will
translate their research experiences and knowledge into classroom practice by
developing instructional modules and course materials that they will introduce
in their classrooms and share with other teachers in their school district.
These activities all contribute to the formation of a community of practice in
partnership with UNO faculty and industry mentors that has the potential to
significantly enhance and improve STEM education in the Omaha Public School
District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating teachers will attend a 6-week
summer institute to participate in cutting-edge research projects with mentoring
from computer science faculty who lead vibrant wearable computing research
programs. This RET Site project will provide a platform for the participating
teachers to develop practical problem-based instructional materials and
laboratory modules that they will share with other teachers in their school
district during an academic year workshop. The teacher-created modules and
lessons will be disseminated nationally through TeachEngineering.org, a
nationally recognized repository for searchable, standards-based engineering
curricula. The RET Site project will boost the quality of instruction in the
Omaha Public Schools and strengthen the curricula. The excitement of learning
about innovative computing technologies can inspire the students to pursue
further computing education and related careers. The WRIST program will
strengthen ongoing partnerships between the University of Nebraska and Omaha
Public Schools and synergize community computer science education initiatives
that lay the foundation for quality computing education in the schools and
provide for the future computing workforce needs of the community.