* 1711165
* Collaborative Research: A Microfluidic-CMOS Cross-cut Approach enabling Tri-Modal Biorecognition for Highly Accurate Viral Diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Mehdi Javanmard, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

This project seeks to develop a finger-stick sized instrument whose purpose is
to rapidly diagnose viral infections in blood. The proposed point-of-use device
can be utilized for rapidly screening subjects at airports, emergency rooms, or
other crowded environments where the potential to spread viral disease is high.
Point-of-use diagnosis of viral pathogens plays a critical role in response
efforts to outbreaks, but is notoriously unreliable with a single mode of bio-
molecular diagnostics due to patient-patient heterogeneity and variation of the
biomarkers in the body fluid with time of infection. In this work, a
microfluidics-CMOS-bio-chemistry crosscut approach is proposed to enable
portable, compact point-of-use hybrid device technology that enables multi-modal
detection capability including antibody detection, viral protein detection as
well as viral load quantification in a single sample-to-answer platform. The
proposed tri-modal diagnostic platform will enable diagnosis with minimal false-
negatives, critically important for diagnosis. The crosscut approach towards
this project will engage and train both graduate and undergraduate students
across multiple disciplines. The PIs will also engage high-school seniors from
local schools and broadly disseminate the knowledge through their proposed
courses (undergraduate and graduate) and through publications, seminars and
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovation is based on
miniaturization of sample, reagent, and buffer handling in microfluidics using
low power electronically actuated micro-valves, reconfigurable electroosmotic
pumps, and multiplexed detection of fluorescence-labeled proteins and nucleic
acids in silicon ICS with integrated nanoplasmonic filters that remove the
necessity of complex optical scanners, lenses, collimators. The platform is
envisioned to be generic and reconfigurable and the pre-functionalized
cartridges can be swapped out for different infectious diseases. Specifically,
the proposed research aims to investigate and develop multi-modal detection
capability through electronically actuated fluidic valves and pumps enabling on-
chip immunoassays for protein detection and on-chip nucleic acid purification,
amplification, and hybridization for viral load determination as well as light
guiding, packaging and additive manufacturing techniques for enabling a sample-
to-answer platform.