* 1711447
* Adaptive Thermal Management for Next-Generation Implantable Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Maysam Ghovanloo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2022
* USD 330,000.00

As the electronics shrink in size and system-on-chips become more efficient,
smart, complex, and functionally capable, implantable medical devices are
emerging as the desired, and in many cases, the only viable therapeutic
solutions for some of the most serious drug refractory (i.e. resistant to
treatment by medication) types of chronic illnesses, such as Parkinson's
disease, chronic pain, epilepsy, and diabetes, which prevalence is rapidly
increasing in the aging industrial societies. However, with increasing
functionalities and associated complexities of implantable medical devices,
potential thermal damage to tissues around the implants becomes a new challenge
facing the industry since exposing the surrounding tissue of a biomedical
implant to a temperature above the safe limits can cause irreversible damage in
the long run, similar to the detrimental effects of a long lasting fever. Real-
time thermal management, as proposed in this project, can enable the emerging
implantable medical devices of the future to achieve significant improvement in
efficacy, functionality, and performance, while providing an additional safety
mechanism for the recipients in the lifetime of a device.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to establish the theoretical
foundation and applied framework of adaptive thermal management for the next
generation high-performance implantable medical devices with growing
functionalities and associated complexities. This project consists of five main
research components: (1) creating computationally efficient models to capture
thermal dynamics in various types of tissues for real-time thermal management in
implantable medical devices; (2) investigating the thermal impact, and
establishing guidelines on thermal modeling and management for implantable
medical devices under different operation conditions; (3) developing an adaptive
thermal management framework that enables safe and smart operation of the high-
performance implantable medical devices; (4) developing a test vehicle for
comprehensive evaluation of the thermal management algorithms; and (5)
evaluating the developed models and thermal management framework through in
vitro experiments in an environment that closely resembles the human body and
its blood perfusion using phantoms filled with circulating tissue-simulant
fluids. This project will significantly advance the understanding of thermal
impact of the high-performance implantable medical devices, and enable the smart
and safe operation of the next-generation implantable medical devices with
growing functionalities and associated complexities. In addition, the thermal
management framework can be adapted to applications using closed-loop
implantable medical device systems to monitor a patient's disease state and
modulate the delivery of therapeutic drugs or stimuli, which is another strong
emerging technical area, as well as other applications with thermal concerns.
The educational components of this project comprise a model designed for a
multiyear, multidisciplinary undergraduate research team to attract and retain
students, and stimulate their research interests by strategically managing the
team and assigning tasks to individuals, in addition to providing research
opportunities and mentoring for graduate students.