* 1711854
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Evolution of Defensive Traits and Diversification in Catfishes
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Milton Tan, Tan                     Milton
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. There are over 3000 species of catfish, making up roughly one
in twenty species of vertebrates. Catfishes are able to lock their fin spines
outwards, providing a defense mechanism against predators, and this has been
hypothesized to be a key innovation that allowed catfishes to escape predation
and radiate. Furthermore, it was recently discovered that in roughly half of all
catfishes, these fin spines also deliver venom, and catfishes comprise almost
all venomous freshwater vertebrates. Venom has been poorly studied for fishes,
including catfishes. Understanding catfish diversity, evolution and co-evolution
of traits (spines and venom) and the role that such adaptations play in species
diversification has broad relevance for all vertebrate biology.

This research project will integrate various types of data, including a new
catfish Tree of Life inferred based on phylogenomic data, venom transcriptomic
data, computed tomography (CT) scans and photographic data that will derive from
biological collections and efforts from the All Catfishes Species Inventory.
These data will be integrated using comparative phylogenetics methods to test
for shifts in the rates of diversification across catfish phylogeny that were
associated with defensive traits and their evolution. The fellow will gain
training in generation and analysis of next-generation genomic, transcriptomic,
phenomic, and phylogenomic data types. In addition, the fellow will instruct
undergraduate level classes and mentor students in research. Broader impacts of
this research include collaboration with the Smithsonian National Museum of
Natural History to interact with the public and develop education materials to
inform the public about ichthyology, and particularly catfishes. The fellow will
also engage in online outreach, including making data and results available to
the public.