* 1711430
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Investigating drivers of ecological speciation in a symbiotically luminous coral reef fish
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Alison Gould, Gould                   Alison
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. In doing so, the proposed research will highlight the
importance of natural history collections in broadening our understanding of how
biodiversity arises relative to ecological variables such as habitat and to
symbiotic associations with microbes, upon which all animals depend.
Specifically, this study investigates the role of habitat use and a symbiosis
with luminous bacteria on the diversification of a group of bioluminescent coral
reef fish. The methods that will be developed to extract both host and symbiont
DNA from museum specimens will establish new opportunities to understand the way
in which host animals and their bacterial symbionts change over time relative to
each other and to their environments. Such information is especially valuable at
this critical time when rapidly changing environments threaten to de-couple
essential symbiotic associations. The historical patterns of species'
dependencies on particular habitats and their abilities to adapt to new
conditions, along with their symbionts, can be used to predict their future
responses to impending environmental changes.

This project examines the symbiotically luminous genus of coral reef fish
Siphamia (Perciformes: Apogonidae) as a model with which to investigate both
habitat use and its symbiosis with luminous bacteria as drivers of speciation in
the host. By applying next generation sequencing methods to archived museum
specimens, the specific research objectives are (i) to infer the phylogenetic
relationships among Siphamia fishes, (ii) to compare the defined divergence
patterns in Siphamia relative to species-habitat use and biogeographic
distributions, (iii) to identify the luminous symbionts of various Siphamia
hosts species, and (iv) to compare symbiont genotypes and phylogenic
relationships with both host divergence patterns and environmental
characteristics such as depth and temperature. To carry out these objectives,
the fellow will extract DNA from the tissue of all 23 described Siphamia species
archived in museum collections from sites representative of their geographic
ranges and will apply restriction site associated sequencing (RAD-Seq) methods
to resolve the phylogeny of the host fish. The fellow will also extract the DNA
of the luminous symbionts from Siphamia light organs, including those from
modern specimens collected during this project, and will sequence genes known to
vary between luminous bacteria in the Vibrionaceae family to infer a phylogeny
of the light organ symbionts. The divergence patterns in the host fish will then
be compared to their habitat use, distributions, and patterns of symbiont
diversification to test for signatures of ecological speciation driven by these
factors, revealing the underlying ecological processes that might have shaped
the diversification of this coral reef fish and its bioluminescent symbiosis.
This research will be based at the California Academy of Sciences (CAS) and will
foster public engagement on the underlying themes of microbial symbioses and of
species-adaptive responses to their environment through outreach programs and
exhibits designed to highlight the importance of biodiversity in coral reef
ecosystems and its current threats. Other important aspects of this project
include the incorporation of new specimens in the ichthyology, microbiology, and
frozen DNA collections at CAS for use in future research as well as the training
of undergraduate students on the applied molecular methods.