* 1711543
* RET Site:  Engineering for Biology: Multidisciplinary Research Experiences for Teachers in Elementary Grades
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Sarah Furtney, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 673,595.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers: Engineering for Biology:
Multidisciplinary Research Experiences for Teachers in Elementary Grades (MRET),
at the University of Florida (UF) is an integrated program to bring together K-5
teachers, engineering faculty, engineering students, and industry professionals
to cultivate the next generation of STEM professionals. Elementary educators
influence fundamental skill development and disposition of students toward math
and science from the youngest ages, but elementary educators are not well
prepared in STEM fields. The goal of MRET is to alleviate this gap in K-5
teacher preparation and catalyze North Central Florida's STEM education
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer over the three year grant period,
the MRET Site will host a cohort of 12, K-5 teachers from Alachua County schools
that encompass a diverse population of students. The program will include four
distinct elements designed to heighten elementary educators' STEM awareness and
expertise, including: (1) a 7-week immersive research experience, working with
faculty mentors and engineering graduate students, centered around real
engineering problems with applications in areas such as biomedicine, the
environment, and agriculture; (2) curriculum development assistance through
weekly summer meetings led by elementary education experts; (3) exposure to STEM
careers through weekly summer seminars from local industry professionals; and
(4) engineering student involvement in K-5 classrooms during curriculum
development and throughout the school year. Teachers will leverage their
engagement in the lab to incorporate meaningful elements of STEM professional
practices into their curriculum across many subjects that will reach over 200
elementary students each year. Teachers will also develop lessons for their
class and then register inclusive kits for their lesson in UF's Center for
Precollegiate Education and Training (CPET) "Equipment Lockers" that will enable
teachers through Alachua County to deploy their lessons and reach even more
students. Teacher participant perceptions of, reactions to, and learning from
these programmatic elements will be evaluated by College of Education faculty.