* 1711451
* Collaborative Research:  NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF:   Complex liquid droplet structures as new optical and optomechanical platforms
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Lan Yang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2020
* USD 114,025.00

Confining light to region of hundreds or even tens of micrometers in high-
quality optical microresonators, one can achieve a significant concentration of
electromagnetic energy. The confined light becomes much more sensitive to
environmental changes, exerts an amplified mechanical force, and can generate
significant nonlinear effects even at small light intensities. For this reason,
optical microresonators are being actively studied in the context of optical
cooling or amplification of mechanical motion, for precision metrology, lasing,
ultrasensitive biosensing and other areas. Confinement of light is usually
achieved using solid materials, but this project proposes to achieve it using
liquid microstructures. The transition to liquid droplet creates significant
challenges, but also opens up new opportunities. Firstly, mechanical softness of
droplets makes them more receptive than solid materials to the light-induced
forces resulting in many orders of magnitude larger mechanical responses and
hence increased efficiency of optical cooling or heating. Secondly, liquid
droplets allow access to the resonator's interior regions. Because
electromagnetic field is orders of magnitude larger inside than outside of the
resonator, one can expect the corresponding increase in sensitivity of
biosensors based on droplet resonators by several orders of magnitude. Thirdly,
use of liquid droplets allows realizing a novel class of photonic molecules with
extra strong optical bonds based on droplet-in-droplet structures, in which one
or more smaller droplets are encapsulated in a larger droplet. Overall, the
objective of this project is to demonstrate the transformative potential of
liquid droplet resonators in the fields of optical cooling, lasing, sensing and
metrology. The interdisciplinary nature of the project, which includes
physicists, and electrical and mechanical engineers, will ensure that graduate
and undergraduate students will be exposed to the culture and methodology of
different disciplines. In addition, the project will build connections between
American and Israeli researchers and students and strengthen the collaboration
between American universities participating in the project and Technion,
Israel's premiere engineering school. The support for this project is provided
within the collaborative NSF-BSF (Binational US-IL Science Foundation) program
with participation of the Israel team financed by BSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project merges the fields of microfluidics and optical whispering-gallery- mode
resonators by proposing the study of the optical and optomechanical properties
of novel photonic structures composed of fluid droplets. The mechanical softness
of liquid droplets combined with their versatility and tunability will allow the
principal investigators to study novel optical and optomechanical effects such
as optical cooling of capillary waves, topological energy transfer in the
vicinity of exceptional points, and others. The international multidisciplinary
team formed for this project will exploit state-of-the-art microfluidic
technologies to fabricate different structures of droplets, with each droplet
serving as a high-quality photonic resonator. Numerical simulation and
theoretical models will be developed to understand the physics associated with
the novel structures developed in the project. Experimentalists working on the
project will carry out optical characterization of the proposed structures and
develop in-depth understanding of their novel optical and optomechanical
effects. This research will advance the field of optofluidics by applying state-
of-the-art 3D printing technologies to the fabrication of novel microfluidic
devices and generation of complex structures of microdroplets. Study of novel
photonic structures with unique properties will also open new directions in the
field of optical whispering-gallery-mode resonators. The general field of
computational electrodynamics will also benefit from this work by taking the
T-matrix formalism well outside its nominal domain and applying it to the modes
of optically coupled complex structures of liquid droplets.