* 1711849
* Materials World Network: Collaborative Proposal: Understanding the Optical Response of Designer Epsilon Near Zero Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Daniel Wasserman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 05/31/2017
* USD 58,515.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of, and control over, the optical
properties of materials provides important insight into the fundamentals of
light-matter interaction. At the same time, these capabilities serve as the
foundation for the design and development of novel applications of optical
science. This Materials World Network project explores the science behind the
interaction of light with exotic material structures having vanishingly small
dielectric permittivity, also known as epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) materials, that
are potentially able to dramatically suppress diffraction of light and to extend
the applicability of the quasi-static approximation to wavelength-scale systems.
In this project, the researchers will create a novel material platform of
"designer" ENZ media and will use this platform for building an analytical
description of the optics of ENZ-related systems. Specifically, a set of
experimental techniques will be developed for subwavelength lateral control of
the permittivity profile of our materials, targeting important visible and IR
frequency ranges. Optical characterization of these structures will be used to
provide the foundation for novel numerical and analytical techniques capable of
describing the light-matter interaction in complex ENZ-based media. It is
expected that both the experimental and theoretical results of this work will
have broader application for plasmonic- and meta- materials across the UV to THz
wavelength ranges. The students involved in the project will benefit from the
unique exposure to modern interdisciplinary projects combining materials
science, chemistry, physics, and applied mathematics, and involving multiple
institutions across the globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Optical science is increasingly interwoven with many aspects
of our everyday life, from optical communications, to imaging, to a broad range
of optical sensing technologies in health-, environmental, and security-related
applications. New optical materials, with unique, yet designer-enabled,
properties, promise to further improve the quality or our life, and perhaps as
importantly, provide a better understanding of the fundamental interaction
between two building blocks of our Universe, light and matter. In this Materials
World Network project, an international team will develop a unique new class of
materials, known as epsilon-near-zero materials, and analyze the interaction of
these materials with light. This research has the potential to provide a novel
material platform for merging optics and electronics technologies, bringing
together the benefits of high-speed optical communications with the compactness
of integrated circuits. The complementary expertise of the participants will
provide a unique opportunity to expose participating students to modern
interdisciplinary international collaboration, enhancing multi-discipline and
multi-cultural exchange. The interaction between the research teams and the
broader community will aim at increasing the participation of emerging
scientists in STEM-related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials program and Office of Special
Programs, Division of Materials Research.