* 1711319
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: A large-scale, experimental test of local adaption in the eastern oyster along a natural salinity gradient in the Gulf of Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Kevin Johnson, Johnson                 Kevin          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Kevin Marquez Johnson, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Dr. Morgan Kelly at Louisiana State University. The project
is focused on learning how oysters from different regions in the Gulf of Mexico
respond to variations in temperature and salinity. This work is important
because changes in land-use and rainfall can dramatically influence salinity and
temperature in the Gulf. By investigating how present-day populations respond to
changes in temperature and salinity, this research will provide a valuable
resource to conservation biologists, state managers, and small-scale farmers as
they maintain over 2 million acres of public and private oyster grounds that
produced 14.5 million pounds of oysters in 2015.

This research explores adaptations to local environmental conditions at three
oyster reefs located along a natural salinity gradient in the Gulf of Mexico.
Evidence for adaptation to salinity and temperature is being assessed by
measuring three indicators of individual oyster health: (i) food ingestion rate,
(ii) growth rate, and (iii) the heritability of environmentally-induced
epigenetic modifications. Utilizing classic metrics for oyster health (i.e.
ingestion and growth rates) across multiple generations will provide the
necessary tools to determine if oysters from these three reefs are locally
adapted to their native environment. This research also uses epigenomic
sequencing to track DNA methylation patterns from the parent population (F0) to
the second generation (F2). Tracking these environmentally inducible epigenomic
changes across multiple generations is providing valuable insight into the
heritability of these markers and quantifying the variation of these markers in
natural populations. Finally, this work is broadening participation of under-
represented groups in biology at both Louisiana State University (LSU) and local
high schools. The fellow is mentoring LSU undergraduate students and encouraging
them to participate in the Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority
Participation (LS-LAMP) program. The fellow also is working with eight local
high school teacher and student pairs to establish a summer education course in
bioinformatics, thereby communicating the utility of these tools in the natural
sciences.