* 1711077
* Long-Range, mm-Scale Wireless Optical Power Delivery Using Nanophotonic Antennas and Integrated Power Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jifeng Liu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 409,994.00

The need for wireless power delivery has grown in recent decades, driven by
exponential (Moore's law) semiconductor scaling, the pervasiveness of portable
computing and communications devices, and other applications including
biomedical devices, transportation and aerospace. This project will explore
delivering power to small (mm-scale) silicon integrated circuits via a free-
space optical (near-IR laser) power source. The goal of the project is to study
and demonstrate the feasibility of long-range optical power delivery in a
silicon platform through an interdisciplinary effort on semiconductor
optics/photonics and low power integrated circuit design. This project will
focus primarily on the optical receiver technology including the design and
fabrication of nanophotonic antennas to concentrate energy into small silicon-
based photovoltaic cells that are implemented in a low-cost standard process
flow. The circuits portion of the project will explore methods to extract
maximum energy from the optical elements and provide a seamless interface
between on-chip dielectric energy storage and a low-voltage embedded circuit
load. This project will support educational opportunities in the undergraduate
and graduate curriculum at Dartmouth, as well as an expansion of ongoing K-12
outreach programs and communication with the general public. An example of this
is the Dartmouth-organized 'Design-it, Build-it' summer bootcamp for high school
juniors and seniors that attracts students from around the country and
encourages students with underrepresented backgrounds to attend through the
provision of scholarship support.

This project will explore several promising technical directions related to mm-
scale optical power delivery. A first direction is the design and implementation
of near-IR (~850 nm) nanophotonic antenna structures, which can concentrate
optical power to small photodiodes (PDs) operated in photovoltaic (PV) mode.
These have the advantage of concentrating optical energy into very small
optically-active structures, which can improve quantum efficiency and reduce
active area needed for optoelectronics, thereby decreasing overall size. Second,
we will explore integration strategies in SOI or triple-well CMOS where multiple
photodiodes can be dynamically reconfigured in parallel and series stacks. This
will help alleviate stress on the power circuitry, enable much higher system
efficiency, and benefit from recent developments in power management for
photovoltaic (PV) systems. Third, we plan to develop a novel power management
approach based on high-density switched capacitor (SC) converters that can
provide efficient regulation and power-point tracking with a monolithic
implementation while interfacing between high-voltage dielectric storage and a
low-voltage embedded system load. The proposed SC architecture builds on past
work by the PIs in chip-scale power conversion, architectures that can to
mitigate systemic energy loss mechanisms in photovoltaic arrays, and new
directions in high-order interleaving and bottom plate recycling that can
improve efficiency and power-density.