* 1711856
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Survival in extreme environments through cooperation: biofilms and looking for life on Mars
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Rebecca Prescott, Prescott                Rebecca        D
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 207,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017, under
the program Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellow, Rebecca Prescott, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology, under the
mentorship of two sponsoring scientists: Alan Decho (University of South
Carolina) and Charles Cockell (University of Edinburgh). This project
investigates how biofilms (thin films of microbes attached to surfaces and
encased in mucus) survive in harsh environments on Earth and under a simulated
early Mars environment. This is important because determining the range of
planetary conditions that are favorable for life, detecting life on other
planets, and understanding how life evolved on Earth are all important questions
in astrobiology. The Fellow is focusing on how biofilms from hypersaline
environments may survive through cooperative behavior and chemical communication
among microbe cells (referred to as quorum sensing). The fellow is also
determining what genes are regulated through quorum sensing, and investigating
the response to the extreme environmental conditions these microbes endure on
Earth and under simulated early Martian conditions. The questions of how life
evolved on Earth are imbedded in cultural traditions across the globe, and the
highly interdisciplinary field of astrobiology provides unique opportunities to
develop and integrate indigenous cultural perspectives into K-12 classrooms.
Thus, the fellow's broadening participation activities include working with the
UK Centre for Astrobiology Summer Teacher Academy, and with science teachers
from the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, to develop teacher training workshops
in culture-based science of astrobiology.

To enhance our understanding of where microbial life may occur on Mars, past or
present, we must understand how microbial communities evolve and function in
extreme environments. Quorum sensing is an ancient and well-documented mode of
cooperative living, and is a mechanism that may enhance microbial survival in
extreme environments. Quorum sensing has not been investigated in an
astrobiological context, and this study will be the first to illuminate possible
mechanisms of microbial interactions that could increase their adaptability to
early Mars conditions on the surface or subsurface. Through collaboration with
the University of Edinburgh, the Fellow is using the Planetary Environmental
Liquid Simulator (PELS) to evaluate the genomic, transcriptomic, and lipidomic
changes of hypersaline biofilm mats from the Bahamas (surface) and biofilms from
the Boulby Salt Mine, UK (subsurface) when placed in early Mars conditions in
the PELS. The fellow is testing the hypothesis that through cooperative behavior
(i.e. quorum sensing), biofilms have an increased chance of surviving under
multiple extremes, and evaluating whether the molecules of communication may be
preserved in the rock record, providing clues to a community-level response to
environmental extremes.