* 1711322
* Minority Carriers in Graphene/SiC Schottky Emitter Bipolar Phototransistors for High Gain Visible Blind UV Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* MVS Chandrashekhar, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2021
* USD 369,999.00

This grant supports the University of South Carolina in the effort to understand
the optical response of electronic junctions formed between silicon carbide
(SiC) and epitaxial graphene layers. In particular, the PIs have demonstrated
ultraviolet (UV) photodetection with high gain in devices featuring a
transparent epitaxial graphene (EG) emitter grown on a p-type SiC base epilayer
on n-type SiC substrates. Ultraviolet (UV) detection is an important capability
for military, industrial, chemical, and biological applications. However, UV
makes up only a small portion of the daylight spectrum and visible light
absorption can easily overwhelm the typical UV signal, making the inherent
visible blindness found in wide-bandgap semiconductors (such as SiC) therefore a
desirable quality for UV detectors if architectures with high detectivity and
UV-transparent contacts (such as epitaxial graphene) can be identified.
Accordingly this grant supports the development and study of Schottky-emitter
bipolar phototransistor (SEPT) devices including detailed analysis using
scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM). The devices rely on high-efficiency
injection of minority carriers in Schottky-based devices, an unconventional
process that could transform many fields of electronics from flexible displays
for consumer electronics, to optoelectronics, to power electronics. For example,
a graphene-emitter bipolar transistor will enable high frequency, high power,
low loss operation of smartgrids, offering performance superior to that
available from either traditional silicon devices, or the latest GaN or SiC
devices, considered the gold-standards in power electronics. The physics of
Schottky minority carrier injection would be transformative in developing hole-
injectors for light-emitting diodes (LEDs), currently a challenge in materials
such as GaN, enabling low-cost solid-state lighting, or in solar cells. The PIs
are additionally committed to development of a diverse science and engineering
workforce through graduate training and K-12 outreach. This project will
directly support research workshops on solar energy and stipends for 10
students/year from historically Black colleges and universities in the Columbia,
SC area, culminating in presentations at the USC Sustainability Showcase
organized by Co-PI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most Schottky junctions, thermionic
emission dominates, and minority carrier injection efficiency gamma &lt;20% is
observed, insufficient for high performance devices despite the potential high
speed that Schottky electrodes offer. Results at the PI's labs on the
transparent epitaxial graphene (EG)/p-SiC Schottky interface have demonstrated
bipolar photocurrent gain bipolar phototransistor current gain beta &gt;100 in
response to 365nm UV radiation, indicative of highly efficient minority
injection (gamma &gt;95%). This behavior is hypothesized to occur due to i) the
large Schottky barrier of EG/p-SiC (2.7eV), larger than the bandgap of many
materials and ii) the large ratio of the mobility of the minority carriers
(electrons) to that of the majority carriers (holes) in SiC. The ultimate goal
of this project is to make EG/SiC Schottky emitter phototransistors that
approach or beat UV avalanche photodiode performance ~102-3A/W (365nm) at much
lower voltages (~10s V vs.&gt;300 V), leading to lower dark current and noise.
The PIs will use SEPT devices formed at the University of South Carolina to
interrogate the transport of minority carriers at Schottky junctions using
frequency, time, spatially resolved optical measurements, as well as temperature
dependent DC measurements. The use of the only natively grown Schottky interface
EG/SiC enables systematic tuning of the interfacial properties using
H-intercalation, and by exposure to polar gas ambients such as H2O, NO2 and NH3,
which the PIs will use to control minority carrier injection. They will also
investigate the role of stacking fault formation under bipolar injection, a key
aging process, as well as how stacking faults determine the responsivity, speed,
and visible rejection of the devices. Finally, the project will permit continued
collaboration with the Naval Research Laboratory.