* 1711230
* Tailoring nonlinear interactions in highly-multimode fibers for versatile light sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Demetrios Christodoulides, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2022
* USD 359,960.00

Title: Fiber Light Sources Based on Multimode Generation and
Amplification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The past
25 years have witnessed a number of impressive advancements in the general field
of fiber optics. These breakthroughs have not only enabled a widespread
proliferation of the Internet, but have also radically transformed industrial
manufacturing, laser surgery, optical microscopy and sensing, to mention a few.
Fiber lasers represent yet another field that has experienced striking growth
during this same period. What made this class of lasers so successful is their
remarkable power scalability, spectral and temporal versatility, high efficiency
and their ability to be integrated into robust and modular systems.
Unfortunately, as with most technologies that experienced a sudden progress in
capabilities, it will not be long before physical constraints appear on the
horizon to dampen future progress. Indeed, nonlinear limits and damage
thresholds of existing fibers are now being approached, imposing restrictions on
the maximum pulse energies/power one could expect from current fiber based light
sources. This work aims to overcome these limitations by exploiting the physics
and complexity of nonlinear dynamics in highly multimode fiber structures.
Alternative strategies are to be developed for designing new versatile light
sources that outperform existing systems by orders of magnitude in terms of
output power and spectral densities delivered. Education is an integral
component of this research effort. Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the
proposed work, the students engaged in this project will have the opportunity to
experience all the steps in the research. This involves starting from ideas that
originate from theoretical models to experimentally demonstrations of the
anticipated behavior to finally producing a prototype fiber light
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research effort is to systematically explore the possibility of using nonlinear
multimode fibers in two areas where current single mode approaches are still in
need of a solution: (i) ultra-high spectral density, multi-octave supercontinuum
sources with customized frequency and modal content and (ii) power-scalable,
low-cost multimode fiber structures for pulsed amplification. This will be
accomplished by devising strategies to preferentially excite particular mode
groups and by developing ytterbium-based fiber amplifiers with low differential
modal gain. Of special interest will be to alter on demand the generated
supercontinuum spectrum, from ultra-violet to mid-infrared. In this respect,
photonic lanterns, chaotic fibers with appropriately engineered transverse index
profiles, and longitudinally varying taper configurations will be fabricated to
encourage frequency generation in specific bands. Moreover, the prospect for
generating chirped parabolic pulses in normally dispersive multimode fibers will
be considered. Of particular importance will be to develop theoretical models
that can either predict or explain processes in nonlinear multimode fibers, for
example mode condensation, that still remain largely unexplored. From a
theoretical perspective, the interplay between nonlinearity and chaos as a means
to homogenize the supercontinuum is still an important problem that will be
investigated. The realization of fiber structures that are prone to chaos could
provide an experimental platform that can be utilized to observe and study the
intricate connection between classical and wave chaos. The use of these notions
in photonics could establish a new paradigm in molding and controlling optical
propagation in nonlinear multimode environments and will help develop
alternative methodologies in designing novel classes of fiber-based sources. The
cross-fertilization of these ideas is expected to lead to advances in both
photonics and nonlinear physics.