* 1711022
* On the Cutting Edge: Early Career Geoscience Faculty Development Workshop: A partnership between NAGT and NSF
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Sarah Penniston-Dorland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 82,912.00

The University of Maryland has been granted an award to host a workshop entitled
"Early Career Geoscience Faculty: Teaching, Research, and Managing Your Career",
in July 2017. The goal of this five-day workshop is to provide concrete skills
to support faculty in the early years of their teaching and research
responsibilities. The participants will learn about discipline-based educational
research, share ideas and strategies for teaching, consider successful
strategies for maintaining an active research and scholarly practice, discuss
life as an early-career faculty member, and leave with materials and tools for
managing their career in academia. Influencing faculty at the beginning of their
careers can have a career-long impact, as well as a notable, secondary impact on
improving Geoscience education and mentoring. The networks that will form at the
workshop will serve to alleviate common feelings of overload and isolation
expressed by early career faculty. Previous workshops have indicated that
faculty benefit from hearing tips from other professors; developing a network of
support; and in making strategic research, teaching, and management plans for
the first several years of their academic careers. The funds from this award
will provide resources to implement the workshop and to support scholarships for
participants whose institutions are not able to support their participation.
This workshop is offered in partnership with the National Association of
Geoscience Teachers (NAGT) On the Cutting Edge program of professional
development workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will advocate for best
practices in pedagogy for participants. In that vein, the workshop leaders will
model effective pedagogical practices during the workshop, for example active
learning techniques and incorporating time for reflection. Leaders will engage
the participants actively throughout the workshop using a variety of methods
including small and large group discussions, short problem-solving tasks,
reviewing and/or trying out activities, and scheduled thinking and writing time.