* 1711712
* Collaborative Research: Challenging, Operationalizing, and Understanding Racialized and Gendered Events (COURAGE) in Undergraduate Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Luis Leyva, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 08/31/2022
* USD 36,020.00

Inadequate preparation of students in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) is a significant problem in the United States. In addition,
historically marginalized groups, including women, African Americans, and
Hispanics, are vastly underrepresented in the STEM workforce. Research indicates
that the reasons why women and historically marginalized students of color are
unable or unwilling to pursue STEM majors are complex and multifaceted. One
common factor often cited in the literature is the nature and quality of college
mathematics instruction. Additionally, some researchers have suggested that the
culture surrounding mathematics institutions, such as messages about
mathematical ability being innate and the focus on individual competition,
deters women and students of color. This suggests critical questions: What
specific patterns of peer and instructor interactions contribute to or reinforce
this mathematics learning culture? Why does this quality of instruction have a
larger negative impact on women and students of color? What, specifically, makes
this instruction inadequate in meeting the academic and social needs of
underrepresented groups in mathematics? Do instructors recognize these actions
as contributing to this underrepresentation in mathematics? Knowing the answers
to these questions will contribute to creating more equitable mathematics
learning environments at the undergraduate level and increasing the number of
STEM majors to meet the demands of the national workforce. This Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Engaged Student Learning project,
Challenging, Operationalizing and Understanding Racialized and Gendered
Experiences (COURAGE) in Undergraduate Mathematics is designed to begin the
process of finding these answers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There is little research
on the relationship between undergraduate mathematics instruction and the
retention and achievement of groups that are historically underrepresented in
mathematics; other scholars have noted that research in this area is sparse and
urgently needed. In order to study this relationship, this research project uses
a mixed-methods design. The intellectual merit of COURAGE is directly related to
the opportunity to advance knowledge in this under-examined area of STEM
education, the design of the research project itself and the qualifications of
the personnel involved. In the first year, through observational study and
stimulus-recall interviews, the investigators will identify specific events in
pre-calculus and calculus classrooms that women and students of color find
potentially marginalizing, and will investigate the perceptions of these events
from the vantage points of undergraduate mathematics instructors as well as
students who are adequately represented and underrepresented in the STEM
disciplines. In the second year, quantitative studies using focus group
interviews and surveys will be conducted to assess the generalizability of these
findings. In particular, videotaped classroom events will be presented to a
national sample of undergraduate students and mathematics course instructors, to
see the extent to which they find these instructional events to be typical,
desirable, or problematic. In the third year, professional development materials
will be designed and then piloted with instructors that intend to create more
equitable learning environments in undergraduate mathematics classrooms. A
critical outcome of this work will be a collection of materials including a
synthesis of typical events in undergraduate mathematics classrooms that
marginalize students, various students' documented perceptions of classroom
events, and recommended instructional practices for more equitably responding to
their occurrences that can be shared widely to the benefit of the broader STEM
education community.