* 1711858
* CAREER:  Mid-Infrared Quantum Dot Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Daniel Wasserman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 04/30/2017
* USD 71,970.00

The objective of this program is the development of a new class of semiconductor
laser based on intersublevel transitions in engineered quantum nanostructures.
Both self-assembled and nanolithographically defined quantum dots will be
investigated for their potential as mid-infrared gain media and for integration
into semiconductor laser structures. The intellectual merit of the program lies
in the development of a new type of gain media which can be incorporated either
mid-infrared lasers for sensing and lab-on-a-chip applications, or into cutting
edge mid-infrared metamaterial and plasmonic structures. The investigation of
optically efficient nanolithographically defined quantum heterostructures will,
in addition, prove to be an enabling technology, not only for mid-infrared
frequencies, but in other, technologically important frequency ranges such as
the terahertz and telecom frequencies. The broader impacts of the proposed work
lie in the societal benefits associated with the potential integration of this
new gain medium into medical diagnostic, environmental sensing, and security and
defense technologies. Furthermore, the development of optical gain will be
mirrored by an educational plan designed to integrate academic gain into the
local K12 and university community, with an emphasis on developing core
competencies among young undergraduate and high-school science students. In
summary, the program will develop a transformative technology to demonstrate
intersublevel gain in engineered semiconductor quantum nanostructures, and
integrate this new gain media into devices and structures for mid-infrared
photonics applications. The technical proposal to develop optical gain is
mirrored closely by an educational plan to demonstrate academic gain among local
K12 and undergraduate science students.