* 1711278
* New Design Paradigm for MIMO RF Power Amplifiers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Patrick Roblin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 320,000.00

The global telecommunication industry faces the challenge of designing the next
generation (e.g., 5G) of mobile networks to unleash the full potential of the
internet by connecting people and machines on a massive scale. There is no
telling the impact broadband mobile communication with tens of gigabits per
seconds will have on societies across the world. However, one important goal for
next generation wireless systems is to save energy while accommodating 10 times
more data traffic. RF power amplifier (PA) is the component that consumes most
energy in both base-stations and cell phones. Therefore, energy-efficient mobile
network requires highly efficient RF amplifiers. This project contributes to
this thrust by introducing a paradigm shift in design methodology that will
enable faster and more effective design to achieve significant energy savings.
In addition to these technical goals, the proposed research will also provide
critical support to the wireless industry by training personnel for advanced 5G
circuit design. A proactive data management plan will also be pursued for
maximizing the impact of this project and its dissemination via an archival
website and participation in the NSF Connection One Center funded by NSF IUCRC
program. The research results will also be introduced in the classroom and in
our educational labs. To provide a close exposure to these exciting research
activities, undergraduate students in engineering will be recruited through a
summer internship program to work on relevant sub-projects. Inspiring outreach
activities in wireless technologies will also be scheduled to promote
engineering education in high-schools and middle-
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of highly efficient RF power
amplifiers is required for the cost-effective deployment of next generation
energy-efficient wireless networks accommodating 10 times more data traffic.
Presently, RF PA designers rely on multi-harmonic source- and load-pull
measurements or simulations for designing power-efficient PAs. Due to the huge
multi-dimensional search space in design, this design technique is extremely
slow and inefficient. In this project, the direct design of RF power amplifiers
using the recently developed embedding PA technique will be pursued. The
amplifiers are first designed at the current source reference planes. It is
indeed now fully understood that for the optimal operation of RF power
transistors, the designer must target on optimal operation at the intrinsic
current-source reference-planes of the transistors. In this project, new PA
classes and architectures will be investigated and compared to traditional ones.
Until recently, the practical realization of ideal intrinsic PA mode of
operation in the real-world remained crippled by the presence of linear and
nonlinear device parasitics, which required time-consuming and inaccurate multi-
harmonic source- and load-pull searches. However, with the advent of the
embedding device model, optimal designs can now be obtained in a single
simulation. This approach will be further applied in this proposal to multiple
interconnected transistor circuits. With this embedding design approach, new
broadband circuit topologies never conceived before can now be explored for
achieving the highest performance possible for broadband 5G applications. This
embedding design technique should also eventually facilitate the development of
tools for the automatic design of optimal high-efficiency RF PAs. This paradigm
shift in RF circuit design has the potential to unleash the true power of
electronic design automation (EDA) tools in RF circuit design.