* 1711402
* Collaborative Research: Modeling for the Enhancement of Learning Chemistry (ModEL-C): Measuring cognitive load &amp; impact of modeling activities across the chemistry curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Cassidy Terrell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 85,598.00

The ModEL-C project will examine how cognitive load affects students' conceptual
learning through the use of chemistry and biochemistry models. The disciplines
of chemistry and biochemistry present a particular challenge to students with
abstract concepts that can lead to rampant and resistant misconceptions,
affecting both learning and student retention. Based on the data collected from
this study, the project team will implement three-dimensional (3D) virtual and
physical modeling activities across the chemistry and biochemistry curriculum
that optimize cognitive load and thereby enhance student learning. Ultimately
this work will create better consumers of chemistry and biochemistry education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will characterize the cognitive load of 3D
physical and virtual modeling activities by defining what and how many cognitive
tasks and concepts are accessed while using those 3D modeling activities in
general, organic and biochemistry courses. To this end, a student cohort and
select content experts will participate in a simulated learning environment,
completing modeling activities while their cognition is monitored by means of
eye-tracking and electroencephalogram (EEG) technologies. Moving forward, this
project will provide evidence to more intelligently design and execute 3D
virtual and physical modeling activities to decrease their cognitive load en
route to deepening students' ability to understand biomolecular interactions and
overcome misconceptions. This evidence will create avenues for curricular
change, from minimal to drastic, for those researchers and practitioners
interested in conceptual changes as well as the advancement of the NGSS practice
of modeling.