* 1711642
* RAPID: Hurricane-mediated alteration of microbial mercury methylation in coastal wetlands
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Parke Rublee, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2019
* USD 49,826.00

Forested wetlands in the coastal plain of the southeastern United States are
important sinks of atmospheric mercury but also represent active sites of
mercury methylation and production of highly toxic methylmercury, which can
contaminate regional water bodies. On October 8, 2016, Hurricane Matthew had a
final landfall at Winyah Bay, South Carolina, and resulted in torrential rain
and extensive flooding in a short period of time. This extreme weather event
flooded an extensive area of the coastal plain, inundating the coastal wetland
for a prolonged period that could potentially have stimulated many oxygen-
deficient processes including microbial mercury methylation. This research will
investigate if and how microbial mercury methylation is stimulated during the
prolonged flooding period in these coastal wetlands. This study represents a new
and unique collaboration between four investigators with different specialties
from three institutions including two assistant professors from a minority
serving institution and an undergraduate institution, respectively. This study
will also raise the awareness of the impacts of extreme weather events on toxic
mercury cycling in low-lying coastal areas in the southeastern United States.

This RAPID research is aimed at examining the influences of Hurricane Matthew on
the dynamics of microbial mercury methylation in coastal forested wetlands near
Winyah Bay, South Carolina, where Hurricane Matthew had a final landfall.
Specifically, this study will integrate field sampling and laboratory
experiments to investigate the impacts of this extreme weather event on
microbial methylation of mercury in the coastal wetland soils over the course of
variation in flooding levels. To evaluate the immediate impacts of Hurricane
Matthew on mercury cycling, surface water and wetland soil samples have been
collected by the research team since October 10, 2016 near Winyah Bay, South
Carolina, where Hurricane Matthew had a final landfall on October 8, 2016. The
sampling sites represent transects along with different degrees of seawater
intrusion and flood severity impacted by Hurricane Matthew. Samples will be
quantified for total mercury and methylmercury, and the abundance of mercury
methylation genes (hgcA) associated with the wetland surface soils over time, to
examine the temporal and spatial variations of mercury methylation and abundance
of mercury methylation genes. Results will be used to evaluate the formation of
hot spots and hot moments of mercury methylation in these wetland soils under
prolonged inundation. Moreover, controlled laboratory experiments will be
employed to examine the effects of different environmental factors on microbial
methylation of mercury in these wetland soils, including duration of inundation,
addition of fresh litter, increase of water salinity, and a combination of these
factors. The proposed work will provide a better understanding of how microbial
mercury methylation, the key biogeochemical step making mercury toxic, is
impacted in coastal wetlands by extreme weather events.