* 1711548
* Stochastic inference and control of complex biological networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Abhyudai Singh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2023
* USD 265,000.00

Living cells encode complex and dynamic networks of interconnected biomolecular
components that orchestrate diverse life processes. Unlike electrical circuits,
these networks consist of biochemical species (genes, proteins, RNAs, etc.) that
interact and regulate each other via chemical reactions. A holistic
understanding of how biomolecular networks process information for cellular
decision-making will have tremendous long-term impact on human health. For
example, a systems-level deciphering of biomolecular networks will fundamentally
transform our knowledge of aberrant regulation driving diseased states, and will
lead to novel ways of finding biomarkers and drug targets that take the network
dynamics into account. Moreover, designing and rewiring of networks using
systems approaches will open doors for different applications, such as,
production of biofuels and therapeutics. To facilitate these transformations,
this project aims to build scalable mathematical tools for modeling, analysis,
inference and control of biological networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements
inside individual cells reveal biological networks with rich stochastic
dynamics, owing to the inherent probabilistic nature of biochemical processes.
The intellectual merit lies in modeling of biomolecular networks via a
Stochastic Hybrid Systems (SHS) framework. Combining tools from control theory,
dynamical systems and random processes, the project will develop computationally
tractable methods for analyzing deterministic and stochastic dynamics of complex
biomolecular systems. These methods will improve computational efficiency of
predicting network dynamics by orders of magnitude as compared to traditionally
used Monte Carlo simulation techniques. Analysis tools will be used to explore
designs of feedback and feedforward loops in biomolecular systems that allow for
systematic manipulation of network activity, for example, controlling
fluctuations in the level of a specific protein embedded in a larger network.
Accurate methods for predicting stochastic dynamics also motivate an intriguing
inference problem of learning about the underlying network architecture from
measured joint fluctuations in the network components. Advances in single-cell
technologies enable precise quantitative measurements of protein copy numbers
inside individual cells over time. Motivated by increasing availability of such
measurements, the project will build inference methods for improved
characterization and reverse engineering of network interactions from time-
series measurements of protein levels. In terms of broader impact, the project
tools will be applied to study diverse biological pathways in close
collaborations with experimental researchers in the life sciences. These include
regulatory networks underlying several medically important systems, such as,
cell-fate regulation in the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and nongenetic
drug resistance in cancer cells. Finally, courses applying systems and control
concepts to biological networks will be developed for both students and
professionals from local industry.