* 1711807
* Elucidating the Genetic Control of Long-term Success in a Near Century Long Study of Barley (Hordeum vulgare)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Jacob Landis, Landis                  Jacob          B
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of California, Riverside and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Daniel
Koenig. Barley is the world's fourth most important grain crop, and is unusually
robust to a diversity of environmental stresses earning the moniker, the crop at
the edge of the desert. Understanding the genetic basis of crop performance in
variable environments is imperative, but long-term studies translating genotype
to phenotype are exceedingly rare. To fill this gap, the genetic basis of local
adaptation will be explored in a near century long agricultural experiment, the
barley composite cross II (CCII). The CCII was initiated in the 1920's and has
been allowed to adapt to the local conditions in Davis, CA for over 50
generations. With this unique resource, cutting edge high-throughput phenotype
and genotype characterization methods will be employed to elucidate the genetic
basis of agricultural performance. The ultimate goal of this study is to predict
successful genotypes in variable environmental conditions. Thriving during
climatic extremes will minimize potential food insecurity arising from
environmental factors.

This project will focus on the characterization of 1000 individuals drawn from
four time points in the CCII experiment to elucidate the effect of local
selective pressures on phenotype and genotype. Phenotypic data will be collected
at three resolutions: single time point measurements of whole plant and
inflorescence traits, temporal growth rate measurements using webcam monitoring,
and inflorescence 3D renderings using CT scanning. Using a combination of
genome-wide SNP discovery and ascertainment strategies, adaptive shifts in
phenotype will be linked to specific genetic changes. The results of this
project will be shared with the general public through multiple outreach
programs, increasing the understanding of how crops adapt to changing
environments.