* 1711141
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Innovation, diversification, and complexity: The impact of venom evolution on the integrated venom delivery system of snakes
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Matthew Holding, Holding                 Matthew        L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/29/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The Fellow?s research focuses on a key gap in our knowledge of
how the diversity of extant life came to be. There is a conflict between the
complex traits of organisms, such as the architecture of the head, jaws, and
teeth, and the speed at which new species appear over evolutionary time. The
major hypothesis for the rapid appearance of new species is the idea of key
innovations, which are traits that provide novel ecological opportunity to a
group of organisms. However, these traits are part of a complex organism with
other traits that may constrain the evolutionary path that is possible. The
Fellow?s work will determine if morphological constraints breakdown following
the appearance of key innovations in the venom of North and South American
snakes. The Fellow will visit several museum collections to quantify variation
in head and fang shape of pitviper species, and quantify levels of variation in
these traits to determine if changes in snake venom lead to changes in variation
and complexity in the venom delivery system, or if the opposite is true. The
Fellow will then use 3D printed fang models to determine if fang shape
contributes to the toxic actions of venom, which will help us understand
snakebite morbidity in humans. This research will train the Fellow in 1) cutting
edge research methods in the different fields of molecular evolutionary biology
and morphology, 2) mentorship of four graduate and eight undergraduate students
who will also learn new methods, and 3) developing outreach programs that bring
scientific knowledge out of the lab and to interested citizens. The research
will also preserve thousands of valuable museum specimens as digital photographs
and lead to the development of a teaching module on key innovations in snake
venom for use in the high school and college biology classroom.

The key trait approach focuses on a few traits in isolation, while most traits
are inherently complex and interdependent. This interdependence (i.e. phenotypic
integration) is manifest as sets of integrated phenotypes (i.e., modules) that
vary independently of each other. The extent of phenotypic integration and
modularity in a set of traits can, itself, evolve, but the relationship between
integration, evolutionary innovations, and biological diversity has not been
determined. This research will test the hypothesis that rapid biological
diversification is intimately linked with altered patterns of integration and
modularity in key traits in New World venomous snakes. The Fellow will achieve
the following goals: (1) quantifying the degree of association between
diversification rates and the strength and pattern of phenotypic integration in
head and fang morphology, (2) determining whether biochemical innovations in the
venom are linked to morphological divergence, and (3) using micro-CT scans and
3D printed fang models to test for the hypothesized functional relationship
between fang morphology and venom composition. The Fellow will be trained in
comparative evolutionary analyses, geometric morphometrics, micro-CT, 3D
printing, and mentoring of other young scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.