* 1711026
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Visual Adaptation to Nocturnality in Birds
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Noor White, White                   Noor
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 11/30/2021
* USD 207,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Noor White, is conducting
research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections in
innovative ways, and is being mentored by two sponsoring scientists at two host
institutions: Anand Swaroop (National Eye Institute, National Institutes of
Health) and Belinda Chang (University of Toronto). Looking at the ways in which
animals have adapted to novel or changing environments is key to understanding
the world around us. This research investigates a particularly striking
transition that some birds have undertaken the shift from a day-living (or
diurnal) to a night-living (or nocturnal) environment. Being relatively rare in
number, nocturnal birds have an advantage over diurnal birds in that there is
less competition for food and fewer predators present at night than during the
day. That advantage comes with challenges, however, and in particular the
challenge of how to see in low-light environments. By asking what changes are
present in the genes and proteins necessary for vision between diurnal and
nocturnal birds, this project will uncover how birds have developed night
vision, and adapted to a new environment. The genes and proteins involved in
vision are conserved across vertebrates, and therefore the results of this
project will be relevant to other animal groups, including humans. The data
uncovered here will help society understand how vision works, and will be
applicable and relevant to research on human vision and visual diseases, such as
colorblindness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will generate genomic and
protein (through retinal transcriptome sequencing) sequences of visual genes
from both nocturnal and diurnal birds with all lineages of nocturnal birds
represented. The functional significance of molecular adaptations will be
identified by expression of opsin proteins and direct measurement of their
spectral sensitivity. The fellow hypothesizes that the transitions to
nocturnality across the avian tree of life were independent, and thus novel
mechanisms of adaptation will be found coincident with each major transition.
This project relies on collections housed at major museums across the country,
taking advantage of the work of previous scientists to carefully collect and
curate birds from around the world. The fellow has a long history of public
outreach and is committed to sharing her work with the public at the National
Museum of Natural History in Washington, DC. Results from these studies will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific meetings.