* 1711817
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Kristin Hook, Hook                    Kristin        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The fellow,
Kristin Hook, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing
the participation of groups underrepresented in biology, and is being mentored
by Heidi Fisher at the University of Maryland (UM). The research explores the
consequences of sperm cell shape on their function. Despite sharing a common
goal to reach and fertilize an egg, sperm cells vary greatly. Rodent sperm are
particularly diverse; not only do they vary within and across species, many
feature a mysterious hook on their head, and a rare few exhibit collective
behaviors in which they form aggregations of several cells that swim together.
The significance of this variation is poorly understood. Using several species
of deer mice, the fellow is exploring the relationship between sperm shape and
their unique interactions. The research and training environment at UM is
exceptionally diverse, with underrepresented minorities (URMs) comprising one-
fourth of the student population. To broaden participation and engender an
inclusive culture in biology, the fellow is collaborating with established
university programs and local magnet schools to recruit and integrate URMs and
women into lab and field research by providing hands-on training and mentorship.
Moreover, the Fellow is sharing results of her research through (1) public talks
on her research in both English and Spanish and (2) online platforms, including
postings on her blog ("Animal Behavior Research Oddities") and Twitter.

The fellow is characterizing how subtle morphological changes (e.g., minor
differences in head shape) and extensive modifications (e.g., hook presence or
absence) influence sperm interactions and swimming performance using a
comparative, cross-species approach among species of deer mice (genus
Peromyscus). She is also examining the biological relevance of sperm aggregates
and identifying the genetic basis of the hook. The fellow is testing the
hypotheses that (1) species with shared aggregate geometries exhibit similar
sperm head geometries, (2) species with shared morphologies exhibit similar
motility, (3) sperm aggregates enhance swimming performance, and (4) species
lacking hooks do not form aggregates. Together this research advances our
understanding of the evolution of reproductive traits, the molecular forces
defining cell design, and the importance of sperm structure, which more broadly
has implications for public health in identifying the unique cellular features
contributing to sperm motility and, ultimately, male fitness.