* 1711976
* Holomorphic Curves in Embeddings and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Daniel Cristofaro-Gardiner, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 145,000.00

Systems that evolve over time are known as "dynamical systems" and appear in a
wide range of fields including biology, economics, physics, and engineering. 
The equations that describe these systems are often difficult to solve directly,
so new tools and techniques are needed to study them.  This project is centered
around a tool called "contact homology" that has produced powerful insights into
many kinds of dynamical systems in recent years.  Contact homology provides a
framework for finding features of a dynamical system that are conserved even as
the parameters of the dynamical system are allowed to vary.   In this way,
complicated systems can be studied by continuously changing the system into a
more basic form, and then using knowledge of the dynamics in this simpler state
to learn about the structure of the original system.  This project aims to
further develop the foundations of contact homology and to use it to produce new
insights about dynamics.  An example of an expected application is the discovery
of new periodic trajectories for many dynamical systems, which are
configurations of the system that re-occur infinitely often in time. An expected
educational impact is the fostering of new opportunities for research training
for undergraduates. In this area the PI plans to continue his efforts, which
have led to two publications by undergraduates in peer-reviewed journals in the
last several years.  The PI also plans to continue his commitment to reach
broader segments of the public, for example through participation in prison
education initiatives and through outreach to local high schools. In a different
direction, the PI plans to continue conversations with researchers in other
fields of science to find new collaborative opportunities. The PI will
disseminate the results of the project as broadly as possible, for example
through organizing conferences and through effective use of online
tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To elaborate on the scientific merit of the
project, previous work of the PI used a special kind of contact homology, called
embedded contact homology (ECH), to show that any vector field of Reeb type on a
closed three-manifold has at least two distinct periodic orbits.  In fact,
evidence suggests that stronger results hold, and in the current project the PI
and collaborators plan to show in many cases that a Reeb vector field with more
than two closed orbits has infinitely many.  Insights into Reeb dynamics also
come from the closely related field of symplectic embedding problems, and this
project will pursue several lines of inquiry in this direction, for example one
thread involves better understanding the number theoretic aspects of four-
dimensional embedding problems while another involves finding new obstructions
to symplectic embeddings in higher dimensions.  New combinatorial tools are
expected to be useful for these investigations, so the PI plans to continue
developing an irrational version of the classical Ehrhart theory familiar from
the theory of lattice point enumeration.  More speculative directions of the
project involve establishing new formulas for the asymptotics of the ECH
spectrum and further developing the foundations of embedded contact homology by
applying new tools for regularizing moduli spaces of pseudoholomorphic curves.