* 1711347
* Quantifying the Genome-wide Influence of Human Selection on Leaf Morphology and Amino Acid Metabolism in Cole Crops
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Sarah Turner, Turner                  Sarah          D
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of Missouri and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Timothy
Beissinger, J. Chris Pires, and Ruthie Angelovici.

Domesticated cruciferous vegetables in Brassica oleracea, commonly known as cole
crops, were selected from wild mustard to encompass a wide range of
morphological and nutritional attributes. Despite extreme physical differences
among cultivars, little is known about the extent of genetic diversity and
developmental trade-offs in cole crops. Of interest is how selection for larger
vegetative organs has influenced amino acid metabolism, which is important in
leaves for human nutritional quality and for seed germinability to ensure
continued evolution and improvement. This project uses a multi-disciplinary
approach to address fundamental questions regarding how domestication has
influenced genetic diversity and amino acid metabolism in a diversity panel of
B. oleracea. Training objectives include quantitative genetics, population
genetics, bioinformatics, and metabolomics. Broader impacts include mentoring of
students, guest lecturing, and outreach events exploring the connections between
food systems and crop domestication.

There is need to expand domestication research beyond the cereals to additional
crops with global and nutritional importance. In this project, the fellow will
study domestication and demographic history in B. oleracea by testing for
genomic signatures of selection, characterizing previous bottlenecks and
expansions, studying trade-offs in amino acid metabolism between leaves and
seeds, and identifying genomic regions of interest for these traits. This will
include the resequencing of a diversity panel of B. oleracea, network analysis
of amino acid composition in leaves and seeds, quantitative assessment of leaf
morphology, and identification of the structural variation contributing to the
observed phenotypes. All data, scripts, and methodologies produced from this
work will be deposited in open-access repositories.