* 1711359
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Evolution and Systematics of Nudibranchia
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Carla Stout, Stout                   Carla          C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Carla Stout, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing
the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow is being
mentored by Ángel Valdés at California State Polytechnic University. This
research examines the phylogenomics of nudibranchs (sea slugs) using newly
developed DNA sequencing technologies that have proven useful for other
problematic groups (e.g. fish, birds, spiders, etc.) when elucidating deep
levels of relatedness. Nudibranchs are diverse (~3000 species) in terms of body
forms, reproductive and developmental modes, feeding specializations, and
defensive mechanisms. Elucidating how these biological facets have evolved has
been difficult with the current lack of understanding of the relationships among
the species, which is crucial for identifying their evolutionary patterns. This
study will provide the first extensive collection of high-throughput sequence
data for nudibranchs, which will be made available to the public via online data
repositories. By developing a standardized sequencing kit for nudibranchs, the
fellow's research facilitates future studies of additional species by other
researchers. The fellow is mentoring students from underrepresented groups in
science through participation in the host institution's programs designed for
minority inclusion in research. These efforts will help prepare students for
careers in diverse scientific fields.

The objectives of this project include reconstruction of the relationships among
species of nudibranchs, investigation of factors promoting cladogenesis, and
establishment of the timing of major diversification events. Methods include
generation of transcriptome datasets for identification of loci well suited for
targeted enrichment, development of probes, library preparation and Illumina
sequencing, and phylogenomic analyses. The relationships established will then
inform subsequent analyses to determine the influence various factors, such as
aposematic coloration, sexual selection, and dietary specialization have had on
radiation events, character evolution, and biogeographical patterns, using
software designed to address these questions. The fellow is gaining expertise in
phylogenomics of non-model organisms and providing mentorship in molecular lab
techniques and bioinformatics to students from groups underrepresented in the
sciences.