* 1711395
* Collaborative Research:   Wideband Multi-Beam Antenna Arrays: Low-Complexity Algorithms and Analog-CMOS Implementations
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Soumyajit Mandal, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 12/31/2020
* USD 175,025.00

The Federal Communications Commission recognizes the need for the wireless
industry to explore the 28-95 GHz millimeter-wave (mm-wave) bands where wider
bandwidth is available, and future allocations may reach above 100 GHz. This
explosion of mm-wave bandwidth opens up applications in 5G wireless systems
spanning communications, localization, imaging, and radar. This project
addresses fundamental scientific and engineering challenges in generating
multiple parallel radio "beams" at mm-wave frequencies. A radio beam refers to a
directional channel that establishes point-to-point contact for wireless
communications and remote sensing. The ability to form a large number of such
radio beams with high bandwidths will tremendously improve the performance for
next-generation wireless systems. For example, multiple beams are essential for
achieving the orders-of-magnitude increases in capacity, data rate, and
geographical penetration required by the explosive growth in wireless
applications. Moreover, they are important for both transmitters and receivers.
The project will draw on an analogy between the spatial Fourier transform and a
thin optical lens to obtain multiple wideband beams. Unlike lens-antenna-based
approaches in the literature, this project will use a planar aperture antenna in
conjunction with analog integrated circuits to generate many wideband mm-wave
beams subject to power and size constraints. The proposed highly integrated
approach is attractive for mobile applications including 5G smart devices, the
internet of things, mobile robotics, and unmanned aerial vehicles, and other
emerging applications focused on mm-waves. In addition to scientific research,
the project will ensure that both minority students and female students will be
mentored towards careers in mathematics, communications, as well as microwave
circuits and systems. Educational materials will be developed for teaching array
signal processing, microwave integrated circuit (IC) design, and ultra-high-
speed analog signal processing. Principal Investigators (PIs) Madanayake and
Mandal will organize a mini-conference to enhance microwave and mm-wave research
activities at nearby universities in northeast Ohio. PI Madanayake will
collaborate with co-PIs towards mentoring underrepresented students towards
careers in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM). The proposal team
is uniquely placed to promote STEM topics spanning both electrical engineering
and mathematics domains. The project will lead to education of the wider
community on the importance of cross-disciplinary collaboration. Further, the
team will strive to show the importance of learning deeper math topics towards
success in technology and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
multi-beam array receiver is deeply difficult to realize in IC form due to the
underlying complexity of its signal flow graph. In this work, mathematical
methods based on the theories of i) sparse factorization of structured complex
matrices, and ii) approximate transforms are proposed to solve this problem. The
resulting matrices are realized with multi-GHz bandwidths using analog ICs. One
of the intellectual contributions is the development of efficient wideband
beamformers based on sparse factorizations of delay Vandermonde matrices (DVM).
This DVM algorithm solves the longstanding "beam squint" problem, i.e., the fact
that the beam direction changes with input frequency, making true wideband
operation impossible. Another is the derivation of transform matrices with
specified properties that approximate the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Such
approximate transforms are not subjected to the known computational complexity
bounds of the exact DFT, and approximate-DFT-based multi-beamformers can in fact
be efficiently implemented using current-mode analog ICs. Finally, precision
circuit design, digital calibration, built-in self-test, and other methods will
be explored for efficiently realizing the proposed multi-beamforming networks in
analog IC form.