* 1711521
* Pattern recognition for one shot control in power systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Steven Rovnyak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2022
* USD 364,159.00

This work will develop new ways of using pattern recognition for one shot
controls in power systems. One shot controls include disconnection of generation
and load and fast power changes on HVDC transmission lines. The control actions
used in this work generally reduce inter-area power flows which tends to improve
transient and steady state stability. The reduction of power flows is also
associated with the prevention of relays from tripping on overload. Many
blackouts result from cascading outages involving generators and transmission
lines tripping off-line due to protective relaying. The proposed controls
promise to make these failure modes less likely to occur. In addition to one
shot control at the transmission level, the investigators will also develop
algorithms to enable consumer appliances such as AC units to detect the loss of
a large generator nearby and turn off long enough for the Independent System
Operator (ISO) to take corrective action at the transmission level. The proposed
methods are inexpensive and easy to incorporate into smart devices because only
local measurements are used. No remote communication is required. Utilities
could provide rebates or rate discounts to motivate customers to purchase
appliances that use the proposed control schemes. All the methods developed in
this work from one shot controls at the transmission level to smart appliances
that operate autonomously will contribute to a more resilient and self-healing
electric grid. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many state variables in turbine
governors, voltage regulators and other digital controllers are subject to
maximum and minimum limits. The differential algebraic equations used for
analytical solution of power system dynamics are only valid if controller
variables do not hit their limiting values. This is one reason why accurate
prediction of power system behavior requires detailed time domain simulation.
Deriving control strategies from a large number of simulations is a big data
problem that requires pattern recognition. The proposed controls are response
based which means, for example, they do not receive information about the status
of particular breakers. Current industry practices focus on event based risk
assessment (e.g. Special Protection Scheme) assuming the operators are fully
aware of what has happened in the grid. It is challenging to develop response
based controls that are actuated quickly enough to stabilize some events. This
research will use event detection and pattern recognition prediction to actuate
response based control earlier so that the stabilizing effect is greater.
Another area of this research will contribute to self healing for a smarter
grid. The underlying scientific principle is that local modes of oscillation
have higher frequencies than inter-area modes. The derivative engineering
contribution of the work will show how a Fourier calculation can help detect
nearby loss of generation events using only local frequency measurements. The
proposed methods are novel compared to existing proposals in the literature for
under frequency load shedding. Utilities are not currently benefitting from
autonomous load shedding at the residential level as proposed here.