* 1711391
* NSF Postdoc Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Convergent evolution of biotic pollination in wind-pollinated angiosperm linages: functional and genomic exploration of a rare transition
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Elliot Gardner, Gardner                 Elliot
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Elliot Gardner, is conducting
research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections in
innovative ways, and is being mentored by two sponsoring scientists at two host
institutions: Andrew Hipp at The Morton Arboretum and Robert Raguso at Cornell
University. The fellow's research project uses field studies, DNA sequencing of
museum collections, and chemical analysis of floral scent to investigate
convergent evolution of animal pollination of plants, specifically the oak,
mulberry, and palm families. Transitions from wind to animal pollination are
considered rare but likely represent an important pattern of flowering plant
evolution. Although not closely related, these diverse plant families have all
evolved similar dense spikes of tiny flowers that use scent to attract small
insect pollinators, and these insects often use the flowers as brood sites. The
fellow's research challenges some assumptions about the evolution of animal
pollination, providing an important foundation for future studies on pollination
transitions and, more generally, convergent evolution. The project is improving
our understanding of the biology of diverse tropical trees - including important
but underutilized crops - and promoting international cooperation with
researchers in developing countries. The fellow is contributing to public
education and outreach programs, as well as research opportunities for high-
school and undergraduate students.

This project will produce a multidimensional picture of convergent transitions
from wind to insect pollination in three divergent lineages. Data from field
studies, herbarium specimens, and chemical (GC-MS) analysis of floral scent will
support ancestral state reconstructions and phylogenetic comparative analyses to
reveal patterns associated with transitions. Targeted sequencing of the entire
terpene synthase gene family - involved in floral scent production - will reveal
gene duplication and loss as well as molecular signatures of selection
associated with pollination transitions. Using herbarium specimens will enable
dense sampling within the target clades, highlighting the potential of museum
collections for targeted next-generation sequencing. The project will generate a
trait data base and genomic resources for hundreds of taxa, and clarify
phylogenetic relationships in three important clades. Results will provide
insight into a remarkable pattern of convergent evolution, and may shed light on
the emergence of biotic pollination in ancient lineages such as cycads, whose
fragrant cones resemble the convergent pattern described here. The fellow is
teaching a portion of an advanced phylogenetics course, and engaging in outreach
to the public and younger students through the host institution.