* 1711463
* Broadband microwave flow cytometry: comprehensive nanoparticle sensing and characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Pingshan Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 384,947.00

Nanoparticles are ubiquitous and have large impacts on many aspects of
everyone's daily life. Among many others, extracellular vesicles, viruses, and
prion proteins are natural nanoparticles and play essential roles in biology,
disease, and medicine. For instance, extracellular vesicles are key in cell
communication, growth and development, and can effectively mediate drug
delivery. Viruses cause severe diseases like influenza epidemic and HIV/AIDS.
Prion proteins are linked to Alzheimer's. On the other hand, numerous artificial
nanoparticles have been synthesized for many important applications including
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), cancer hyperthermia therapy, drug and gene
delivery, flexible electronics manufacturing, solar cell development, and
surface plasmon resonance sensing. Additionally, more than 1000 commercial
products are developed with nanoparticles. Thus, there is a widespread and
urgent need for convenient and accurate measurement of particle size, size
distribution, density (particles/mL), and surface charge. These parameters are
essential for any further nanoparticle exploration, such as colloidal stability,
biological behavior, and toxicity. Nevertheless, measuring these basic
parameters is very difficult due to small particle size (less than 100 nm in
diameter), significant size variation, and diverse particle origin. They require
single-particle, multi-parameter, high sensitivity and high throughput
measurement, which is not available from existing techniques such as tunable
resistive pulse sensing, advanced flow cytometry, nanoparticle tracking, dynamic
light scattering, and transmission electron microscopy. This project proposes a
novel broadband microwave flow cytometry method to address the problem. The
proposed method is expected to significantly facilitate nanoparticle efforts,
such as those mentioned above, and strongly impact the development and
advancement of nanomaterials, biology, medicine, mesoscopic physics, chemistry,
and nanoparticle products. The project also provides support and training to
graduate students as well as postdoctoral scholars in the emerging area of
nanoparticle instrumentation science and technology. It enables a female faculty
member from a predominantly undergraduate institution to participate in cutting-
edge nanoscale science research. Additionally, it offers an exciting topic to
attract high school, undergraduate, and underrepresented students to experience
and study advanced science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop
and demonstrate broadband microwave flow cytometry techniques for the detection
and comprehensive measurement of nanoparticles in a label-free and non-invasive
manner. Automated tunable interferometers together with nano-sensing structures
and nanofluidic channels will be developed to measure single nanoparticles at
multiple microwave frequencies. The targeted particle size is from 20 nm to 200
nm in diameter. The minimum detectable particle volume is about 10 times smaller
than that of tunable resistive pulse sensing, an existing technique considered
as one of the most promising nanoparticle characterization methods. Physical and
electrical models of a few nanoparticles will be established for data
interpretation and parameter extraction. Algorithms will be developed to obtain
the size, size distribution, density (particles/mL), surface charge (i.e. zeta
potential) and frequency dependent dielectric properties of nanoparticles. Such
dielectric properties are currently not available with any other technique. The
targeted throughput is 1 particle/second for a comprehensive multi-parameter
measurement and 10 particles/second for simple detection. The throughputs can be
further improved in future development. Commonly used nanoparticles (polystyrene
and magnetic iron oxide) and copolymer micelles will be used to test the
proposed techniques, and the performance will be evaluated by comparing with
light scattering measurement results.