* 1711875
* Collaborative Research: Strain Based Devices for Switches and Memory Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Vidya Madhavan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 270,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The last decade has seen tremendous
advances in the realization of new materials classes with unique properties such
as topological insulators and phase change materials. This proposal seeks to
harness the properties of these new materials classes to build a new generation
of strain-based devices. Strain control of devices is at the beginning stages
with many theoretical predictions and little experimental work. Moreover, much
of the predictions of strain induced phase transitions are yet to be tested. Our
success in creating strain and gated devices will allow us to tune bulk band
structure and transport properties into metallic and insulating regimes thereby
creating the basis for future straintronic devices. The conditions under which
we are able to realize reversible phase transitions from insulating to metallic
in topological materials will provide important information for the theoretical
understanding of these systems. Realizing, characterizing, and measuring strain
tunable systems will allow us to understand and explore strain dependent
materials properties for applications such as optical and electrical storage
devices, solid-state displays, photonic memories, plasmonic-based circuits,
optical modulators, and computing. Undergraduates, graduate students and post-
docs involved in this project will be trained on materials and instruments at
the forefront of today's research. The success of the project will enhance
research experience for women in physics. Many of the undergraduates, graduate
students and post-docs working in the PIs' labs are from under represented
groups. The PI's integrated outreach and education activities will expose
talented high school students to cutting edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The unique properties of
topological insulators, topological crystalline insulators, and transition metal
dichalcogenides, as well as their potential tunability by strain and doping make
them very attractive for future applications. Our ability to harness the
extraordinary properties of this new generation of materials however depends
heavily on our ability to manipulate their electronic properties. While a whole
host of potential devices have been proposed, very few have been realized so
far. This collaborative research project describes the PIs plans to investigate
different avenues to use strain to control Dirac surfaces states and phase
change materials. To achieve this, the PIs will combine their considerable
expertise in these materials classes with advanced measurement techniques. The
success of the project hinges on a tight feedback loop between molecular beam
epitaxy thin film growth, characterization using low temperature scanning
tunneling microscopy, and spin and charge transport measurements. Thin films of
3D topological insulators, topological crystalline insulators and phase change
materials will be grown characterized with a range of probes including scanning
tunneling microscopy, X-ray scattering and atomic force microscopy. Strain
devices for transport measurements will be made using both thin films as well as
exfoliated flakes. The goal is to create materials with specific properties
tailored for device applications through reduced dimensionality and strain.