* 1711968
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: An Empirical Approach to Understanding Extinction by Direct Incorporation of Fossil and Sub-fossil Morphological and Molecular Data
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Janet Buckner, Buckner                 Janet          C
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Janet Buckner, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing
the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow is being
mentored by two sponsoring scientists at two host institutions: Tracy Heath
(Iowa State University) and Courtney Hofman (University of Oklahoma). The goal
of the fellow's research is to reveal the relationships among the nearly 180
species of living waterfowl (ducks, geese and swans) by sequencing and comparing
their DNA. Human-waterfowl interactions (i.e., hunting, domestication) have
garnered much interest in the conservation of these species and their habitats,
which provide important ecosystem services. Thus, a comprehensive understanding
of waterfowl biology and their role in wetland ecosystems would aid the
conservation and management efforts of biologists and lay people. Additionally,
their diverse behaviors, physical characteristics, and global distribution make
waterfowl a promising model group for understanding animal evolution. The fellow
is working to improve methods for estimating the rate of origination and
extinction in this bird group by including fossil DNA in the genetic comparison.
Such improved methods have the potential to improve the overall understanding of
how evolution occurs over time and to identify particularly vulnerable species
by directly measuring recent rates of extinction. Finally, the fellow is
building online platforms dedicated to mentoring, promotion and inclusion of
underrepresented students and professionals in the biological sciences. This
initiative is vital to science and society because it allows for the recognition
and fostering of promising biologists from minority groups that might otherwise
be overlooked due to a lack of opportunity, support and/or information.

This research is extending the statistical framework of recent phylogenetic
methods to produce improved estimates of extinction rates from molecular
phylogenies. The fellow is (1) producing the most robust, taxonomically complete
phylogeny of waterfowl using morphological and molecular data in a total-
evidence dating approach; (2) extracting DNA from up to 30 species of recently
extinct waterfowl available from museum collections, and (3) restructuring the
fossilized birth-death model developed by sponsoring scientist Heath, to deal
with newly incorporated fossil molecular sequence data. The fellow is being
trained in the development of phylogenetic methods and statistical models under
Bayesian inference and in the most recent ancient DNA sequencing protocols and
technologies. The fellow is also actively engaged in outreach programs at the
host institutions (e.g. SACNAS), particularly engaging undergraduate students in
the research and networking initiatives described above.