* 1711842
* Marine Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) Targeting Transfer Students as a Means for Building a Science Learning Community.
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Hui-Min Chung, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 06/30/2022
* USD 278,880.00

Today more than 50% of STEM students will attend more than one higher education
institution to complete a bachelor's degree. Many of these students are transfer
students who attend a 2-year community college and later transfer to a 4-year
institution. Unfortunately, many transfer students fail to complete a bachelor's
degree. A major reason for this phenomenon is that transfer students often face
challenges that negatively affect their academic success, and ultimately their
retention and graduation in a STEM major. Programs that increase the success of
transfer students can significantly increase the STEM graduation rate, which
will help meet the national goal of increasing the diversity and size of the
STEM workforce. Participation in scientific research experiences involving real-
world problems supports student success, increasing student retention and
graduation rates. This project provides undergraduate research experiences to
transfer students both during a summer bridge program and the academic year.
These experiences will help establish a diverse and sustainable research
community that will better support and prepare all undergraduates for STEM
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take place at the University
of West Florida (UWF), a medium-sized regional state university with a high
percentage of transfer students. The central goal of this project is to
establish a multi-faceted course-based undergraduate research (CURE) community
centered on the novel genetics and cell biology of the local coquina clam Donax
variabilis. This project will also address specific challenges to the academic
success of transfer students, engage faculty with research and enhance their
pedagogical skill, and develop strategies for institutional transformation and
sustainability. The central project activities will: 1) develop and enhance
student research and laboratory skills, and 2) engage incoming transfer students
and faculty through a summer bridge program that incorporates peer mentoring and
a CURE training workshop series for faculty based on the coquina research
project. The project will contribute to a better understanding of the biology of
the coquina clam. In addition, the project will contribute to education research
on factors that influence the success of transfer students in higher education
and generate best practices that other institutions might implement. The project
will improve understanding of current challenges encountered by transfer
students that impact their success in biology, the effect of the CURE experience
and bridge program on transfer students' sense of belonging and their scientific
literacy and skill, and 3) best practices for implementing a CURE in a biology
class and engaging faculty for institutional transformation. Findings will be
communicated through a UWF Coquina CURE web page that will incorporate content
created by both students and faculty to share curriculum materials. Research
results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations. This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part
of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).