* 1711859
* A Seamless Integration of Communications, Networks, Distributed and Hierarchical Control for Reliable Conversion of Ocean Wave Energy to Electricity
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mario Magana, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 410,000.00

Solar radiation produces wind which, when it blows over the ocean surface,
generates waves. These waves can travel very long distances with little energy
loss. Most importantly, these waves are a source of clean energy readily
available for harvesting using appropriate wave energy converters such as
oscillating water column converters. Currently, most ocean wave energy
conversion projects deal with design, development and testing of single wave
energy converters. This research project proposes a vision of a large-scale wave
energy conversion park which is capable of generating the electrical power of a
large power generating plant. To achieve this goal, a wave energy converter park
can be designed as a large intelligent system with intra wave energy converters
communication, supervisory global control, and active local control to maximize
clean electrical energy generation. The main benefit from the application of the
ideas herein proposed is a significant increase in year-round electricity
productivity. In fact, it can be shown that hydrodynamic active control as
proposed in this research project could increase annual energy conversion
productivity by a factor in the range of 1.5 to 2.8.

Most wave energy converters absorb energy by means of an oscillatory motion that
makes waves which constructively and/or destructively interfere with the
incoming waves. A wave energy converter with fixed geometry and mass possesses a
natural period, and it is known that the energy absorption from the sea is
largest when the natural period agrees with the wave period, namely at
resonance. When this is not the case, a passive wave energy converter has a
natural response that is not optimal. This means that there is a possible motion
other than the natural one that would absorb more energy. Specifically, in terms
of sinusoidal waves and oscillations, there exist optimal values of phase and
amplitude of the natural response which could be matched by the wave energy
converter using optimal control. Hence, an optimal active control of the primary
conversion system can be devised so that the electricity production can be
maximized. In essence, what active control can do is to use the machinery in a
purposeful way to change the dynamical resistance and mechanical reactance felt
by the waves when they act upon the wave energy converter. Therefore, the
proposed research will develop new active control techniques which will modify
the motion of a wave energy converter closer to one or both of these parameters
using both local and global wave climate information gathered by a network of
sensors deployed on the wave energy park and other sources such as National Data
Buoy Center.