* 1711631
* Optically-Controlled Waveguide Architectures for Advanced Tunable and Reconfigurable THz Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Patrick Fay, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

This project will investigate and develop a simple and powerful approach for
efficiently generating advanced tunable and reconfigurable terahertz (THz)
components based on novel waveguide architectures. These advancements will
provide the building blocks needed to implement reconfigurable and high-
performance sensing and communication systems that will provide much larger
bandwidths than current microwave and millimeter-wave systems. This is an
important technological area with a wide range of applications that will
generate significant benefit to the society. High-performance variable THz
modulators and attenuators based on rectangular waveguide configuration can be
applied to radio astronomy, scientific instrumentation, and metrology. Tunable
THz filters using programmable electromagnetic bandgap structures will enable
spectroscopic sensing and imaging for enhancing defense and security screening
(e.g., substance identification and detection), chemical and biological sensing,
and disease or cancer diagnostics. More advanced reconfigurable THz circuits
generated using photo-induced substrate-integrated waveguides will find
applications in adaptive ultra-high-speed wireless communications. By using the
proposed techniques, virtual circuit patterns that can be dynamically
reconfigured will be implemented without complex circuit fabrication and device
integration processes, leading to tunable and reconfigurable THz circuits that
could not be realized using conventional approaches. The project also provides
significant educational opportunities for students. The graduate students in
this program will be exposed to the full scope of semiconductor physics,
electromagnetic wave propagation, microwave engineering, advanced THz system
design and testing process, from single device to the circuit/component/system
level. Undergraduate students will be involved through summer and honors thesis
research. The PIs will advise and mentor students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to explore three
optically-controlled waveguide architectures including 1) optically-controlled
rectangular waveguide modulator, 2) photo-induced electromagnetic bandgap
structure, and 3) photo-induced substrate-integrated waveguide. The interaction
between the propagating THz mode in the waveguide or transmission line sections
and the photo-induced patterns (formed by spatially-modulated optical generation
of electron-hole pairs) on the semiconductor substrate allows dynamically
tunable and reconfigurable functions with high performance to be realized
efficiently. The tunability and reconfigurability is realized by illuminating
virtual circuit patterns on mesa- or pillar-array structures using a digital
micromirror device chip without the use of pre-patterned circuits and devices.
The mesa- or pillar-array structures employed will significantly improve the
performance including higher conductivity, higher spatial resolution, and higher
control speed, making it possible to dynamically generate reconfigurable THz
components. The three proposed architectures represent increasing levels of
tunability and reconfigurability. In particular, the photo-induced substrate-
integrated waveguide architecture could potentially provide nearly unlimited
possibilities for realizing real-time programmable passive THz components with
multiple functionalities. The project will involve semiconductor physics,
transmission line theories, THz science and technology, high frequency testing
and characterization to implement and demonstrate the proposed novel approach
and three waveguide architectures. If successful, the project will greatly
advance the knowledge to demonstrate tunable/reconfigurable waveguide-based
passive components and potentially produce a paradigm shift on how tunable and
reconfigurable THz circuits will be realized in future THz systems.