* 1711449
* Smart Partitioning Based Large-Scale Power System Analysis on High-Performance Computing Platform: Modeling, Algorithms, and Computations
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Yong Fu, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 323,007.00

With the ongoing integration of renewable energy, distributed generation, energy
storage, smart loads, and new market-driven incentives, today's power system is
undergoing an evolutionary transformation towards a more stochastic and dynamic
paradigm for power system operation. In order to handle the ever-growing size,
complexity, and heterogeneity of the mathematical problems resulting from power
system expansion and evolution, and to conduct rapid and accurate power system
analyses especially with the aid of advanced computing techniques, the project
team envisions a new concept of "Smart Partitioning" as an innovative
decomposition method to enhance the analysis of large-scale and complex power
systems by leveraging a high performance parallel computing platform. The
research will systematically explore this novel domain decomposition concept in
terms of problem modeling, solution algorithms and computational implementation
to transform how steady state and dynamic large-scale power system analyses are
efficiently performed on a high performance parallel computing platform. The
research will help expedite the proliferation of applications based on the high-
performance parallel computing platform to enhance the economics, reliability
and stability of electric power systems and accelerate the development and
deployment of other smart grid technologies. As an integral part of this
project, the educational plan focuses on power system applications on high-
performance parallel computing technology and emphasizes how the knowledge and
results gained from the research can be directly channeled into the project's
education goals via standard academic means, stimulate students' interest in
large-scale power system studies, and empower industry engineers with skills for
life-long learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed smart partitioning based
decomposition method could revolutionize power system analysis by constructing a
virtual domain based, flexible, scalable, and efficient partitioning structure,
and utilizing parallel optimization science and parallel computing techniques to
tame the size and computational difficulty of large-scale power system analysis
problems. The proposed power system decomposition will no longer need to be
formulated around one particular domain like functions, scenarios, geographical
areas or time. Instead, it can be made based on one or a set of virtual domains
to fully exploit the inherent structures, physical coherency, component
characteristics and unique properties of the power system. The proposed smart
partition strategies have distinct and unique attributes that are consistent
with the objectives of modern power system analysis, including flexibility and
extensibility of the modeling, scalability and parallelism of the algorithms,
and efficiency and usability of the computations. The key research tasks include
(1) developing virtual domain decomposition based flexible modeling for both
steady state and dynamic analyses of the power system composed of heterogeneous
types of power production and delivery elements; (2) exploring scalable and
effective parallel computing algorithms that process the proposed power system
studies in a fully parallel manner and optimize the information interactions
among calculation tasks; and (3) implementing efficient and rapid high-
performance parallel computations that optimally map the computation tasks to
processors and balance the arrangement of tasks.