* 1711680
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: The Evolution of Metamorphosis in Scyphozoan Jellyfish
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Helm, Helm                    Rebecca        R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The fellow,
Rebecca Helm, is conducting research and receiving training that is increasing
the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow is being
mentored by two sponsoring scientists at two host institutions: Ann Tarrant
(Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution), and Allen Collins (Smithsonian
Institution). The fellow's research examines animal evolution and development,
using jellyfish as a model system. Many animal species that change shape during
development ('metamorphose') are economically important to humans, including
jellyfish, which impact power plants, fisheries, tourism, and human health. For
example, blooms of jellyfish can make coastal waters unsuitable for swimmers,
and compete for food resources with economically important fish. For most of
their lives, 'true jellyfish' (scyphozoans) look nothing like our image of a
typical jellyfish. Scyphozoans are found year-round as 'polyps,' which look more
like small sea anemones. When seasonal conditions are favorable, these polyps
develop into many small juvenile jellyfish, with a shape more like a 'typical'
jellyfish. The fellow is studying the environmental and chemical factors that
trigger jellyfish to change shape, and the genes associated with these triggers.
The goal of this research is to provide insights into the cellular mechanisms of
jellyfish production as well as potential genetic tools for predicting jellyfish
blooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand scyphozoan metamorphosis, the fellow
is using diverse methods, including pharmacological, histological, sequencing,
and functional techniques. The fellow is using pharmacological agents to trigger
or inhibit jellyfish metamorphosis and then identifying genes associated with
these responses. Furthermore, the fellow is using functional molecular
techniques to test the role of different genes in metamorphosis across different
species. The resulting research will provide critical insights in the cellular
mechanisms of jellyfish metamorphosis and the role that different compounds,
including potential pollutants, may play in this process. In addition to
providing the fellow with training in scientific techniques, the fellow is
training and mentoring high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in STEM. The fellow is receiving mentorship training,
and mentoring an undergraduate research student from an underrepresented group
in STEM through the Woods Hole Partnership Education Program. The fellow is also
collaborating with a middle school educator to lead a marine biology student
group project related to the fellowship research. This project will be part of a
middle school oceanography club, composed of 61% female students, 23% Hispanic
students, and 24% Native American students, in the fellow?s hometown of
Flagstaff, Arizona. Combined, these efforts provide students with an opportunity
to access and participate in real science as it happens.