* 1711980
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Ecology and biomechanics of insect-plant interactions in wind
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Nicholas Burnett, Burnett                 Nicholas       P
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Nicholas Burnett, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Stacey Combes at the University of California-Davis. The
fellow's research investigates how wind can affect the interactions between
plants and insects. Wind is a common occurrence for plants in many habitats, and
many insects are subjected to the movements of those plants in wind, including
insect that are important pollinators of plants or pests that destroy
agricultural crops. However, little is known about how plant motion in wind
affects insects. Conversely, little is known about how insects can affect plant
motion in wind. The fellow is conducting experiments in laboratories and in
nature to measure how insect behavior, ecology, and flight performance are
affected by plant motion in wind, and how insects, by feeding on plants, can
affect plant motion in wind. Understanding these aspects of plant-insect
interactions in wind can help scientists predict how both plants and insects
will be affected by wind, including future changes in the intensity or frequency
of wind storms.

The fellow is evaluating the effects of wind on plant-insect interactions with
the following experimental approaches: (1) measuring how an agriculturally
important pollinator flies in natural plant canopies that are moving under the
force of wind, (2) measuring how plant movement in wind is affected by
herbivory, pollination, and fruit development, and (3) measuring how a moving
plant canopy in wind affects the ability of a flying predator to detect, track,
and capture flying prey (herbivores). The fellow is receiving interdisciplinary
training in a study system that draws on concepts from physics, engineering,
ecology, and entomology. To increase participation of under-represented groups
in biology, the fellow is working with established undergraduate research
programs at the University of California-Davis, and is recruiting students from
under-represented groups to take part in the research. Additionally, the fellow
is organizing and hosting technical workshops to teach interdisciplinary skills
to students from under-represented groups in biology. These hands-on experiences
build the confidence of the students and benefit their study of biology. Lastly,
the fellow is implementing a peer mentoring system for postdoctoral researchers
from under-represented groups at a national conference to improve those
researchers' professional and emotional experiences as biologists, thereby
improving the retention of scientists from under-represented groups in biology.