* 1711030
* Monolithically Integrated  High-Power GaN Devices and Si CMOS Circuits for High Frequency and High Power Converter
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Shadi Dayeh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2020
* USD 387,000.00

Approaches to integrate high efficiency and high frequency switches with control
electronics can substantially reduce losses in power conversion and accelerate
the development of compact, light-weight high performance power modules for
electric vehicles, motor drive, photovoltaics, power factor correctors, and
uninterruptible power supplies. The Gallium Nitride (GaN) material has recently
demonstrated exceptional performance as a high-power switch on the individual
device level but the overall power converter performance, size, and cost are
compromised when these individual devices are assembled to printed circuit
boards that contain the control circuitry and magnetics. Novel integration
approaches that combine innovations at all levels of material, device, and
packaging of power electronic devices are necessary. Building on a recent
development in our laboratory for the successful growth of thick (that is
suitable for high-power) GaN layers on Si, this project aims to monolithically
integrate the Si gate driver circuits alongside the high power GaN devices and
demonstrate co-functionality in a compact high power system. The physics and
materials science of this system along with the research results will be
integrated into the curriculum of compound semiconductor devices, power and
energy classes at UC San Diego. The research will also be conducted with a
variety of educational, mentoring, and outreach activities that will involve and
recruit underrepresented and minority students. If successful, the integrated
devices proposed in this project will substantially increase energy savings and
reduce its costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the epitaxy
techniques for the growth of thick crack-free GaN material on Si, the
fabrication of vertical GaN switches, and their co-integration with Si drive
electronics to demonstrate a monolithic high performance power converter. The
epitaxy technique will result in thick GaN layers that are of high quality with
low dislocation densities and low background doping in order to sustain high
breakdown voltages, and the approach will utilize a few high temperature
processes in order to co-integrate Si drive circuits near the GaN devices (power
diodes and switches). Power converters will be assembled by implementing the
developed monolithic high-power integrated circuit and its performance at high
frequency with high output power and efficiency will be evaluated. The developed
processes will have the potential to significantly advance the fundamental
electronic materials research in power devices and their efficient system level
integration.