* 1711446
* Ultra-Wide Bandwidth and High Resolution Photonic Analog to Digital and Digital to Analog Converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Nadir Dagli, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 05/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Title: Ultra-Wide Bandwidth and High Resolution Photonic Analog to Digital and
Digital to Analog
Converters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: In today's
technology driven world digital electronics and digital systems are ubiquitous.
Their hardware and software are the essence of everything that touches our lives
many times a day. Real life systems generate analog signals which need to be
converted into digital form before they can be handled by digital technology.
This is done using an Analog to Digital Converter (ADC). Almost all the existing
ADCs are electronic. There are many types of ADCs with different resolution and
speed. As the resolution of an ADC increases its fidelity improves
significantly. Although electronic ADCs provide very high resolution they do not
operate very fast. This proposal aims to develop a high speed ADC photonics
technology which operates without sacrificing resolution. The same technology is
used in fiber optic communication systems, is well understood and its parts are
commercially available. However, a few special components need to be developed
before the entire ADC can be demonstrated. This project will develop and
fabricate such components and demonstrate a proof of concept operation of the
ADC. Such high resolution and fast ADC will improve many applications, such as
instrumentation, radar, optical fiber communication and wide bandwidth signal
distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This proposal introduces a new
and novel approach for a photonic ADC that can deliver eight bits of resolution
at bandwidths of 20 GHz and higher. The proposed basic ADC resembles very much
to a wavelength division multiplexed (WDM) fiber optic digital link without the
fiber. It consists of a multi wavelength source, a quantizer, a sampler, a
demultiplexer and receivers. The quantizer is a high-speed Mach-Zehnder
modulator (MZM) with an intentional path length difference between its arms. The
sampling is done after the quantizer. The sampled outputs at different
wavelengths generate a code corresponding to the digitized version of the analog
signal applied to the quantizer. This basic idea is improved upon using a
subranging approach to improve the number of bits while reducing the component
count. This requires a digital to analog converter (DAC), which can be made out
of a single MZM. The practical operation of such an ADC requires low-voltage and
high-speed MZM for quantizer and DAC. The required ultra-low jitter sampling can
also be performed using such MZMs. The focus of this proposal is to develop
these critical components, namely the quantizer, DAC and the sampler, and make a
proof of concept demonstration of a scaled down version of the ADC.