* 1711699
* A Fast-Response Odor Detector for Food Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Inyoung Kim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 329,999.00

Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) constitute a large group of organic chemicals
that evaporate easily under normal conditions of temperature and pressure. VOCs
are emitted in the atmosphere from a wide variety of natural and anthropogenic
sources. The characterization and monitoring of VOCs emitted from different
sources is immensely important ranging from biomedical diagnostics, homeland
security, food safety and quality to environmental protection. The proposal
seeks to develop a new on-site real-time odor sensor based on the principle of
electronic noses. The outcome of this proposed research will have a significant
impact on reducing the cost, increasing the portability, and increasing the
analysis speed and resolution of current VOC detection methodologies. The
proposed device will be developed by combining microtechnology, chemistry, and
statistics and will be validated for high resolution detection of food
adulteration which is a serious and widespread global issue. The research while
advancing science and technology for a societal need, will provide invaluable
experience for students as they will be trained to work in an interdisciplinary
environment. Furthermore, the outreach activities will educate pre-college
students how advanced science and engineering can be merged to solve real,
current problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is
to develop rapid odor detector implemented by merging the significant concepts
in electronic noses and fast gas chromatography (GC) into a small footprint. The
focus of this system is the uniquely designed chromatographic chip with multiple
capillaries working in parallel. The chip will be fabricated in silicon using
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology and will be functionalized
using ionic liquids. The major processing steps include deep reactive ion
etching followed by silicon-glass anodic bonding. The proposed chromatographic
chip will be interfaced with a detector or multiple detectors to generate a
rapid odor-print of the sample. The output will be an array of chromatographic
responses which will be analyzed using advanced multivariate statistical and
pattern recognition algorithms to determine if the food sample has been
adulterated. The statistical method can simultaneously perform a variable
selection in nonadditive multivariate nonparametric model for analyzing the
large data generated by the chip. Olive oil and honey which have been the target
of adulteration will be used to validate the technology. It is expected that the
new odor detector will achieve a total analysis time of less than a minute which
is orders of magnitude faster and more economical when compared to established
techniques such as gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS).