* 1711919
* RET Site:  SECURE:  Secure Teacher Education on Cybersecurity by Utilizing Research Experiences
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Mark Weichold, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site
focused on cybersecurity research at Texas A&amp;M University. Cohorts of high
school teachers and community college faculty in the areas of Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) will participate in summer
research projects with Texas A&amp;M faculty mentors who are actively involved
in leading-edge research on cybersecurity. The participating teachers will
translate their research experiences and knowledge into classroom practice by
developing instructional modules and course materials that they will introduce
in their classrooms and share with others. These activities all contribute to
the formation of a community of practice between Texas A&amp;M faculty and local
educators that has the potential to significantly enhance and improve STEM
education in the school districts around the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RET participants will attend a 6-week summer
institute to participate in cutting-edge research projects with mentoring from
computer science faculty who lead cybersecurity research programs. The RET Site
research topics focus on software, network security, cryptography, and malware.
These are all topics that are of current interest and important to our nation.
The RET Site project will provide a platform for the participating teachers to
develop effect practical problem-based instructional materials and laboratory
modules that they will share with teachers in their school districts as well as
teachers from across the state of Texas. The excitement of learning about
cybersecurity can inspire the K-12 and community college students to pursue
further computing education and related careers. The SECURE program will
strengthen ongoing partnerships between Texas A&amp;M University and the
surrounding schools and lay the foundation for quality computing education in
the schools and provide for the future computing workforce needs of the
community.