* 1711268
* Thermal Homeostasis using Nanophotonic Phase-Change Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Michelle Povinelli, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2021
* USD 375,000.00

Title: Thermal Self-Regulation using Nanoscale Photonic Phase-Change
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: Humans, mammals, and
birds are able to maintain their body temperatures at a constant value.
Engineered materials that could regulate their own temperature, or maintain
thermal homeostasis, would lead to transformative advances in energy savings and
thermal control. The objective of this work is to use nanostructured, phase-
change materials to achieve this goal. Educational activities integrated into
the research will train undergraduate and graduate students in a range of skills
useful for careers in science and engineering. The students will gain hands-on
experience with computer simulation, microfabrication, and measurement. These
skills will be useful for R&amp;D careers in either industry or academia. Public
outreach activities project will build understanding and appreciation of
research careers among the general public. Photo-documentary techniques will be
used to show the practice of lab research, including the work of women and
minority researchers. The outreach program will be scaled up through an
interactive workshop in which high school, undergraduate and graduate
researchers will launch their own photo-documentary platforms for social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The proposed work will
explore the limits of thermal homeostasis via control over light absorption and
thermal emission. Phase-change materials such as vanadium dioxide have optical
properties that change dramatically at their phase transition temperature.
Moreover, nano-photonic materials such as photonic crystals and metamaterials
allow fine control over the thermal emission properties. This raises the
possibility of designing materials whose absorption and emission spectra that
self-adjust with temperature to minimize the temperature variation that they
experience due to a changing heat load. Our technical approach will encompass
fundamental theory, materials design, and experiment. We will use analytical
models to understand the fundamental limits on passive temperature self-
regulation in materials with engineered thermal radiation profiles. We will then
use accurate electromagnetic models to design nanostructured materials with the
desired thermal radiation profiles. We will make these novel materials using
nanofabrication methods and test their radiative/emission properties
experimentally. We will then test the material's ability to self-regulate their
temperature. The outcome of this research will be an improved understanding of
materials design for environments with varying heat loads. It will thus apply to
a range of application areas, including electronics, building thermal
management, and space-based systems. The scientific knowledge we gain will
potentially lead to new methods for materials design and manufacturing.