* 1711004
* Retrofit Control: A New, Modular Gyrator Control Approach for Integrating Large-Scale Renewable Power
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Alexandra Duel-Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2023
* USD 323,873.00

This 3-year NSF project advocates a power distribution system with ultra-high
wind and photovoltaic penetration, whose operation and management are enabled by
a smart device called the Solid-State Transformer (SST). The SST is a power
electronics-based controllable transformer wherein communications and
intelligence can be easily integrated for demand-side management. The bi-
directional power flow capability of the SST can feed locally generated power
back to the grid in a controlled way, which makes it a tailor-made choice for
integrating large-scale wind and solar generation. As renewable installations
continue to grow in the United States, multitudes of SSTs will need to be
installed as well. This will necessitate advanced, complex and cross-coupled
control algorithms spanning hundreds to thousands of SSTs. Our goal in this
project is to study different variants of such SST-enabled control applications
that can enable renewable integration in a smooth and stable way. We will
particularly address two problems, namely, frequency control and voltage
control, based on the fundamental question on "how to choose controller set-
points for every SST in a distribution grid to ensure stable operation despite
high variability in wind and solar generation". Currently, there is no well-
defined control algorithm that addresses this question considering the physical
constraints from the generation side. Our controllers will respond in real-time
to any change in generation and loads, and automatically recalculate the set-
points for every SST using a new control approach called retrofit control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project will be
in developing control designs for next-generation power grids, centered on new
power electronic converter technologies. Advanced ideas of bifurcation analyses,
nonlinear control, moving equilibria systems, and hierarchical control will be
applied. The broader impact will be in bringing together three traditionally
distinct research communities - control systems, power systems, and power
electronics - to join forces, and resolve emerging issues on stability and
dynamics in face of high renewable penetration. Research results will be
broadcast through publications, undergraduate and graduate education, and
conference tutorials. International collaboration will be fostered through a US-
Japan research initiative between NC State University and Tokyo Institute of
Technology.