* 1711432
* Ensuring Resilient Operation of the Future Power System with High Levels of Renewables using Switched Mode Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Kevin Tomsovic, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 04/30/2021
* USD 358,152.00

In recent years, electric power systems have seen a rapid introduction of both
new types of generation and loads. Many of these new components interface to the
grid through power electronic converters that are controlled by embedded digital
signal processors. Such converters have a very different behavior than the
electromechanical machines and passive devices that have been predominant in the
traditional grid. Power electronic interfaced devices have greater overall
controllability because of their fast regulating time and the flexible
programming of digital signal processors. Depending on the program settings,
they can operate under a variety of different dynamic modes. Moreover, a variety
of new complex hybrid dynamics have arisen in the power grid whose mechanisms
are poorly understood. This proposal seeks to analyze these new dynamics and
provide engineering design guidelines that can provide system-wide performance
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to a rapid increase of power electronic
converters interfaced renewable resources and loads interconnected with the more
traditional devices in the power grid, new complex hybrid dynamics have arisen.
In this project, a set-theoretic framework is introduced and a feature set
concept is proposed to explain switching behavior, label discrete events and
synthesize modes for modern power systems. Under this principle, a passivity-
based barrier certificate framework is formulated as a mathematical program to
compute the feature sets of corresponding modes such that the supervisory level
synthesis can be established. Moreover by taking advantage of converter
controllability, a control Lyapunov-barrier function is employed to design a
supplementary control to reduce the conservatism of traditional feedback
controllers, enlarge the feature sets and provide system-wide performance
guarantees. The mode synthesis and control objective is to ensure states operate
within a safe range, i.e., within operational constraints. The main research
tasks include: (a) establishing the proper mathematical foundation to estimate
safe regions with desired properties, namely, estimate the errors and algorithm
convergence; (b) design property-preserving feedback controllers to meet system
requirements; (c) integrate designed controllers and existing controllers with
nonlinearities (primarily, deadband and saturation) to form a comprehensive
hybrid closed-loop system design; (d) synthesize multiple modes among different
sources under a centralized, decentralized or distributed structure for a
connected network; and (e) address scalability issues through alternative
program realization of positivity certificates required in the framework of
finite and discrete approximations of infinite dimensional continuous space and
model reductions.