* 1711260
* Collaborative Research: Assessing "Systems Thinking" Skills and Learning in Interdisciplinary STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Steven Gray, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 11/30/2020
* USD 182,698.00

This is a collaborative project involving investigators from Michigan State
University (Award DUE-1711260), the American Museum of Natural History (Award
DUE-1711411), and Rutgers University-New Brunswick (Award DUE-1712034).
Understanding complex interdisciplinary issues such as large-scale ecosystem
change, food security, and the decline in global fisheries requires that the
next generation of scientists develop Systems Thinking (ST) skills that will
allow them to understand the structure and function of coupled human and natural
systems and identify the leverage points for addressing problems most
effectively and efficiently. Students who are able to think deeply about the
complex dynamics of a system are better prepared to predict the system's
behavior, engineer more favorable outcomes, and evaluate the trade-offs between
different policy and management decisions. However, even though ST skills are
often the foundation of sustainability science curricula at universities
nationwide, few resources are available for instructors to promote and assess ST
skills in their classrooms. In this project, the investigators will test a
method for teaching, assessing, and improving ST skills in STEM classrooms using
cognitive mapping software called Mental Modeler
(http://www.mentalmodeler.org/), which allows students to represent their
understanding of a problem through easy-to-use system-modeling tools and to
rearrange components of the problem to analyze scenarios and revise their
understanding. This approach will be tested in several environmental science,
environmental studies, and sustainability-related courses focusing on problems
related to food systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous NSF-funded
research, this project will (1) produce tools and modules that support and
measure ST learning in integrated STEM disciplines and (2) further develop and
test the Mental Modeler software for visualizing complex systems. Mental Modeler
is a multidimensional visualization and modeling software platform that allows
users to identify the structure, function, and leverage points of a system and
to run system-level scenario analyses. The software will help educators
determine aspects of ST assessment that are applicable across STEM fields and
measure students' ST learning over time. Specifically, the project will address
three questions: (1) What are the standardized ST assessment dimensions that are
applicable across STEM fields? (2) Can students' ST learning progressions be
measured over time through structural network metrics, functional scenario
analyses, and qualitative descriptions defined within semi-quantitative
cognitive maps (a) within a specific course and (b) across courses in a
curriculum? (3) Are there predictable student learning trajectories or
progressions with regard to ST?