* 1711118
* Quantum Magnetometers for Rapid Identification of Resonance Frequencies in Explosives, Pharmaceuticals, and Other Substances
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Karen Sauer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2023
* USD 377,784.00

Crystalline solids, such as explosives and pharmaceuticals, have intrinsic
resonances that provide a unique radio-frequency fingerprint for the material.
Simply exciting the sample with a magnetic wave at its resonance frequency,
yields a signal. However, weak signal strength and months-long searches for
resonances in unstudied materials prevent ready adoption of this inexpensive and
simple technique, known as nuclear quadrupole resonance. Quantum magnetometers,
with sensitivities better than standard coil detectors, help with the former
problem, but will, with this project, be developed to increase the search speed,
potentially five orders of magnitude faster than the conventional method.
Despite the difficulty of discovering new resonance lines, researchers have
pursued the use of quadrupole resonance for substance detection in a few
applications of critical importance for security and society; in particular, the
detection of explosives and the identification of counterfeit from real medicine
at checkpoints. The adoption of quadrupole resonance for checkpoint and
standards applications would greatly expand if resonance lines could be quickly
identified for new materials. In addition to national security benefits, the
project will improve science, technology, engineering and mathematics education
within George Mason by forging strong ties between the Electrical Engineering
and Physics Departments through revitalized laboratory courses. Furthermore, by
creating undergraduate internship projects focused on K-12 educational
experiences, fledgling science teachers will be nurtured and seeds of a diverse
and competitive technology and engineering workforce will be
planted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic magnetometers are fundamentally different
sensors than coils. The use of optically aligned atoms as the detection medium
and optical read-out of the sensor with a laser gives a better detection
sensitivity than coils; noise in the magnetometer is fundamentally limited by
quantum fluctuations. Moreover, the operating frequency of the magnetometer can
easily be changed to match the frequency of the excitation with a small static
magnetic field. In light of these advantages, the excitation frequency can be
swept continuously, as opposed to pulsed excitation at a single operating
frequency, obviating the need for a point by point search. With pulsed
excitation the material must return to an equilibrium condition before another
signal is acquired; often long wait times are required between data
acquisitions. However by sweeping up through higher frequencies, then back down
to the original frequency, the material is automatically returned to
equilibrium. In this way, the long wait times that compromise the effectiveness
of standard pulse techniques is avoided. As part of the project, the following
goals will be met: &lt;br/&gt;1) Magnetometer cells with an active volume of 2
cm3 will be designed and constructed. The resulting magnetometer will have sub-
femtoTesla sensitivity. The small volume is critical for the practical
implementation of the resonance search with a limited quantity of
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Continuously tuning the magnetometer to a
changing frequency will not alter its sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) The
sensitivity of the magnetometer can be retained while resonant excitation on the
order of a 100 micro Tesla is applied to a sample a couple centimeters away.
Coil geometry and common mode rejection schemes using a second magnetometer will
be employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) If the above three goals are achieved, the
search speed for resonance frequencies can be improved by as much as five orders
of magnitude over conventional techniques.