* 1711546
* Smart Heat: Aggregating renewable-electric-heating-thermal-storage systems for grid services
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ke Zhang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 07/31/2021
* USD 354,000.00

The overall objective of our study is to test the hypothesis that an aggregated
population of smart-heat systems with advanced control can provide high quality
grid services while maintaining thermal comfort. Smart-heat systems are defined
as controllable, efficient electric heating equipment (e.g., heat pumps) with
thermal storage. The social context of the proposed work is that 40% of the US
population live in regions requiring intensive space heating, and vast majority
of the space heating relies on fossil fuels. Renewable electricity-driven
heating systems can potentially serve as a sustainable solution. However, large
penetration of electric heating systems will have severe impacts on the power
systems such as elevated peak demand. The research team will create a hierarchal
control architecture for smart-heat aggregation, and test the hypothesis by
demonstrating the feasibility of smart-heat aggregation. In collaboration with
several local initiatives, the research team will create a smart-home virtual
testbed, taking advantage of high-fidelity and reduced-order modeling techniques
and real-world community energy systems monitoring.

Intellectual Merit: We foresee that our research will result in a new control
platform to explicitly optimize heating control to maintain thermal comfort and
provide grid services. The proposed hierarchal control architecture and model-
predictively-controlled load (MPCL) concept will advance our fundamental
understanding in stochastic optimization, and will also unite smart grid and
smart building research communities.

Broader Impacts: The results from this study will raise public awareness of two
important issues, i.e., the linkage of renewable energy with electric heating in
mitigating the impacts of climate change, and the values of thermal storage in
renewable heat. The research team will work closely with community organizations
to communicate the research findings with general public through community
meetings, newsletters, websites, and social media. Together with electric
vehicles, the smart-heat concept has the potential to transform and unify our
energy systems around electricity. The closely integrated education plan will
bring more under-representative minority (URM) students into the fields of
sustainable energy systems, built on PI's previous success in recruiting and
mentoring URM students.