* 1711178
* Manifolds with Special Holonomy and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Sema Salur, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 198,199.00

The unification of the four fundamental forces of nature--electromagnetism,
gravity, the strong and weak nuclear forces--is one of the greatest unsolved
mysteries of physics. Over the last few decades, M-theory, a "theory of
everything",  has emerged as a candidate for such a unification of these
forces.  This project is about manifolds with special holonomy, spaces whose
infinitesimal symmetries allow them to play a crucial role in M-theory
'compactifications'---that is, they model the tiny 'curled up' dimensions
lurking at every point of spacetime.   In this project, the principal
investigator will focus in particular on 6-dimensional Calabi-Yau manifolds
(which play the analogous role of the curled-up dimensions of superstring
theory) and spaces of dimension 7 and 8 whose symmetries fill out the special
holonomy groups known as G2 and Spin(7), respectively.  Despite extensive
research on Calabi-Yau manifolds, the geometric properties of G2 and Spin(7)
manifolds are not well understood, and the problem of the existence of
calibrated (i.e., volume minimizing) submanifolds is still wide open.  One goal
of this project is to develop techniques that are robust enough to handle these
difficult existence questions. Another goal is to study the deformation spaces
of calibrated submanifolds, as understanding these spaces will ultimately be
useful for M-theory compactifications.  The PI also believes that manifolds with
special holonomy is an excellent topic for graduate research, and intends to
continue to supervise PhD students.  She plans to encourage women and members of
other under-represented groups to take up graduate study and continue to
research careers in differential geometry, through activities that include
advising, organizing seminars, special sessions, conference and "Women in Math"
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI plans to continue her
work on Ricci-flat manifolds, their calibrated geometries and the
compactifications of moduli spaces. In recent joint work with F. Arikan and H.
Cho, she showed that every G2 manifold is an almost contact manifold. Studying
the relations between contact and G2 structures can be useful to find the
existence conditions of a G2 metric  on 7-manifolds (similar to the existence
conditions of the Calabi-Yau metric). In another joint work with Cho and A.J.
Todd, she investigated the properties of G2 manifolds from a symplectic point of
view. Using contact and symplectic structures, the PI plans to construct
Lagrangian and Legendrian type submanifolds  of G2 and Spin(7) manifolds. Also,
in joint work with C. Robles, she applied the Cartan-Kahler theory to
associative and Cayley embeddings into G2 and Spin(7) manifolds, and she plans
to use these techniques to construct new examples of G2 and Spin(7) manifolds
and study their contact and symplectic structures. In other joint work with D.
Joyce, the PI studied deformations of asymptotically cylindrical coassociative
submanifolds and their topological quantum field theories, and with Todd she
also proved similar results for asymptotically cylindrical special Lagrangian
submanifolds. The PI plans to apply these techniques on special Lagrangian
moduli spaces inside Calabi-Yau manifolds to obtain a framework for the Floer
homology program. Understanding the moduli spaces of these submanifolds will
provide a better understanding of the mirror symmetry phenomenon.