* 1711554
* Resilient Control of Human Controlled Robotic Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Nikhil Chopra, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 380,000.00

The research objective of this proposal is to investigate resilience of human
controlled robotic networks to cyber attacks. These systems extend the human
capability to manipulate objects remotely with the help of robotic systems and
communication networks. Several application areas such as operations in
hazardous environments, undersea exploration, robotic surgery, drilling, etc.
are significantly impacted by this technology. However, the use of communication
networks can lead to man-in-the-middle or malware attacks that can severely
compromise the safety and performance of these systems. Motivated by these
observations, this proposal is aimed at investigating algorithms, tools, and
implementations that lead to secure and resilient human controlled robotic
networks. From a fundamental standpoint, the proposed work will broadly impact
the field of cyber security in control systems and robotics. From an
applications perspective, the proposed research will impact the field of
telesurgery, space robotics, and other semiautonomous telemanipulation systems.
One graduate student will directly benefit from the proposed research, and it is
expected that several hundred undergraduate and graduate students will benefit
from the enriched interdisciplinary education in control theory, robotics, and
cyber security.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed three-year research effort is
expected to significantly impact the manner in which secure and resilient
semiautonomous systems are designed and controlled. This will be realized by
investigating distributed and computationally light algorithms for edge and node
attack detection in human controlled robotic systems. Additionally, utilizing
and refining the computation of fundamental bounds to colluding attackers in
these systems will aid in understanding achievable resilience to the
aforementioned attacks. Specific objectives of the proposed work include
investigating analysis tools and physics based encryption techniques for edge
and node attack detection and identification, developing resilience in human
controlled robotic networks by utilizing mixed physical-virtual robot teams, and
experimental studies on a test bed consisting of heterogeneous robotic systems
to achieve an understanding of implementation vulnerabilities.