* 1711776
* Fast Predictive Medical Image Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Marc Niethammer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 06/30/2022
* USD 330,000.00

The goal of medical image analysis is to extract quantitative information from
images. Image registration is a key image analysis technique to estimate spatial
correspondences between images. However, while good results have been obtained,
registration methods are typically slow, specifically, when complex deformations
are to be captured. This limits the utility of these algorithms (i) for very
large-scale imaging studies, (ii) as component algorithms of more advanced
analysis algorithms, and (iii) for applications which would benefit from rapid
solutions, for example, to facilitate user interaction. Furthermore,
registration methods are typically ill-adapted to given tasks, as, for
mathematical convenience only, approaches use simple elastic or fluid models
from physics. This lack of task-specificity impairs achievable registration
accuracy, even for state-of-the-art
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will therefore
further develop, invent, and investigate fast analysis approaches based on
replacing costly numerical optimizations by fast, approximate, learned
regression models for image registration. Using such learned regression models
will facilitate analysis approaches which were previously not easily possible
due to computational constraints (for example, general large-scale image
analysis or geodesic regression approaches for images which use deformation
distances to measure model residuals}. This project will also explore regression
models for task-specific registrations (for example, for longitudinal data) and
will therefore open up the possibility to achieve registration accuracies beyond
the current state-of-the-art. The project results will have immediate impact on
current brain imaging studies and will form the basis for advanced analyses of
brain and general imaging data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: While the
proposed methods are motivated by the analysis of brain images, the invented
methods will have more general applicability, e.g., to analyze abdominal, lung,
or even non-medical image data. For flexibility and to assure utility of the
approaches in other application domains, all methods will be made available to
the community in open-source form. This will allow others to adapt approaches,
to replicate results, and to create customized analysis approaches. To ease
interpretability of results we will provide simple visualizations and approaches
for uncertainty quantification, thereby facilitating communication between
computational analysts and domain experts.