* 1711227
* Electrically Tunable Graphene Gas Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Liwei Lin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 330,000.00

In the modern age of sensing technologies for broad applications such as
internet of things, the capability to make low power, small form factor, and
versatile gas sensors for applications such as wearable devices and cell phones
could revolutionize the fields of gas sensing systems and fabrications. Over the
past decade, a great number of miniaturized physical sensors, such as light,
motion, heart rate, and altitude have been successfully developed for mobile
devices to deliver reliable sensing tasks and revolutionize the user
experiences. The potential future growth area has been predicted to be the
chemical interfaces to sense surrounding environmental conditions, such as
gases, biomarkers, and explosives. Specifically, chemical sensors are projected
to have a 32% share of the total mobile sensor market in the next decade. For
example, gas sensors may monitor critical volatile chemicals (CO, VOC etc.) to
determine living conditions from comfort to health threatening and even the
possibilities of diagnosing lung related diseases by analyzing exhaled gases
from human breath. The proposed project provides unique opportunities by using
graphene as the new gas sensing material; electrical turning mechanisms for gas
selectivity and responses; and a wafer-level processing platform for low
manufacturing cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, graphene based gas
sensors have drawn great interests due to its ultra large surface to volume
ratio and semiconducting properties. Both room temperature and molecular-level
sensing capabilities have been reported, while the gas selectivity is poor
without further functionalization with polymers or noble metal particles. This
project proposes four unique approaches to address the typical issues associated
with electrochemical gas sensors: (1) low power consumption by demonstrating
room temperature gas sensing capability using ultrasensitive single-layer
graphene as the sensing materials; (2) gas selectivity by graphene FETs (Field
Effect Transistors) coupled with DC electrical tuning without adding functional
materials; (3) fast responses and drift-free sensing by using AC electrical
phase sensing; and (4) wafer-level batch fabrication for small form factor and
low manufacturing cost. By utilizing the architecture of an array of graphene
FET gas sensors and the development of wafer-level process to integrate the
sensor with microelectronics to reduce device size and manufacturing cost, this
project aims to result in ultra-low power, low form-factor gas sensors with good
sensitivity, stability, response time and gas selectivity all desirable features
for current and future mobile gas sensing applications in wearable devices and
cell phones. Furthermore, this project also seeks to answer some of the very
fundamental questions: How does the electron transferred from graphene surface
to adsorbed gas molecules during the sensing process? What are the fundamental
limitations in gas selectivity of graphene FET gas sensor arrays? Can one make
graphene FET gas sensors to maintain good selectivity at a wide concentration
range (for example from 1ppm to 50%) with good reproducibility?