* 1711716
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Understanding and harnessing structural defects, doping, passivation, and alloying to increase Voc and efficiency of CdTe solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Don Morel, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,997.00

Title: Advancing photovoltaic technologies through innovative process
design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims at developing new knowledge in the areas of materials science and device
engineering to further advance the performance of the low cost photovoltaic (PV)
technology based on CdTe. Despite the tremendous market growth and price
reduction demonstrated by PV technologies over the last two decades, PV-
generated electricity remains below 1% of our total electricity usage; further
cost reduction could be achieved through higher device performance leading to
accelerated deployment of PV. The project will investigate several processing
routes to improve the output voltage of the CdTe cell, which is the remaining
challenge to achieving near ideal performance. This research seek to minimize
the negative impact of grain boundaries and other structural defects, in order
to improve key material properties which control the output voltage of CdTe
cells. The focus will be on studying elemental impurities, specifically
phosphorous (P) doping, and its interaction with grain boundaries and other 2D
structural defects in CdTe films and their alloys. Graduate students at both
institutions will gain experience in thin film device fabrication, crystal
growth, and advanced methods of characterization of materials and devices. This
project will also impact students from K-12 and provide educational resources on
thin film solar cells and materials on PV education. The PIs and associate
graduate students will continue hands-on solar cell teaching outreach to middle
and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to create the
fundamental knowledge and process techniques required to advance the output
voltage of CdTe PV. This research has the following objectives: (1) investigate
the effect of isolated grain boundaries in large mm grain size materials, and
use the findings to tailor the properties of polycrystalline thin films; (2)
investigate the combined effect of group V dopant(s) with post-deposition
processing techniques on the net p-type doping; (3) enhance p-type doping by
suppressing structural defects through alloying CdTe(Se,S); (4) lower interface
recombination at critical device interfaces, such as the main junction and back
contact, through alloying. The above goals will be pursued through a holistic
approach that will include the investigation of large mm grain size bulk
materials, device quality polycrystalline thin films, and state-of-the-art
device structures. The experimental component of the project will be rooted in
fundamental material studies and expanded to device engineering. The activities
will be guided using device physics models to predict solar cell performance.
Results from this project may have a direct impact on solar cell manufacturing
and could lead to a paradigm shift impact in terms of improving efficiency and
decreasing cost of polycrystalline CdTe-based solar cells.