* 1711070
* Lagrangian Floer Theory and Quantum Invariants of Symplectic Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Christopher Woodward, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 239,660.00

Symplectic geometry is the mathematical study of the foundations of classical
mechanics. Despite its classical origins, this research area has recently
experienced an explosion of progress centered on the study of quantum invariants
defined using geometric objects known as holomorphic curves. These quantum
invariants have appeared not only in geometric analysis but also in low-
dimensional topology, which studies three-dimensional space as well as four-
dimensional space-time, and in certain models in high-energy physics. The
investigator will study fundamental questions about these quantum invariants,
including their behavior under mathematical operations known as surgery and
symmetry reduction. Applications will be of interest in topology and physics.
The investigator will also continue his outreach activities for middle-school
geometry teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project studies the
behavior of quantum invariants such as the Fukaya category and quantum K-theory
under operations such as flips, blow-ups, and symplectic reduction. In the first
part of the project, the investigator will construct generators of the Fukaya
category associated to surgeries on the symplectic manifold that arise naturally
as the symplectic structure is varied. Each of these gives rise to a collection
of objects in the Fukaya category, and conjecturally a factor in the quantum
cohomology. The main technique here involves the Abouzaid-Ganatra generation
criterion and a restricted version of symplectic field theory for the Fukaya
category developed using stabilizing divisors. In the second part of the
project, the investigator and collaborators will construct a homotopy version of
Kirwan's map from the quasimap Fukaya category of a Hamiltonian group action to
the Fukaya category of the symplectic quotient. This study will have
applications to the disk potentials of Lagrangians in symplectic quotients. In a
third collaborative project, the investigator will study the behavior of
K-theoretic Gromov-Witten invariants under wall-crossing and aims to prove that
the potentials are unchanged, generically, in the case of crepant birational
transformations associated to variation of symplectic quotient.