* 1711400
* Geometry of Curves and Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Mohammad Ghomi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2021
* USD 245,427.00

Curves and surfaces are to geometry what numbers are to algebra. They form the
basic ingredients of our visual perception and inspire the development of far
reaching mathematical tools. Yet despite centuries of study, and an abundance of
potential applications, there are still many fundamental open problems in this
area which are strikingly intuitive and elementary to state. Studying these
problems may stimulate useful developments in mathematics, or lead to wider
applications in science and technology. For instance, the Principal
Investigator's work on rigidity problem for surfaces may have applications for
stability of complicated domes in modern architecture, or various physical
frameworks. Further, various techniques which the Principal Investigator is
proposing to develop could be useful in computer aided design, mathematical
physics, and the emerging field of discrete differential geometry. Finally,
these problems are ideal for introducing the general public to the exciting
world of modern day mathematics, and arousing the interest of beginning students
in Geometry.

The PI's research on curves and surfaces, and more generally Riemannian
submanifolds, spans a wide range of topics including isometric embeddings,
h-principle theory, isoperimetric problems, geometric knot theory, polyhedral
approximations, and connections with real algebraic geometry. Some recurring
themes throughout these investigations are various notions of convexity or
optimization, and the interaction between geometric and topological concepts, or
local versus global properties of submanifolds. More specifically, a typical
problem is how restrictions on curvature, intrinsic metric, or various boundary
conditions, influence the global shape of a curve or a hypersurface, or even
allow an embedding of that object in a Euclidean space of low codimension. A
fundamental problem in this area is that of isometric rigidity of surfaces: can
one continuously deform a smooth closed surface in Euclidean space without
changing its intrinsic metric? The PI also considers a number of related
problems involving the self-linking number or vertices of closed curves,
spherical images of closed surfaces, and various deformations of submanifolds
which preserve the sign or magnitude of the curvature. Other projects include
unfoldings of convex polytopes, and the study of the cut locus or medial axis of
contractible regions in Euclidean space.