* 1711015
* Development of Chiral Charge Density Wave Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Goran Karapetrov, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2022
* USD 370,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to extend our fundamental understanding of the
properties of chiral charge density wave materials and utilize its properties in
new opto-electronic devices. Manipulation of chiral charge domains will be
transformative to the condensed matter physics and it will open the doors to
devices based on collective electron excitations. The main advantage of using
collective charge systems for electronics is lower power dissipation, high
density of information storage and high speed. The fundamental studies will
involve both macroscopic electronic and optical properties characterization and
atomic scale investigations of the chiral charge density wave properties in
carefully engineered two-dimensional materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;The
program will provide students and young researchers with necessary tools to
carry out modern fundamental research in the fields of materials science,
condensed matter physics and optoelectronic device engineering. Since the
designed research activities are highly interdisciplinary, the students will be
stimulated to take classes across disciplines, such as nanoscience, electron and
scanning probe microscopy and nanofabrication. The plan is to broaden
participation and appreciation of students through (a) incorporating elements of
the research in existing nanoscience, nano-electronics and solid-state physics
courses at both the undergraduate and graduate level; (b) train students to use
state of the art fabrication and characterization tools and (c) expose the
students to research enterprise and collaborative research across different
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;This work should lead to training a PhD student and
several undergraduate students. Outreach to local area high schools through
senior thesis work experience and science research clubs as well as College' s
open houses are part of the overreaching strategy to prepare high school
students to pursue science and engineering
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chirality breaks down the spatial inversion
symmetry and results in unexpected new electronic properties, in particular in
systems with reduced dimensionality. In many cases the electronic chirality is
facilitated by the specific structure of the system in which it emerges, either
on atomic scale or on mesoscopic scale. Recently, it was discovered that one of
the well-studied macroscopically correlated electronic state, the charge density
wave, also exhibits chiral properties. This proposal explores the opportunity to
use the nanometer-size domains of opposite chirality that are separated with
domain walls as basic elements for memory and logic units.&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal we will expand the fundamental understanding of the dynamic nature of
the coupling of the chiral CDW with femtosecond optical perturbations and
nanosecond current pulses. The dynamics of the excited metastable states through
which the system traverses before coming back to equilibrium could include
unconventional order such as ferroelectricity, CDW or superconductivity. The
origin of these phenomena is in the existence of various types of symmetry
breaking (inversion symmetry in TiSe2) that gives rise to degenerate ground
states. The opportunity exists to exploit these metastable states in low power
electronic devices. We will also optimize the growth of TiSe2 thin films in
order to enable efficient device fabrication. The effect on strain and doping on
chiral CDW thermodynamics will be explored.