* 1711824
* Monolithic integrated-photonic sensors in the molecular fingerprint region
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Mikhail Belkin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

This project is to develop a materials platform for mid-infrared integrated
photonics and create mid-infrared photonic crystal sensors with parts per
billion sensitivity. Such a platform and sensors do not currently exist. High
sensitivity will be achieved by targeting strong fundamental vibrational
absorption lines of chemical components in the mid-infrared spectral range, also
known as the molecular fingerprint region, and employing the principle of slow
light in slotted photonic crystal waveguides. The photonic crystal waveguides
will be monolithically integrated with mid-infrared quantum cascade lasers and
detectors using epitaxial transfer techniques to produce highly compact
integrated-photonic chemical sensors operating in the mid-infrared spectral
region for a wide range of applications, such as chemical and biomedical
sensing, environmental monitoring, and security
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this project to
investigate a mid-infrared photonic waveguideing platform spanning molecular
fingerprint region (3-14 micrometer) and develop integrated-photonic sensors in
the molecular fingerprint region. Silicon-on-insulator devices cannot be
operated beyond 3.5 micrometer wavelength range owing to mid-infrared absorption
in SiO2, silicon-on-sapphire platform is limited to wavelengths below 5
micrometer owing to sapphire absorption, and silicon itself is only transparent
down to 7-8 micrometers. The lack of a suitable photonic waveguiding platform
currently limits the realization of a portable absorption spectrometer surrogate
of benchtop infrared spectroscopic systems that can effectively probe the
molecular fingerprint region below 1500 cm-1. Epitaxially-grown GaAs/AlGaAs
waveguides offer a well-established lattice-matched, very low defect density and
high index contrast platform for low loss optical circuits in the entire 3-14
micrometer wavelength range. This project aims at developing a GaAs/AlGaAs
integrated photonics platform for on-chip mid-infrared photonics spanning the
entire mid-infrared spectral range, including the molecular fingerprint region,
and using this platform to demonstrate high sensitivity low parts per billion
on-chip absorption sensing in the molecular fingerprint region. High sensitivity
will be achieved using slotted photonic crystal waveguide devices. The proposed
platform is expected to have a detection limit of 0.3 parts per billion for CO2
and 1 part per billion for toluene at their respective peak absorbance
wavelengths at 4.23 micrometer and at 13.8 micrometer, respectively.