* 1711299
* Collaborative Research: Sequential Predictors for Partial Differential Equation and Delay Systems: Designs, Theory, and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Michael Malisoff, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 266,000.00

This project solves the problem of implementability of feedback controls for a
variety of dynamical systems that arise in additive manufacturing, battery
modeling, deep mine elevators, oil drilling, traffic congestion, water
desalination, and other engineering domains. Feedback control involves the use
of information about the states of dynamical systems and about their
surroundings, to decide how to adjust the behavior of the systems to realize
important objectives such as ensuring that the systems safely converge to a
desirable operating mode with minimal human intervention. The project combines
the PIs' complementary expertise in engineering and mathematics, by tackling
important interdisciplinary problems that could not be solved outside of this
new collaborative framework. The project studies interconnected systems with
delays, in which the current states of the systems or of their surroundings may
not be available for use in the feedback control design, and related problems in
extremum seeking under delays, in which one wishes to minimize important types
of cost criteria. Through the PIs' contacts with engineers from industry, the
project will increase the engineering community's use of more rigorous methods
to obtain better performing controls and will also provide interdisciplinary
training to graduate students that is guided by compelling engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides transformative control
and extremum seeking algorithms for key classes of ODE and ODE-PDE cascades that
involve delays, prescribed regulation times, and uncertainties. Input delays
arise from sensor or transport phenomena, and finite time constraints occur when
there are hard deadlines for achieving control objectives. While prediction has
been used extensively, there are currently no analogs of prediction for
stabilization problems with prescribed regulation times where there are delays
and uncertain model parameters. This project overcomes these challenges for
general classes of nonlinear systems, using new sequential predictors,
sequential anti-diffusors, chain observers, adaptive control with parameter
identification, and extremum seeking under delays or time constraints, including
cases where only sampled output measurements are available. The controls
developed ensure better disturbance rejection and robustness against
uncertainties. The project is guided by cutting edge engineering applications,
to ensure the usefulness of the theory. They involve models for underwater
marine robots where slow acoustic communication is modeled through long delays,
the reduction of severe slugging in oil production, and online social networks
where opinion spreading is modeled by PDE-ODE cascades with diffusion. The
project will include experimental real time implementation of some of the
controls and train PhD students.