* 1711156
* Angle-Sensitive Metasurfaces for Lens-Free Compound-Eye Cameras
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Lei Tian, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2022
* USD 379,953.00

Title: Metasurfaces for Lens-Free Compound-Eye Cameras
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
developing a new camera technology featuring extreme size miniaturization,
inspired by the compound-eye vision modality that is commonly found in nature in
small invertebrates such as insects and crustaceans. Compound eyes typically
consist of a curved array of many imaging elements (including lenses and
photoreceptors), each oriented so as to detect light incident along a different
direction. The full image of the object being visualized is then reconstructed
from the combined inputs of all such elements. The optoelectronic implementation
of this vision modality is generally complicated by its curved architecture,
since standard optoelectronic devices are based on planar substrates. The
compound-eye vision modality represents the optimally adapted solution to
provide wide-angle field of view with negligible distortion within the smallest
possible package. Furthermore, compound eyes can create focused images of
objects at arbitrary distances without the need for any focal-length adjustment,
and thus offer nearly infinite depth of field and extremely high acuity to
motion. The proposed cameras could therefore provide an enabling technology for
a wide range of imaging applications where small size, large field of view, and
high temporal resolution are of particular importance. Specific examples include
machine vision (e.g., for obstacle avoidance and autonomous navigation),
surveillance, and endoscopic medical imaging. The proposed activities will also
promote education through the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
a wide range of topics within nanophotonics, optoelectronics, and image
processing. Related curriculum development efforts will impact students in other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will leverage recent advances in nanophotonics and metamaterials to
develop a planar lens-free compound-eye camera consisting of a planar array of
imaging pixels. The angle selectivity of each pixel is provided by specially
designed arrays of metallic nanoparticles (optical metasurfaces) patterned on
the surface of each photodetector. The key innovation of the proposed research
is the development of metasurfaces that can selectively transmit into their
substrate only light incident along a single geometrically tunable direction
(within a small range). Light incident along any other direction will be
reflected. With this arrangement, lens-free compound-eye cameras can be
implemented using existing CMOS or CCD image-sensor arrays. Each pixel will be
coated with a different metasurface designed to allow for the detection of light
from a different direction. The proposed angle-sensitive photodetectors will be
designed via full-wave numerical simulations, fabricated on silicon substrates,
and characterized through angle-resolved photocurrent measurements. Arrays of
these devices will then be developed for a proof-of-concept demonstration of
their imaging capabilities. Advanced computational imaging algorithms will be
employed to optimize the image reconstruction from the combined signals of the
individual sensors. In addition to the potential technological impact of the
proposed cameras, this research will also advance the science and technology of
optical metasurfaces through the exploration of novel designs and applications,
and will create new research opportunities in the emerging field of
computational imaging.