* 1711669
* GOALI: Optical Differentiation Wavefront Sensing for High-Dynamic-Range High-Sensitivity Freeform Metrology
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Jie Qiao, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2022
* USD 366,762.00

Freeform optics are optical components having no rotational symmetry, allowing
for high-performance optical systems with reduced cost, size, weight and
assembly complexity which are now used in applications such as head-worn
displays for augmented reality, automotive lighting, astronomical telescopes,
and projection systems. Freeform optics present significant manufacturing and
metrology challenges, and push most commercially available wavefront diagnostics
to their fundamental limits. The PI will investigate and demonstrate a new type
of wavefront sensor, the optical differentiation wavefront sensor, which will
improve the fundamental understanding and promote technological innovation of
wavefront metrology for the measurement of freeform optics. Successful
demonstration and commercialization of the optical differentiation wavefront
sensor, possibly in combination with a coordinate-measuring machine, will
provide a competitive advantage to American optical manufacturers that produce
metrology equipment and manufacture freeform optical components. This wavefront-
sensing technology can be applied to other fields such as laser engineering,
astronomy, and biomedical imaging, all of which improve national science,
technology, defense, healthcare, and economic growth. The impact of this GOALI
proposal on inclusion of women will be transformative through the strategic
collaboration with WiSTEE Connect, an organization that the PI has founded to
improve the leadership, career opportunity and mentorship for women in science,
technology, engineering, and entrepreneurship. The project will enhance the
involved undergraduate and graduate students research experience in the PI's
multidisciplinary laboratory. It will enable student interactions with
industrial mentors and promote entrepreneurial career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this GOALI proposal is to
demonstrate a novel optical differentiation wavefront sensor and investigate its
capability for high-accuracy and high-precision freeform metrology with
decoupled dynamic range and sensitivity. The potential to achieve simultaneous
high-dynamic-range and high-accuracy through combination with a commercial non-
contact coordinate-measuring machine will also be investigated. The
investigation will be performed via the combination of simulations using a
complete model of the wavefront sensor and laboratory demonstrations of various
configurations of the sensor with application to freeform optical components.
The PI will investigate the ability of an optical differentiation wavefront
sensor relying on binary pixelated filters to measure wavefront slopes and
achieve decoupled dynamic range and sensitivity, high-accuracy, and high-
dynamic-range wavefront measurements of freeform surfaces. She will create
models of the wavefront sensor and filters to investigate the performance impact
of design parameters of the optical system and filters. Novel methods for
improving the performance, e.g. aperture stitching to increase the measurable
aperture size and spatial dithering algorithms for designing the binary
pixelated filters, will be evaluated. Optimal configurations of the optical
differentiation wavefront sensor appropriate for different classes of freeform
optical components will be identified and tested in a laboratory environment by
characterizing test optical freeform components. The synergetic combination of
an optical differentiation wavefront sensor with a commercial coordinate-
measuring machine, with the potential for unmatched performance in terms of
dynamic range and accuracy, will be studied via modeling and collaboration with
the industrial co-PI. The novel realizations of the optical differentiation
wavefront sensor will advance the fundamental understanding of this technology
for characterizing freeform optics and elucidate its potential advantages over
other approaches such as interferometry, deflectometry, Shack-Hartmann sensors,
and coordinate measuring machines. The proposed research will also advance the
technological capability of freeform metrology and manufacturing.