* 1711102
* Suspended High-gain Millimeter-wave Antenna Arrays: Hybrid Fabrication using MEMS and 3D-Printer Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Nima Ghalichechian, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 324,000.00

Today's wireless communications systems operate mostly in the microwave
frequencies below 3 GHz, which has become a crowded and limited resource. Yet
more than 100 times bandwidth is available in the millimeter-wave spectrum of
30-300 GHz, offering the potential of huge increases in data rates for next
generation devices. Currently, there are several challenges for successful
realization of millimeter-wave communication systems. One such challenge is that
the signal propagation at millimeter-wave frequencies is impaired by severe path
loss. Natural approach to counter the increased path loss at higher frequency
bands is to use transmitting and receiving beamforming networks with many
antennas per terminal. As a result, it is highly desirable to develop high-
efficiency and high-gain integrated circuit antenna arrays operating at
millimeter-wave frequencies. Potential applications for the proposed arrays
include millimeter-wave short-range communication links, satellite
communications, radars, remote sensing, security, and medical imaging. This
research will not only advance the research of advanced miniaturized antenna
arrays but also support curriculum development at The Ohio State University in
the area of RF microsystems. The PIs will advise undergraduate researchers
through capstone design projects and independent studies intended to harness the
unique features of millimeter-wave antennas, electrical characterization of
materials, 3D printed meta-material surfaces, and microfabrication processes.
Other educational impact includes hands-on experiences to train students in
wireless technologies through summer camps and a variety of outreach activities
to attract undergraduates and underrepresented students in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major drawback of current millimeter-wave technologies
adopted for integration of arrays on silicon is the low efficiency (5-10%) and
consequently low realized gain. Therefore, the central objective of this
proposal is to develop scanning arrays on silicon integrated circuits that
exhibit radiation efficiency of greater than 85%. Such compact high-efficiency
millimeter-wave arrays have not been realized to date. Moreover, steerable
millimeter-wave antenna arrays are well suited to meet the needs for next-
generation high data-rate communications. This research aims to understand and
address fundamental limitations in efficiency of integrated circuit antennas.
The proposed approach for increasing low radiation efficiency and low gain is
interdisciplinary and utilizes hybrid fabrication approach: a) suspended
radiating elements using micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) process, and b)
3D-printed artificial (anisotropic) dielectric layers. By suspending all
radiating elements of a phased array in air using MEMS fabrication processes,
the lossy silicon substrate is removed. In addition, a 3D-printed dielectric
lens or meta-material layer is fabricated above the radiating elements to
enhance the scanning volume of the phased array. As a complementary fabrication
technique, additive manufacturing such as 3D printing is uniquely suited for
millimeter-wave arrays where the wavelengths are in the range of a few
millimeters. The integration of antenna with integrated circuits - combined with
enhancements in scanning volume, gain, and bandwidth delivered by artificial
dielectric layer - provide enormous advantage in miniaturization of the systems
and is essential for next-generation active electronic-scanning arrays. This
novel and interdisciplinary approach is potentially transformative to integrated
circuit antennas.