* 1711259
* Piezoresistive Sensing Platform for High-Throughput Single Platelet Nanomechanics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Oliver Brand, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Abnormal clotting and bleeding are the cause, or a lethal complication, of many
diseases including heart disease, stroke, and cancer. During the formation of
blood clots, biochemically activated platelets interact with growing networks of
fibrin polymers and contract against this fibrin scaffold. Today, few tools
exist to predict when a person may experience abnormal clotting or bleeding, and
nearly all of these tools rely on sensing biochemicals associated with clot
formation or breakup. However, new research has shown that changes to the
physical forces nominally applied by platelets are associated with bleeding.
Rather than attempting to sense trace amounts of biochemicals associated with
clotting, the ultimate goal of this project is, thus, to examine platelet forces
to predict abnormal bleeding and clotting. The physical strength of a cell may
be directly linked to bleeding and clotting, thus representing a potentially
"disruptive" paradigm of biophysical testing that could be applied to many other
diseases. While promising, this novel approach requires assaying a large
population of platelets to gain clinically relevant data and predict bleeding
and clotting disorders. Using today's technologies, which are mostly utilizing
microscopy-based optical techniques, this still requires too much time to be
useful in the clinic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome the limitations of
optical techniques to measure platelet forces, this proposal seeks to explore
non-optical transduction mechanisms to create a rapid, high-throughput platform
capable of assaying large numbers of individual platelets. More specifically,
the goal of this project is to develop piezoresistive sensing platforms for
high-throughput mechanical testing of single blood platelets. Using
piezoresistive transducers for force sensing, the proposed platforms will
overcome the key bottleneck to high-throughput single-cell force analysis with
all existing techniques, namely their reliance on optical imaging. The two
proposed sensing platforms are based on arrays of microdots and nanopillars and
mimic the two most common optical platforms for cell force measurements,
traction force microscopy and microfabricated post array detectors,
respectively. Thereby, the contraction force exerted by a blood platelet on a
pair of microdots is measured with underlying sub-micrometer strain gauges,
while the platelet-contraction-induced deflection of nanopillars is sensed by
stress-sensitive metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFET)
embedded into the underlying substrate. On the sensing system side, the
intellectual merit lies in the design and fabrication of large arrays of
piezoresistive force sensors with nano-Newton force resolution in an ultra-small
form factor, targeting a pitch for the microdot/pillar pairs of less than 15µm.