* 1711946
* RET Site: Sustainable Development-Research Experience for Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Shaobo Huang, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 543,466.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers in Engineering and Computer Science Site:
Sustainable Development-Research Experience for Teachers (SD-RET) at South
Dakota School of Mines &amp; Technology (SDSM&amp;T) will expose middle and high
school mathematics and science teachers in rural America to engineering and
science research projects and a curriculum development strategies to improve the
teaching and learning of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. To align with the educational and training needs of the 21st
century and to increase the interests of students, particularly underrepresented
minorities, in learning STEM disciplines, the SD-RET provides the teachers an
access to the various engineering and science technologies and the tools to
integrate engineering/science projects into K-12
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SD-RET project will directly involve at
least 30 rural teachers over the three project years. During the 6-week summer
program each year, the rural teachers will conduct research in the engineering
and science research laboratories at SDSM&amp;T as research assistants (referred
to as SD-RET RAs) with formal/informal mentoring from the faculty and
graduate/undergraduate students. The engineering and science research projects
will focus on implementing the technologies to address challenges in sustainable
development such as air quality, water resources and treatment, sustainable
energy, and sustainable materials. In addition, the SD-RET RAs will enroll in a
2-credit graduate course entitled "STEM Education in Secondary Classroom" for
pedagogical and curriculum development training based on state and national
standards. By integrating the lab research experience and curriculum development
skills, the SD-RET RAs will translate their engineering and science research
experience into their STEM curriculums. The SD-RET project will provide multiple
follow-up activities to enable the implementation of the SD-RET experience. The
SD-RET Assessment Advisory Board will evaluate the project and provide feedback
for continuous improvement. Beyond the 30 SD-RET RAs, this project has the
potential to extend impacts to colleagues of the SD-RET RAs at the same schools,
pre-service teachers enrolling in the curriculum development course, and
educators who access to the SD-RET website.