* 1711188
* An Optimization Decomposition Framework for Principled Multi-Timescale Market Design and Co-Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Dennice Gayme, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,928.00

The United States electricity generation mix is undergoing a fundamental
transformation. Older thermal generation units, which can be reliably scheduled
depending on system needs, are being replaced by newer renewable-based units
with substantially different operational constraints. As a result, the core
principles under which existing markets operate are rapidly evolving. New
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regulations in response to the increasing
variability and uncertainty that renewable generation introduces have spurred
Independent System Operators to make fundamental market design changes. However,
the existing design process for market products, which include heavy stakeholder
involvement as well as some (but not extensive) numerical testing, often has an
ad-hoc flavor and uncertain outcomes. Also, the complex interactions that arise,
due to the simultaneous participation of resources in several markets operating
at different timescales, have caused some of the recently designed new markets
and products to lead to counter-intuitive outcomes. This work addresses these
challenges by developing analytical tools and thorough simulation setups that
can support more effective market designs based on a sound theoretical framework
that takes into account the interdependencies of decisions across markets and
time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a principled market
design methodology that can evaluate the performance of electricity market
products for systems with variable energy resources and other emerging
technologies. Central to this research is a novel top-down approach that
decomposes the operator objectives into desired market products while
identifying multi-market interactions, even across time-scales, and
communications requirements for co-optimization. This methodology does not aim
to redefine from scratch the whole market ecosystem already in place. Instead,
the decomposition approach seeks to define suitable subproblems that fit within
the existing architecture, which allows comparisons between the new solution and
existing market designs, and the identification of missing market components. To
show its relevance to current market design challenges, the proposed approach
will be first applied in the design of coordinated real-time energy and
regulation markets, and subsequently, be augmented to include additional market
products and timescales. The benefits of the proposed market designs will be
assessed using extensive simulations of detailed market models that will be run
on realistic simulation setups. Thus this research includes a mix of innovative
design and algorithmic development grounded in deep knowledge of existing and
practical market operation structures and business rules, which will be informed
by collaborations with the California Independent System Operator, the
Pennsylvania, Jersey, Maryland (PJM) market monitor, and the Electric Power
Research Institute. In this way, this work intends to provide novel and
beneficial research results that are directly applicable to existing and new
electricity markets.