* 1711167
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Patterns, drivers and consequences of land-use transitions: urban agriculture as a model system
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Theresa Ong, Ong                     Theresa        W
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Theresa Wei Ying Ong, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by the following sponsoring scientists: Simon Levin (Princeton
University), Stacy Philpott (University of California Santa Cruz), and Brenda
Lin (CSIRO- Australia). Urban agriculture provides food security, biodiversity,
greenspace and educational opportunities to underrepresented groups in science,
yet urban landscapes are in constant flux, with parcels frequently transitioning
between vacant lots, urban gardens and developed land. This research explores
past and future patterns of land-use change in urban areas, the role of socio-
economic and ecological factors in driving change, and how land-use change
influences biodiversity and ecosystem function. The fellow is participating in
multidisciplinary collaborations that will advance her work at the intersection
of theoretical, landscape and urban ecology. The project addresses why
transitions to urban agriculture are more permanent in some cases than others,
and results will be shared with community members who are seeking land-tenure
for urban gardens in gentrifying neighborhoods.

The fellow is receiving training in socio-ecological theory through
collaborations with the sponsoring scientists, and is developing a spatially-
explicit dynamic model of land-use transitions as a function of the net socio-
ecological costs associated with the direction and frequency of transitions
between land-use states. The model is also being fit with socio-ecological data
from urban gardens, future land-use changes are being predicted, and results are
compared to past patterns observed for large, urban counties of California using
historical aerial imagery. Historical land-use change is being categorized into
dynamic types ranging from critical to smooth, and transition type regressed
against data on pest and natural enemy biodiversity in urban gardens to
understand its impact on biological control. Broader impacts and broadening
participation efforts target youth from working-class families that use urban
agriculture for food subsistence and are directly influenced by the land-use
change resulting from gentrification of their neighborhoods. These individuals
are participating in workshops focused on the socio-ecological drivers and
consequences of land-use transitions for biological control services in their
own neighborhoods. The results of this research are being further disseminated
through policy pamphlets designed for relevance to urban gardeners and city
planners.