* 1711701
* RET Site: Research to Inspire Students in Engineering through commUnity Partnerships (RISE UP)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Karen Graham, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

As the second largest sector in the US economy at 12% of Gross Domestic Product,
advanced manufacturing is viewed as an enabler for national security, jobs
creation, and economic growth. The objective of this Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) in Engineering site, Research to Inspire Students in Engineering
through commUnity Partnerships (RISE UP), at the University of New Hampshire
(UNH) is to create partnerships between UNH, local school systems, and industry
(specifically the manufacturing sector) to improve student learning through
teacher development/research training and academic year follow-up activities.
Participants will be provided the opportunity to engage industrial-based
research projects, within a broad theme of micro-scale phenomena, mathematical
modeling, and material behavior. The RET program will target rural and urban
schools, with an aim to attract underrepresented groups, including first-
generation college students. The overall goal is to effectively incorporate
activities that integrate science and engineering practices into pre-college
curricula and thus attract and motivate young people to engineering disciplines.
In addition, the inclusion of rural and urban schools and women faculty as
mentors has the potential to attract underrepresented individuals to
engineering, including first generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer over the three-year grant period, the RISE UP
Site will host a cohort of 12 pre- and in-service secondary STEM teachers and
community college faculty in a 7-week experience (including orientation,
intensive research, curriculum development, field trips to local companies, and
academic year follow-up which includes visits to classrooms by graduate student,
faculty and industrial mentors). The teachers will be active participants within
their selected research groups and conduct research projects guided by the
graduate students, faculty, and industrial mentors. The intellectual merit of
RISE UP lies in implementing authentic research to develop engineering practices
in classrooms, and assessing the impact on teachers. How teacher immersion in
research projects translates into more effective teaching; content understanding
and motivation for teachers; and increased student learning and interest in
pursuing engineering careers will be evaluated. The effect of the industrial
focus and participation in the project will also be assessed. The UNH faculty
and graduate students will experience the teachers' perspectives in designing
activities that engage a variety of student learners. The project will bring
together a sustainable community of partners to collaborate on developing and
implementing authentic science and engineering practices in classrooms that can
generate a broader impact across the nation.