* 1711692
* Abelianization of Connections in Two and Three Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Andrew Neitzke, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2021
* USD 334,171.00

The PI studies problems of geometry using methods imported from particle
physics. In joint work with his collaborators, he has recently developed a new
geometric technique of "abelianization" -- so called because it reduces
nonabelian problems (involving operations for which the order in which we do the
operations matters) to simpler abelian ones (where the order does not matter).
The PI, together with his collaborators and graduate students, will work on
several new applications of abelianization. One application is a new approach to
solving certain differential equations, including the Schrodinger equation which
governs the physics of some quantum systems. A second application is a new way
of measuring the topology of 3-dimensional spaces. The results of this work will
be disseminated broadly both in the mathematics and high-energy physics
communities, helping to bring these two areas closer together. The work will
also contribute to the training of graduate students in both
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's recent joint work with collaborators
introduced a new ingredient to the theory of flat connections: a way of
"abelianizing" flat connections on a rank N complex vector bundle over a
surface, replacing them by almost-flat connections on a line bundle over an
N-fold branched covering surface. The full scope of this new theory is not yet
known: it appears that there are many more uses of abelianization yet to be
discovered. The PI aims to develop some of these. First, he will study a family
of special connections on surfaces called "opers," which can be abelianized in a
canonical way. On the one hand, this is a warmup for the abelianization of the
twistor lines in the Hitchin system. On the other hand, it gives a new way of
understanding the locus of opers and thus a new perspective on many related
issues, from the classical theory of linear scalar differential operators to
nonperturbative extensions of topological string theory. Second, he will
consider abelianization on a 3-manifold instead of a surface. One immediate
application is the development of new formulas for classical complex Chern-
Simons invariants. Third, the PI aims to develop a new relation between
abelianization and Floer theory on cotangent bundles.