* 1711245
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: THE ROLE OF THE NORTH AMERICAN MONSOON IN THE ANNUAL MOLT OF MIGRATORY BIRDS
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Ryan Terrill, Terrill                 Ryan
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY, under the
program Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The research will study how migratory birds use a seasonal
rainfall event, the North American Monsoon (NAM), for resources in their annual
feather replacement. Many species of birds that breed in Western North America
use this monsoon as a region to replace their feathers, but where these birds
come from, and how dependent they are on these monsoonal rains, is not well
understood. Replacing feathers is important for birds, and all birds replace
their feathers at least once a year. Migratory birds face the challenge of
breeding, molting, and fueling for migration throughout the year. Breeding and
migration have been well studied in these birds, but little research has been
dedicated to molt. Furthermore, climate change is affecting the timing and
intensity of the monsoon, and there is currently no data that can inform how
this will affect the birds that use the monsoon for feather molt, and this study
will combine analysis of the genomes of birds with a unique collection of
specimens from this region to assess how birds use the monsoon for feather molt.

To understand how various populations employ this strategy, the fellow will
establish the migratory connectivity of birds using this region to molt by
constructing a reference database of genomic DNA from breeding populations of 13
species of birds that are known to follow this molt migration strategy, then
sequencing DNA from molting birds in the NAM region. These data will allow the
fellow to understand the relative proportions of breeding populations using this
molt-migration strategy. The fellow will also investigate how the NAM has
influenced molt phenology and plasticity of molt timing and location by
conducting this migratory connectivity analysis in two species of common molt-
migrants across a time series spanning 80 years from a heritage collection at
Occidental College. Occidental College houses the largest collection of birds
from Mexico in the world, and is active in development and use of ultraconserved
elements (UCEs) for phylogenetic and population inference; and is the ideal
setting for this research. The fellow will be trained in field and laboratory
techniques in specimen preparation and DNA extraction, as well as mentoring and
publication skills, and specimen curatorial and data analysis.