* 1711967
* Nanophotonic optical link
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Diana Huffaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2020
* USD 350,000.00

The realization of an energy-efficient optical link would have an obvious impact
in reducing the energy consumption of data centers, which have been recognized
as the most rapidly growing consumers of global energy. One promising approach
to solve this issue is to utilize optical rather than electrical signals to send
and receive data, which can theoretically lead to much higher speed and lower
power consumption. However, difficulties in integrating high-performance optical
components onto silicon electronics have been hindering practical application of
optical links to chip-scale data communications. Here, we propose an innovative
yet feasible optical link architecture consisting of nanoscale transmitters and
receivers on a silicon platform. Relating the fascination of optoelectronics to
its impact on carbon footprint of data centers will be the foundation of a new
education and community involvement platform. Already, the PI participates in
several activities to broaden the impact of laboratory research to society
including direct relationships with high-schools, on-campus teacher training and
helping to organize UCLA students for community involvement. In this case, the
PI will (a) incorporate the findings of the proposed research into the UCLA
curriculum (b) train and mentor high-school students through summer internships
and student exchange programs, (c) form a targeted effort aimed at increasing
community knowledge and participation through a high-school technology roadshow
and campus visitations to create excitement for innovations in high-speed,
energy-efficient optical links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this proposal is to develop nanophotonic optical links based on compact, energy-
efficient, and directly integrated lasers and photodetectors as transmitters and
receivers on silicon-on-insulator via selective-area epitaxy of III-V
nanopillars. The proposed design is fundamentally different from other
interconnects with externally bonded lasers, as both transmitters and receivers
are monolithically aligned and simultaneously integrated on conventional silicon
waveguides. The proposed optical links include electrically-driven nanopillar
array lasers and single nanopillar photodetectors, which are engineered to
achieve an energy-to-data ratio of &lt;10 fJ/bit. For lasers, a one-dimensional
photonic crystal cavity consisting of an array of nanopillars can achieve a high
cavity quality factor of 19,000 and waveguide coupling efficiency of 60 % with a
footprint of only 7.7 × 0.2 µm2. Purcell enhancement from an ultra-small and
high-Q cavity as well as an introduction of three-dimensional diffusion barriers
from InGaAs/InP nanopillar heterostructures results in an internal quantum
efficiency of 93 %. For detectors, nanopillar photodiodes combined with
plasmonic field enhancement achieved by metal nanoslot couplers realize the
efficiency far beyond the diffraction limit, resulting in a dark current of 1 pA
at 10 V, a bandwidth of 3.4 GHz, and a noise-equivalent power of 1.5 × 10-13
W/Hz1/2. The total power consumption is expected to be 6.3 fJ/bit assuming that
these transceivers are linked by 3 cm-long waveguide, which is more than an
order of magnitude reduced power consumption compared with the state-of-the-art
optical interconnects. The proposed electrically injected nanoresonators and
plasmonic light manipulation architectures on silicon not only enable ultra-
compact and energy-efficient optical links, but also pave the way toward quantum
computing, all-optical switching and memories, single-photon sources, and bio-
and chemical sensors.