* 1711191
* Dynamic State and Parameter Estimation based on Robust Unscented Kalman Filters for Power System Monitoring and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Lamine Mili, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2020
* USD 325,645.00

The enhancement of the reliability, security, and resiliency of electric power
systems depends on the availability of fast, accurate, and robust dynamic state
estimators. These estimators should be robust to gross errors on the
measurements and the model parameter values while providing good state estimates
even in the presence of large dynamical system model uncertainties and non-
Gaussian thick-tailed process and observation noises. It turns out that the
current Kalman filter-based dynamic state estimators given in the literature
suffer from several important shortcomings, precluding them from being adopted
by power utilities for practical applications. To be specific, they cannot
handle (i) dynamic model uncertainty and parameter errors; (ii) non-Gaussian
process and observation noise of the system nonlinear dynamic models; (iii) any
type of outliers that are induced by impulsive measurement and system process
noises, or incorrect system parameter values, to cite a few; and (iv) all types
of cyber attacks. To address these challenges, this project will resort to both
robust statistical theory and robust control theory to develop a general
theoretical framework for robust dynamic state and parameter estimation. This
new general framework will provide reliable real-time state and parameter
estimates for power system monitoring, control, protection, and security
analysis. In addition, it will contribute to the next generation of online state
estimators with synchrophasor measurements and the redesign of robust detectors
against cyber attacks. The project also contains an integrated educational
agenda for K-12 students, undergraduates and graduate students who are
interested in the STEM (Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics)
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pioneer a general theoretical
framework that integrates both robust statistical theory and robust control
theory for robust dynamic state and parameter estimation of a cyber-physical
system. Specifically, the generalized maximum-likelihood-type (GM)-estimator,
the unscented Kalman filter, and the H-infinity filter will be integrated into a
unified framework to yield various centralized and decentralized robust dynamic
state estimators. These new estimators will be able to handle large system
uncertainties as well as suppress three types of outliers while achieving good
statistical efficiency under a broad range of non-Gaussian process and
observation noise. The three types of outliers, including observation,
innovation, and structural outliers are caused by either an unreliable dynamical
model or real-time synchrophasor measurements with data quality issues, which
are commonly seen in the power system. Furthermore, the theories of robust
statistics will be extended to structured nonlinear regression models. That is,
the theory of breakdown point in linear structured regression will be extended
to nonlinear dynamical models characterized by sparse Jacobian matrices, which
is precisely the case for power systems. To this end, the global and local
breakdown points of all the proposed methods will be investigated. Finally, the
developed methods will be implemented and tested on two practical power systems,
including the Southern Brazil power system and the Dominion Virginia Power
500-KV transmission system, which is observed through a set of redundant real-
time synchrophasor measurements.