* 1711850
* Collaborative Research: A Global Algorithm for Quadratic Nonconvex AC-OPF Based on Successive Linear Optimization and Convex Relaxation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Amin Kargarian Marvasti, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2022
* USD 196,972.00

Non-convex programming involves optimization problems where either the objective
function or constraint set is a non-convex function. These kinds of problems
arise in a broad range of applications in engineering systems. Despite the
substantial literature on convex and non-convex quadratic programming (general
classes of optimization problems), most available optimization techniques are
either not scalable or work efficiently only for convex quadratic programming
and do not provide adequate results for non-convex quadratic programming. This
project focuses on fundamental research on an integrated approach which the
research team expects will lead to powerful solution methods for classes of non-
convex programming problems. The new approach will be applicable for non-convex
problems arising in many areas, such as power and energy systems,
transportation, and communications. The project will involve students from
underrepresented groups and will positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general difficulty of power and energy
optimization problems has a direct impact on power and energy systems
management. This is one of the most fundamental concerns that must be dealt with
in electrical power system management. The primary objective of this project is
to address the difficulty associated with problem non-convexity by developing
high-performance optimization techniques that apply to a broad set of nonlinear
energy problems, particularly the Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problem. There is a
critical and urgent need for developing smart and robust OPF solvers. The
conventional options currently available for DC-OPF are quite limited. The
research will fundamentally address AC Optimal Power Flow (AC-OPF) with active
and reactive quadratically constrained quadratic programming optimization
problems of a form that arises in operation and planning applications of the
power system. Besides being non-convex, these problems are identified to be NP-
hard. The proposed solution method is based on several basic and powerful
optimization techniques in convex optimization theory such as linearized
approximation techniques, linear and global search procedures, bi-linear and
convex relaxation, and alternate direction methods. Also, new schemes and
theories must be introduced to establish the convergence of the algorithm and
guarantee the global optimality of the solution results. The research team
devised a new successive linear optimization based branch and bound (SLOBB)
method based on deploying principles of the classical linear approximation,
improved convex relaxation, and the branch-and-bound technique to find the
global optimal solution of the AC-OPF problem. Since the linear programming and
convex solvers are robust and fast, and also the power systems community is
already familiar with linear and convex programs for OPF, the algorithm that
will be developed will be beneficial and user-friendly for the AC-OPF problem.
We will also pursue theoretical investigations to examine the performance of the
proposed algorithm and analyze its efficiency on existing test bed systems and
synthetic data sets. The developed models and methodologies will be executed in
real-world practical power grids.