* 1711703
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Mechanisms of phenotypic variation in Polistes paper wasps
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sara Miller, Miller                  Sara           E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Sara Miller, is conducting
research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections in
innovative ways, and is being mentored by two sponsoring scientists at two host
institutions: Michael Sheehan at Cornell University and James Highman at New
York University. Character displacement is an evolutionary change in phenotype
that results in decreased competition between species using the same resources
or the same signals for mate choice. This process has been proposed as a key
mechanism for maintaining biodiversity because it allows species to coexist that
would otherwise go extinct through competition. Character displacement has been
poorly examined in social insects. The United States is home to sixteen native
species of paper wasps in the genus Polistes. These charismatic species exhibit
striking diversity of color variation within and among species, yet occupy the
same ecological niche and can have overlapping distributions. This project will
provide a comprehensive overview of inter- and intraspecific color pattern
diversity in these species. The fellow will test if these patterns are
consistent with character displacement and will explore alternative hypotheses
to explain this variation. This project will produce improved distribution maps,
and detailed data on coloration and size variation for these species and will
additionally develop image analysis methods that can be applied to other
organisms. Data will be used to develop identification resources for researchers
and citizen scientists. The fellow will mentor undergraduate students and
present findings to local residents at Insectapalooza.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thousands of paper wasp specimens are available in museum
collections making this an unexploited resource ideally suited to large-scale
studies of phenotypic variation. The fellow will compile specimen information
and use ecological niche modeling to generate species distribution maps.
Measurements of body size and high-resolution photographs will be taken for most
specimens. Automated image processing will be used to measure and quantify color
pattern variation in multidimensional space. To test for a pattern of character
displacement, trait means and distributions will be compared between habitats
with different species compositions. Color patterns will be compared with
environmental variables and latitude to test for correlations among phenotypes
and the abiotic environment. This project will also examine the process of
character displacement by comparing trait distributions in species' body size
and coloration before and after the recent colonization of the United States by
the invasive wasp species Polistes dominula. Overall, this study will provide a
much-needed assessment of the mechanisms maintaining diversity among social
wasps.