* 1711163
* Enhancing Preparation of Secondary Preservice Mathematics Teachers: Mathematical Reasoning and Proving as a Lens for Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Sharon McCrone, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 283,249.00

This project will contribute to the National Science Foundation's goal of
improving undergraduate STEM education to broaden and strengthen the U.S. STEM
workforce. Preparation of mathematically literate and STEM-oriented majors
begins prior to students reaching college. It begins with highly qualified and
knowledgeable teachers, who inspire and prepare students to pursue STEM
disciplines. Thus, it is imperative to prepare excellent mathematics teachers
capable of enacting effective teaching practices in their classrooms. This
project will address this teacher knowledge base through design, implementation,
and study of a new, technologically rich capstone course called Mathematical
Reasoning and Proving for Secondary Teachers. The course will enhance
prospective secondary mathematics teachers' content and pedagogical knowledge to
promote deep conceptual understanding, problem solving, reasoning, and proving
skills. This emphasis concurs with the vision put forward by the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the Common Core State Standards for
Mathematics. The successful implementation of this vision relies on a well-
qualified and knowledgeable teacher workforce. The project will generate
evidence-based approaches, instructional modules and facilitator guides to
improve preparation of secondary mathematics teachers throughout the country,
and by extension the project will enhance the mathematics education of thousands
of middle school and secondary school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovative aspects of the capstone course Mathematical Reasoning and Proving for
Secondary Teachers will include university-based experiences supported by
virtual learning environments, a structured practical experience in local
schools, and an emphasis on reasoning, justification, and proving as an
overarching approach for teaching mathematics. The project will develop a
concept model of the capstone course, four instructional modules, and the
accompanying facilitator guides. The instructional modules will each address a
critical topic related to proving, such as quantification, conditional
statements, direct proof and proof by contrapositive. The project will utilize
design-based research methodology to study how prospective teachers' content and
pedagogical knowledge for teaching mathematical reasoning and proving develop
throughout the course. The results will help to better understand the impact of
the learning environment and its design components on enhancing prospective
teachers' knowledge. Specifically, the project will contribute to the literature
on mathematical reasoning and proving and the ways to incorporate them in
teacher preparation and, consequently, in the mathematics classroom. The
theoretical and the empirical knowledge generated by the project will be broadly
disseminated to help to improve preparation of secondary mathematics teachers
nationwide. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program will provide co-funding
for this project in recognition of its alignment with the broader teacher
preparation goals of the Noyce effort.