* 1711632
* Integrating High Frequency Whispering-Gallery-Mode Phononic Cavities with Efficient Electrically-Small Antennas: Pushing the Limits of Wireless Passive Micro-Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Xun Gong, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 403,247.00

This project aims to explore and combine novel micro-scale resonator designs
with extremely small antennas to build a wireless sensing platform that does not
require power sources and takes advantage of the economy scale in delivering
exceptional performance at very low price-points. This platform, once realized,
is believed to make a significant impact on medical sensing paradigms by
offering flexibility in remote and nonintrusive measurement of patients vital
signs. Despite the tremendous technological progress made in the field of
microelectronics during the past few decades, there exists a gap between the
scale of sensing apparatus used in medical industry and the state-of-the-art in
the field of miniaturized sensors. Specifically, the devices monitoring
respiration rate and breathing pattern are inconvenient for the patients due to
excessive wiring. The platform proposed in this project can significantly scale
down the size of the equipment required for monitoring breathing rate. The same
technology can be adapted for continuous monitoring of the temperature
(including the core body temperature), the heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen
intake, etc. without the need for changing the battery. The data collection can
be achieved by a simple and small gadget that could communicate with
smartphones. The principal investigators are participating in the NSF-supported
Career Advancement Mentoring Program for Young Entrepreneur and Scholars Program
(CAMP-YES) and the Research and Mentoring Activities (RAMA) program at the
University of Central Florida, both of which promote research experience for
underrepresented undergraduate students. The resources developed in this project
will assist the principal investigators in furthering their contributions to
these programs by recruiting students to engage in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to enable extremely-
small wireless passive sensors by exploring exceptionally high quality factor
(Q) piezoelectric-based high-frequency resonators integrated with ultra-small
highly-efficient antennas. In this work, for the first time, whispering-gallery
mode phononic cavities in a piezoelectric-on-ultrananocrystalline diamond
platform will be demonstrated with the goal of achieving high coupling factor
and high quality factor at high frequencies around 1 GHz. The whispering gallery
mode is chosen to evade the anchor-loss (a major source of energy loss) and the
diamond substrate is chosen to minimize the effect of internal friction losses
at high frequencies. Such large values of coupling and Q could enable extremely-
small size (&lt; 1 cm x 1 cm including the antenna) wireless sensors with a
readout range of a few meters. The tasks include: 1) Studying the physics of
loss in high frequency piezoelectric-on-diamond resonators, 2) Implementation of
whispering-gallery mode phononic cavities in the thin-film piezoelectric-on-
diamond platform, 3) Integration of the phononic cavities with highly-efficient
electrically-small antennas to develop passive wireless sensors. Such sensors
can be orders of magnitude smaller than other wireless sensors operating at
similar frequencies. Successful demonstration of extremely small wireless
sensors targeted in this project will have a significant impact on a wide range
of remote sensing applications including medical health monitoring and
diagnosis, environmental monitoring, and industrial control.