* 1711997
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Testing the role of isoprene in tropical forest responses to climate change: a study linking biological collections to field data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Tyeen Taylor, Taylor                  Tyeen          C
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Trees of the world's forests not only respond to the climate in
which they grow, but also regulate climate through the exchange of energy,
water, carbon dioxide, and reactive trace-gases. The extreme diversity and
remoteness of tropical forests make research on their vulnerability to climate
change particularly challenging because the work often requires sophisticated
instrumentation that is not well suited to fieldwork. This award will support
studies using custom-designed instrumentation to measure trace gases on
botanical garden specimens to understand leaf physiology and the production of
isoprene gas. Isoprene helps leaves tolerate heat and drought, both of which are
expected to increase in tropical forests with climate change. Field datasets
showing tree responses to recent climate warming (elevation range shifts), and
droughts will also be analyzed. As part of the effort, groups of 10th grade
students will be mentored in biological research methods to promote broadening
participation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research aims of the planned study will
address whether isoprene production impacts organismal resilience to climate
change. The use of a custom gas analyzer in garden setting makes creative use of
the collected specimens to inform field biology. Analyzing the taxonomic
distribution of isoprene production in tropical species is expected to enhance
our understanding of forest dynamics and resiliency. Using the integrated
measures of isoprene production capacity, climate data, and species range
distributions, the Fellow will build a predictive framework to model the impact
of climate changes on tropical forests. Results from these studies will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and shared at scientific meetings.