* 1711355
* Collaborative Research:  Programmable THz Devices Enabled by High-Performance Optical Spatial Modulation for Advanced Imaging and Adaptive Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Li-Jing Cheng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 220,000.00

This project will investigate and develop a novel approach based on high-
performance wavefront spatial modulation using mesa arrays for efficiently
generating tunable and reconfigurable quasi-optical THz components that could
not be realized using conventional approaches. Using the proposed approach and
components, three advanced THz imaging architectures and adaptive wireless
communication links will be further explored and demonstrated. Both imaging and
communication at THz region are important technological areas that will generate
significant benefit to the society. For example, high-speed THz near-field
imaging with subwavelength resolution enabled by reconfigurable coded-apertures
may find applications in chemical sensing, medical imaging, and cancer
diagnostics. Real-time ultrasensitive passive imaging can be used in astronomy
observation and rapid security screening (e.g., detect weak blackbody emission
from the human body, environmental scenes). THz spectroscopic imaging using
tunable filters will enable advanced biological sensing, and substance/material
identification and detection. Finally, adaptive THz wireless communication links
(enabled by tunable filters and beam-steering/forming antennas) to be
demonstrated will significantly bolster current efforts to develop advanced THz
devices, circuits and systems, and may have profound impact on 5G cellular
networks, secure military and defense links, the internet of things, chip-to-
chip interconnection, 4K TV signal broadcasting, and multi-medium downloading.
The project also provides significant educational opportunities for students.
The graduate students in this program will be exposed to the full scope of
semiconductor physics, electromagnetic wave propagation, advanced imaging, THz
system design and testing process, wireless communication, from a single device
to the component/circuit/system level. A cooperative education activity will be
initiated between the University of Notre Dame and Oregon State University with
remote graduate-level lectures. Undergraduate students will be involved through
summer and honors thesis research. The PIs will advise and mentor students from
underrepresented groups. Finally, this project will also promote science and
engineering education among local middle- and high-schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to explore
and demonstrate a novel high-performance optical THz spatial modulation
technology based on a mesa-array approach for efficiently achieving tunable and
reconfigurable quasi-optical devices that are required in advanced THz imaging
and adaptive THz wireless communication systems. This technology would offer
sub-wavelength spatial resolution, higher than 100 dB modulation depth, higher
speed, and permit high-resolution photo-defined patterns to be virtually
generated for devices and components operated at high THz frequencies with
multi-functionality. Using this mesa-array technology as a platform,
tunable/reconfigurable THz quasi-optical devices, including imaging coded masks,
beam steering and forming antennas and universally-tunable filters, with
performance and versatility far beyond those realized by conventional approaches
will be investigated and demonstrated. Acting on the above investigation, a
compact, dynamically programmable THz quasi-optical device/component module will
be developed. By employing such modules as building blocks, three advanced THz
imaging architectures 1) high-speed THz near-field imaging with sub-wavelength
resolution, 2) real-time ultra-sensitive passive THz imaging, and 3) spectrally-
resolved THz imaging and prototype adaptive THz wireless communication links
will be demonstrated. The project will involve semiconductor physics, THz
science and technology, imaging theory, wireless communication, and high-
frequency testing and characterization to implement and demonstrate the proposed
novel approach for tunable/reconfigurable THz quasi-optical devices. If
successful, the project will establish a unique and powerful technology platform
for developing tunable and reconfigurable quasi-optical THz devices that cannot
be realized using any other conventional approaches.