* 1711839
* Collaborative Research: Silicon Nano-Opto-Fluidics Enabled Multi-Dimensional, High-Throughput Molecular and Size Profiling of Exosomes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Liang Dong, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2021
* USD 280,652.00

Liquid biopsy has significant advantages over traditional tumor biopsies,
because it is minimally invasive and uses biofluids, such as blood and urine, to
diagnose cancer and other diseases in their early stages. Exosomes, which are
actively secreted from cancer cells, carry molecular constituents of their
originating cells. Because these membranous extracellular vesicles can serve as
cellular surrogates, exosomes have emerged as a new type of potent biomarkers.
However, conventional exosome analysis methods such as immunoblotting or enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assays are costly and require approximately twelve hours
and excessive volumes of serum to detect transmembrane proteins on the surface
of exosomes. Exosome separation requires complex steps to remove debris or
cellular components that will confound downstream analysis. High-throughput
molecular profiling of exosomes using miniature label-free biosensors is not
available. The goal of this project is to develop a new capability to rapidly
screen and profile exosomes based on both molecular and size characteristics.
This research will lead to a transformative change in exosome analysis by
integrating two state-of-the-art technologies on a single silicon chip. In
addition, this research will be integrated with education through adding new lab
modules to existing undergraduate biomedical engineering minor program
curriculum, recruiting female students, and providing summer internship
opportunities to African-American students to participate in the project at Iowa
State University, and developing a new undergraduate-level course related to
nanobiotechnology at Arizona State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will lead to an integrated silicon-based nano-opto-fluidic platform for rapidly
and continuously profiling of both molecular and size features of exosomes.
Cascaded nanoscale deterministic lateral displacement pillar arrays will be
developed to simplify the isolation and size profiling of exosomes. The exosomes
will be effectively separated from interference molecules present in the fluid
sample. High-performance lateral flow-through optical biosensors will be
developed to quantify the separated exosomes. The exosome samples can flow
through the nanoscale biosensor and be immobilized and enriched on the
functionalized sensor surface. Because both the separation and detection modules
have the features of lateral flow designs, they can be integrated on a single
silicon chip using the nanoimprint lithography process. The integration of these
two functions will lead to an unprecedented ability to continuously streamline
exosome separation, enrichment and detection processes to profile multi-
dimensional molecular and size information for multiple protein markers within
one hour. The biological validation plan of the project will be carried out
using the proposed device to sort and sense exosomes released from a parasitic
nematode and etiological agent of the human disease, Lymphatic Filariasis. The
proposed technology is advantageous over the lab-based methods in terms of cost,
sample consumption, and throughput, and could be extended to the profiling of
circulating exocellular exosomes in human or animal biofluids to diagnose a
variety of diseases, identify companion biomarkers that are important for drug
discovery, and monitor the progress of a therapy.