* 1711587
* Monitoring and Optimization in Coupled Natural Gas and Electric Power Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Vassilis Kekatos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2021
* USD 285,000.00

The pressing need for efficient, low-carbon, and fast-responding electric power
generators and decreasing prices of natural gas are currently transforming
natural gas networks. The intermittent operation of gas-fired power plants to
compensate wind generation introduces spatiotemporal fluctuations in
continuously increasing volumes of gas demand. Generation and network
contingencies in power transmission systems can affect shortages in gas
supplies; and vice versa, congested and suboptimally scheduled gas networks
limit the integration of renewable energy. In this context, this project studies
the interdependency between these two critical infrastructures through
coordinated control and market operations to ensure stability, reliability, and
efficiency. The research project will develop algorithmic tools for the
analysis, optimization, and monitoring of natural gas networks and their
interplay with electric power grids. The vision is threefold: develop a reliable
computational toolbox for enhanced gas network operations leveraging advances in
convex optimization; identify analogies, key differences, and opportunities by
jointly dispatching the two energy systems; and engage data analytics for
transforming both gas transmission and distribution networks into smarter cyber-
physical infrastructures. The consequent gains in efficiency and awareness will
be reflected on a wide gamut of industrial, commercial, and residential uses of
natural gas; while enabling a smooth transition to the low-emission economy.
Broader transformative impact will result from an educational dissemination
plan, involvement of undergraduates in research, and outreach to the local
community and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of
modeling, control, and monitoring of gas networks is a set of nonlinear
equations relating nodal gas injections and pressures to flows over pipelines.
Building on convex relaxations, the gas flow problem is formulated as a
semidefinite program that outperforms existing alternatives in terms of region
of convergence and which naturally leads to coupled gas and power flow
formulations. The novel scheme is generalized for optimally dispatching natural
gas networks, independently or in tandem with electric power systems. To cope
with uncertainty on renewable generation, and adjusting to the slower gas
transients, static and dynamic setups are considered via decentralized and
stochastic implementations. Efficient modules are additionally devised for
enhancing situational awareness via gas network state estimation. By developing
a suite of gas pressure and injection data analytics, computational efforts will
aim towards enhancing local gas utility distribution networks, thus resonating
with efforts for smart cities and connected communities. The utility of the
proposed research goes well beyond the envisioned application area to the
broader fields of stochastic optimization, statistical signal processing,
control of coupled networks, inference over graphs, and dynamic modeling of
fluids.