* 1711254
* Digital Instrumentation for the Radio Astronomy Community: The Next Generation of CASPER
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Anthony C. Readhead, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,208,681.00

The Collaboration for Astronomy Signal Processing and Electronics Research
(CASPER) was founded eleven years ago to develop specialized computational
methods for radio astronomy. It has since become a community of hundreds of
scientists and engineers worldwide and their methods have become ubiquitous
throughout radio astronomy. Such numerically intensive methods require high-
performance computing hardware and specially designed software. Declining costs
and technological advance of this hardware mean that old CASPER methods are in
danger of becoming obsolete. This project will develop a modern version of the
CASPER toolkit, known as JASPER. This new toolkit will enable a wide range of
scientific discoveries. The collaboration is also known for providing training
for students and early career researchers. This project will continue ongoing,
highly successful conferences that provide such training and industry contacts
for academics. The PIs also plan to release the JASPER toolkit as open source
and build upon the existing user community around the language by ensuring that
interested researchers are able to contribute to the JASPER codebase. This will
allow a wider growth of the project. This aspect is of special interest to the
software cluster in the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, which has
provided co-funding for this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
update the current offering of Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) design tools
and software to support the latest generation of hardware. Preliminary
development has already begun. This project will expand into a flexible, well
documented framework. This award will also support continued migration away from
expensive proprietary platforms (i.e. Matlab, Simulink) toward freely available,
open source software written in Python. It leverages progress in the computing
industry, which has surpassed hardware development in radio astronomy. This
project will provide infrastructure to cost-effectively build the next
generation of astronomical instrumentation, including wide-band spectrometers,
transient-detection machines, large N correlators and high-pixel-count,
millimeter wave cameras.