* 1711515
* RET Site: Research Experience for Teachers in Nanoengineering with a Focus on Teacher Leadership
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Pedro Alvarez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 591,401.00

This award provides funding to support a Research Experiences for K-12 Teachers
(RET) in Nanotechnology, Engineering, and Leadership at Rice University
entitled, "Research Experience for Teachers in Nanoengineering with a Focus in
Leadership". This proposal leverages STEM programs developed through prior RET
site and NSF Engineering Research Center awards that have resulted in a strong
partnership with Houston Independent School District (HISD), which has a very
diverse student population. The Rice RET is designed to not only develop content
and leadership skills but also scale up research experiences by forming a nexus
of teacher leaders who can then train new teachers in perpetuity. Teacher
interns will work with curriculum specialists to develop lessons that are
inquiry-based, embedded with nanoscience and engineering, and tightly aligned
with National and Texas Science standards. The proposed NSF RET Program will
enhance and extend the previous successful RET Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Rice Office of STEM Engagement (R-STEM) will offer a K-12 RET program in
Nanotechnology with a Focus on Teacher Leadership, an enhancement upon the six
years of success Rice University has committed in teacher professional
development through research internships. R-STEM will connect STEM teachers who
serve students in the Greater Houston metropolitan area with expert faculty in
nanoengineering research at Rice. With the help of Rice University's research
mentorship and facilities, RET will accomplish the following objectives: 1) use
nanoengineering research experiences to enhance teacher content knowledge and
understanding of STEM research processes, 2) improve the quality of education
though the development of engineering design-based learning activities centered
on research practices, 3) create a cadre of teacher leaders, and 4) disseminate
the RET outcomes broadly by creating a network of teachers who are actively
learning about nanoengineering research and engineering design. Teachers will
receive inquiry-based lessons, professional development, and pedagogical support
along with leadership training as they translate their research experiences into
learning experiences for students. The program will serve as a national model
and will broadly disseminate the outcomes of RET via symposiums at Rice,
national and state-wide meetings, peer-reviewed publications, and online via the
TeachEngineering digital library. Teachers will meet weekly during their RET
experience to discuss their research, share their lab experiences, develop
lesson ideas, as well as plan the dissemination of their research. Rice
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and industry mentors will be
constituents supporting the RET teachers in their research. At the conclusion of
the research experience, each teacher will create a research poster to present
their experience and finding at the Nanotechnology for Teachers Symposium, to
their teaching campus, as well as at district and professional conferences.
During the academic school year following their research experiences, teachers
will share both their research and lesson plans with other teachers in
professional development programs. R-STEM professional development courses will
support RET teachers to propagate their knowledge effectively to a large number
of STEM teachers, creating a cadre of motivated, creative, and diverse teacher
leaders in the community. RET interns will also be encouraged and guided by the
R-STEM team to publish their nanotechnology lessons through
TeachEngineering.org. Throughout the components of the program, assessment is
performed by an external evaluator to determine the impact on the 12 teachers
that participate each summer and to provide feedback for refining the program.