* 1711708
* Electrodewetting
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Chang-Jin Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 03/31/2022
* USD 414,000.00

As a simple technology for handling liquid droplets, electrically making a
liquid wetting on a non-wettable surface, i.e., electrowetting, especially
electrowetting-on-dielectric (EWOD) technology, has shown significant progress
since the turn of the century. While major commercial products have started to
emerge, the well-known reliability problem of EWOD devices is hampering the
continued growth. A UCLA team from the engineering and medical school proposes
to explore a phenomenon opposite to electrowetting, thus named electrodewetting,
after finding it has a droplet manipulation capability similar to EWOD without
the reliability problem. Noting the high reliability and easy manufacturing of
electrodewetting-based devices, the team proposes to study the origin of
electrodewetting, characterize the mechanism, and build the fundamental
knowledge that will help design application devices. The proposed
electrodewetting study is expected to significantly increase the user base of
digital (droplet) microfluidics, which is powered by EWOD technology currently.
Attractive to users of all levels and different goals regardless of their
expertise and interests, electrodewetting devices are expected to serve both
academic and industrial researchers as well as some hobbyists because of their
simplicity and reliability. The proposed work requires an interdisciplinary
approach in research and training on issues ranging from basic electrical
engineering, surface science, and microfabrication, all the way to optical and
biochemical applications. Graduate students will gain first-hand experience from
this interdisciplinary research and be well prepared to be future leaders.
Undergraduate and high school students will carry out tasks in a vertical team
of researchers. The results will enrich the engineering curricula, including the
MEMS/Nano PhD program at UCLA. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While providing all the
basic digital microfluidic functions of EWOD, electrodewetting avoids the key
problems of EWOD. First, electrodewetting uses a hydrophilic substrate with
neither the dielectric layer nor the hydrophobic topcoat. These coated layers
needed for EWOD are the main culprits to its reliability problem and high
manufacturing cost. Hydrophilic surfaces, such as glass, are common to many
diverse applications spanning biomedical, optical, chemical, and other fields.
Importantly, this simplicity would also make the design and manufacturing of
electrodewetting devices easy and cheap. Second, electrodewetting typically uses
only ~3 V for actuation. This low voltage allows the use off-the-shelf
integrated circuits so the developers can quickly build a compact system, which
is especially useful for mobile applications. Third, droplets can be split into
smaller ones in an open configuration with no cover plate, allowing more
flexibility in device design. In the proposed study, based on hypotheses
carefully constructed from preliminary experiments and observations, the UCLA
team will elucidate how the electrodewetting mechanism works, understand how it
responds to device parameters, build the fundamental engineering knowledge for
device design, and explore applications by developing an electronic display
device. The underlying goal is to develop knowledge foundation that will assist
other researchers and developers who would like to adopt this elegantly simple
liquid handling technology for their own applications.