* 1711951
* GOALI: Distributed Control, Optimization and State Estimation of Networked Microgrids with Enhanced Stability
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* David Wenzhong Gao, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 01/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

This project is focused on advanced control technology development based on new
techniques for analysis and enhancement of stability characteristics of
networked microgrids, which is a complex system integrated with various
distributed energy resource (DER) units. University of Denver has assembled an
excellent team for the collaborative GOALI project with our industry partners
ENCORP and National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The major novelties of
the project are: to research the distributed, optimal control strategies and the
stability characteristics of microgrids; to explore new control technologies to
enhance stability of microgrids; and to pursue technology validation and
commercialization with our industry partners. This project is unique because the
proposed control methods can optimize generation resources with enhanced
stability in a distributed manner. Another unique aspect of this project is the
combination of computer simulation and real-time implementation/physical testing
for the proposed methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research can
be applied to technologies and demonstrations that shape the future of the
electricity grid. The development of networked microgrids along with the
proposed control, optimization and analysis methodologies will not only
facilitate the increased penetration of distributed renewable energy resources
but also enhance the reliable operation of low- or medium- voltage distribution
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research offers a unique research
setting unobtainable from pure academic institution. Graduate students and
undergraduate students including those from underrepresented groups will benefit
greatly from the educational outcome of our proposed research and development
work. The principal investigators and senior personnel of this project will
pursue a holistic range of activities to promote microgrid and smart grid
technologies for research-integrated education and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful penetration of our technology into the
energy market will have major societal and commercial impact and contribute in
transforming our energy infrastructure to become resilient. Our microgrid
control technology will improve security, efficiency, and sustainability of our
power and energy infrastructure.