* 1711672
* Collaborative Research:  Experiential Process Safety Training for Chemical Engineers
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Daniel Anastasio, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2021
* USD 27,024.00

Process safety is regarded as a critical part of chemical engineering education.
However, teaching process safety only in a classroom setting makes it difficult
for students to grasp contextual factors that impact decisions they may make in
a real-world scenario. Real life chemical processing environments are difficult
to achieve in the classroom and potentially dangerous in an actual facility.
Computer-based simulations are beneficial tools for teaching difficult and
abstract content due to their ability to immerse the learner within the
environment, provide goals, support their learning experience, and provide
immediate feedback that allows learning lessons from failure.Â The proposed
approach uses a digital environment that allows students to role-play as
chemical plant employees. In this learning environment, students will be given
the opportunity to experience first-hand the safety challenges of working in an
industrial environment and the difficult decision-making scenarios that often
arise. The virtual environment offers conditions that are safe, providing
students with real-world experiences without the disastrous consequences of
wrong decisions that could occur in real life.

Working with a professional game design company, the chemical process safety
simulations will be implemented in three chemical engineering programs.
Following initial consultations, a design document will be produced that
specifies details of the simulation's rules and interactions, describing the
player's experience and how the player's actions correlate to learning
activities. Three appropriate research questions will be investigated regarding
student motivation to learn about process safety, changes in ability to make
correct safety decisions and cultural differences in safety decision making.
Quantitative methods will be applied to determine how the process safety
simulation influenced students, in addition, thematic analysis of student
reflections on their responses to the process safety decision making prompts
within the process safety instrument will be undertaken to further understand
the approach students took when examining the scenarios provided.