* 1711579
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale, Multi-Rate Spatiotemporal Optimal Control with Application to Airborne Wind Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Christopher Vermillion, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 03/31/2019
* USD 230,581.00

The objective of this research is to pioneer new control strategies for emerging
systems whose operating environments change as functions of both time and a
controllable spatial position. Such applications include coordinated unmanned
aerial vehicles that operate in variable atmospheric conditions, concepts for
relocatable marine hydrokinetic energy systems that operate in a varying ocean
environment, and airborne wind energy systems that operate in an atmospheric
environment where the wind varies with respect to both time and vertical
position. This research will focus on deriving general theory that will be
relevant to a variety of applications, along with the validation of these
results on an airborne wind energy system. In airborne wind energy systems, the
conventional tower is replaced by tethers and a lifting body (a wing or
aerostat) that elevates a horizontal-axis turbine to high altitudes. Because the
tether lengths can be adjusted, the operating altitude can be varied to
optimally harness the wind resource. The work will include a substantial
complementary educational component, wherein graduate, undergraduate, and STEM
high school students will utilize NREL's Hybrid Optimization Model for Multiple
Energy Resources (HOMER) software to optimize renewable/storage/dispatchable
network configurations for microgrids in North Carolina and
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will derive new control theoretic
knowledge and tools for the systems that operate in a spatiotemporally varying
and partially observable environment. While optimal control in a temporally
varying environment is a well-studied problem that can be addressed through
Markov models, the addition of a spatial component results in an explosion in
the number of states, rendering Markov-based methods computationally infeasible
in most cases. Furthermore, the presence of partial observability results in a
fundamental tradeoff between exploration (obtaining knowledge of the spatial
environment) and exploitation (operating at the most favorable locations). To
address the complexities of this spatiotemporal optimization problem, this
research will explore the use of a multi-rate, multi-scale hierarchical
framework. Specifically, an upper-level controller will perform a global
optimization over a very coarse grid (thereby rendering the optimization
computationally tractable), and a lower-level optimization will perform
adjustments on a much finer grid. The research will focus on model predictive
control for the upper-level optimization and will explore the use of extremum
seeking and model predictive control strategies at the lower level. Control
algorithms will be validated on a model of a lighter-than-air airborne wind
energy system, using real wind shear profile models and load demand data. In
this airborne wind energy system, the wind speed is only measurable at the
system?s operating altitude (thereby making the problem partially observable),
and significant energy production improvements can be realized through the
optimal adjustment of the operating altitude.&lt;br/&gt;uction improvements can
be realized through the optimal adjustment of the operating altitude.