* 1711944
* Understanding the Complex Impact of Convergence Bids on Wholesale Electricity Markets: Current and Future Implications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Amir-Hamed Mohsenian-Rad, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 04/30/2023
* USD 338,296.00

The objective of this project is to build an analytical foundation and new
mathematical tools to investigate and explain the complex and sometimes counter-
intuitive results of placing convergence bids (CBs), a.k.a., virtual bids (VBs),
in wholesale electricity markets. Several Independent System Operators (ISOs) in
the United States have adopted CBs with the general assumption that CBs would
enhance market efficiency by lowering the gap between the prices in the day-
ahead market (DAM) and prices in the real-time market (RTM). However, analysis
of ISO market data over the past few years has led to a current state of
uncertainty and debate about the true advantages or disadvantages of CBs in
electricity markets and their impact on utility customers and generation firms.
What is alarming is the reason behind having such debates: there is currently no
clear scientific understanding of how CBs work (or don't work) in wholesale
electricity markets. However, the PI's preliminary studies have shown that some
of the concerns that are recently raised by ISOs about CBs are fundamental and
have root causes that can be understood through mathematical analysis and
illustrative examples. In brief, many of these issues are due to the physics of
transmission lines, generators, and loads, which do not allow application of the
generally accepted principles of market efficiency as observed in trading in
other financial and commodity marketplaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit in this proposal is to provide scientific fundamentals, in
the form of mathematical analysis and illustrative examples and case studies,
which can help to ultimately resolve the current state of uncertainty and debate
on the subject of CBs in ISO markets. The intellectual advances in this project
will be shaped and organized around three main research thrust themes: 1)
characterizing the impact of CBs on price convergence; 2) characterizing the
impact of CBs on overall market performance; and 3) explaining the current and
future implications of the results and making recommendations to enhance the
potential benefits of CBs while avoiding their potential detrimental impact in
existing and emerging electricity markets.