* 1711626
* Integration of Phase Change Devices with Silicon Electronics for Increased Functionality and Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ali Gokirmak, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 487,999.00

The electronics market is continuing to grow, as functionality of electronic
circuits' increases for reduced cost, and the market expands into the developing
world with mobile applications. The demand for overall computer and
communication infrastructure is also increasing as a result. Electronics became
a major driver of the global economy and increased quality of life with reduced
device dimensions and integration of new materials and techniques. The recent
advances in device technologies is enabling integration of large amount of high-
speed data storage with logic circuits to construct computers on chip. If the
memory access circuitry can be scaled down, the single-chip computer can
significantly outperform the conventional computers in speed, power consumption,
cost and size. One of the memory technologies that can enable integration of
large data storage with logic circuits is phase change memory, which stores
information in the highly resistive amorphous and conductive crystalline states
of glassy materials as logic '1's and '0's. Phase change materials can also be
used to make a family of multi-contact devices that complement conventional
silicon electronics to reduce the area required for the logic circuits. The
multi-contact phase change structures that are investigated in this study
utilize thermal interactions in addition to electronic interactions to achieve
the same or improved functionality at smaller area, reduced power and cost. The
graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in device fabrication,
characterization, simulations and modeling. The students involved with this
project interact with industrial leaders to advance the field of phase change
memory and will help transition this multi-contact phase change device
technology to mass production. Minority students will be mentored through UConn
Mentor Connection and Northeast Alliance program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on fundamental studies on electro-thermal interactions and
behavior of phase change materials that enable multi-contact logic devices, and
design, fabrication and evaluation of these multi-contact devices as
multiplexers, routers, counters, state machines and other logic units. These
devices offer speeds comparable to DRAM (dynamic random access memory) and non-
volatile configurations at sufficiently low power levels for critical feature
sizes &lt; 50 nm. Pattern transfer technologies to achieve sub-50 nm critical
features are now commonly available in silicon CMOS and some of the large-scale
manufacturers have announced high density phase change memory products. Hence,
the challenges related to integration of phase change memory with CMOS are
practically resolved, and new device and circuit concepts that utilize this
infrastructure can lead to significant impacts in a relatively short time. These
multi-contact phase change devices can be manufactured along with conventional
phase change memory arrays atop silicon CMOS to realize logic functions at a
significantly reduced transistor count in the CMOS layer.