* 1711529
* Collaborative Research: Photon Funnels-A Fundamentally New Concept for Concentrating Light
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Raymond Rumpf, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,235.00

Collecting and concentrating light is an essential process in any system
utilizing optics. Conventional lenses collect light and concentrate it to a
spot, but the concentration spot moves as light rays strike at different angles
or different positions. As a result, sensors and detectors can lose energy as a
source moves, and the efficiency of an optical devices is often limited by the
angular acceptance of a lens or lens system. In this project, a collaborative
team at the University of Central Florida and the University of Texas at El Paso
will explore a fundamentally new approach for concentrating light called "photon
funnels," which is based on spatially engineered optical lattices. Photon
funnels will be designed to leverage an optical phenomenon called "self-
collimation" to control how light propagates within an engineered lattice. Using
a collaborative approach that combines theory, simulation, fabrication, and
optical testing, the team will develop fundamental knowledge that enables
scientists and engineers to design photon funnels for a myriad of applications.
The benefits to society will include new technologies for imaging, optical
detection and sensing, telecommunications and energy harvesting. This
interdisciplinary project will give research students cutting-edge training in
optical engineering, physics, chemistry, materials science, and design and
simulation. Educational outreach activities integrated with the project will
bring the excitement of the research to the broader community and will help to
improve understanding of science and technology and encourage youth to pursue
careers in related fields.&lt;br/&gt;The research goals are to: 1) generate
fundamental understanding of photon funnels and more generally self-collimating,
spatially-variant lattices; 2) establish the fundamental performance-limits of
photon funnels; 3) determine to what extent reciprocity limits their light
collecting ability; and 4) create design-rules that engineers can use for their
own applications. Photon funnels are wavelength-scale aperiodic three-
dimensional lattices in which the unit cells are spatially varied in orientation
to direct light via self-collimation to a single concentration zone. Because
photon funnels work via self-collimation, they are not bound by Snell's law, so
in principle they could collect and concentrate light incident at all positions,
all angles, and all polarizations. No existing technology offers this
extraordinary capability. Photon funnels and spatially-variant lattices are
designed by spatially varying the structure of an optical lattices while
preserving the self-collimating properties of the unit cells. Spatially-variant
lattices are fundamentally different from photonic crystals, metamaterials, and
devices based on graded-index and transformation optics. Spatially-variant
lattices do not require exotic properties - like refractive index that is high,
negative, or less than one - which makes spatially-variant lattices simpler to
fabricate and inherently more manufacturable. The project will transform how
engineers design optical systems because they could set aside traditional ray
optics in certain applications and use photon funnels to concentrate light.
Photon funnels and spatially-variant lattices offer tremendous potential because
multiple functions can be integrated into a single device, including light
collection and concentration, tight beam bending, wavelength separation, and
control of polarization, phase, and power.