* 1711982
* Understanding the Genomic Landscape: High Altitudes, Adaptation, and Population Structure
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Maria Nieves-Colon, Nieves-Colon            Maria          A
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 154,680.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Over 140 million people live in high
altitude zones around the world and are susceptible to chronic or temporary
disorders related to low oxygen concentrations (hypoxia). Reproductive disorders
exacerbated with hypoxia include preeclampsia, which complicates 2-10% of all
pregnancies worldwide, causes nearly 40% of all premature births and is
associated in 10-15% of maternal deaths. Previous research has shown that native
Andean populations carry unique genetic variants conferring adaptation to high
altitude hypoxia. Some of this genetic variation may also underlie
susceptibility to preeclampsia, and therefore may influence human reproductive
fitness. This investigation characterizes genetic structure and adaptation in
native populations from the Peruvian Andes to understand the genetic factors
influencing human reproduction in challenging environments. Characterizing
underlying genetic diversity and population history is essential for the
identification of functional genetic variants, therefore this work will examine
how past demographic processes in the region have shaped the genomes of
indigenous Peruvians. This project is conducted in collaboration between USA
(Arizona State University, Stanford University), Mexico (National Laboratory of
Genomics for Biodiversity), and Peru (Puno Regional Hospital) based research
teams. A crucial benefit of this opportunity is to increase representation of
Latinos in genomics, promote international collaborative research, strengthen
genomics research capacity within Latin America and further education through
training and outreach. The project is led by a postdoctoral researcher
underrepresented in the SBE sciences, and further broadens participation of
underrepresented groups in the sciences by training Latin American graduate
students. The genetic data produced by this project will be freely available
upon completion, contributing to lessen the underrepresentation of ethnically
diverse populations in human genomics research.

The Peruvian Andes was home to multiple major civilization centers of the pre-
contact Americas, and contemporary peoples in this region retain a large
reservoir of Native American genomic diversity. Because they have evolved
adaptations to the extreme conditions of high altitude hypoxia, understanding
the ancestry and evolution of native Andeans can lead to discovery of genetic
loci involved in human adaptation for successful reproduction in low-oxygen
environments. Thus, this investigation examines fine-scale patterns of genetic
diversity in native Andeans to: (1) characterize their demographic history, (2)
identify candidate loci under natural selection, and (3) understand how genomic
architecture and admixture influence preeclampsia susceptibility and
reproductive fitness in a high altitude environment. Genotype data from 17
native populations from the coastal, highland and lowland Andes (N=170) will be
generated and analyzed to characterize local patterns of genetic diversity.
Additionally, existing genotype data from Andean families suffering from
preeclamptic pregnancies in Puno, Peru (N=530) will be analyzed by mapping
associations between genetic variants, ancestry and preeclampsia phenotype.
Studying human groups with unique genetic adaptations facilitates identification
of the primary genetic factors underlying complex phenotypes and gene function.
This research examines Andean groups as a model to understand human physiology
in hypoxic conditions. This natural experiment provides an excellent opportunity
to understand the genetic factors influencing human reproductive fitness in
challenging environments.