* 1711775
* Bridging the Gap Between Education and Research through Pre-College Engineering Systems (PCES) Outreach Program
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* James Momoh, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2023
* USD 186,000.00

The purpose of the project is to develop a residential summer research and
education Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) outreach program
targeted at 11th and 12th graders from across the country. The program will
advance students' preparation for careers in engineering through integration of
research and education. The students in the program will undertake lectures on
topics such as advanced mathematics and physics, chemistry, preparatory
scholastic aptitude testing, advanced placement courses, and will be exposed to
fundamentals of engineering courses and special topics in Electrical and
Computer Engineering such as artificial intelligence, communications,
nanotechnology, photonics, energy systems and smart grid technologies. These
courses will prepare and motivate students for research work in energy
management, automation functions for secured critical infrastructures, sensor
based systems and safe environment. The background achieved and exposure through
hands-on activities will capacity for a future diverse workforce of
underrepresented groups and women to pursue careers in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work in the pre-college
engineering systems program will include various fields of engineering and
science used to help students to appreciate the role of creativity, analytical
and hands-on work in conducting engineering projects, processes and systems. The
research work will involve needs assessment, constraints, problem formulation
and design of algorithms, implementation, testing and validation under different
scenarios. The major areas for project ideas include communication and signal
processing, photonics/electronics, nanotechnology, materials and energy and
power systems, with each area having its own set of specific projects. Under
communication and signal processing, specific projects include the solar bag,
smart phones, new integrated display board, and others. In
photonics/electronics, the specific works include mobile diagnostics for power
electronics and smart displays. Nanotechnology and materials projects include
design of nano toothpaste, nano skating boots, and a nano tricycle for kids. In
the area of energy and power systems, smart city design using renewable energy
resources and electric vehicles with self driving properties are specific
project areas. Furthermore, wireless sensors, a handmade wristwatch for health
monitoring, and automatic fan control will be pursued within the computer
engineering projects. Students will work in teams and final products will be
presented at the end of the program each year to an audience of faculty, parents
and a representative of the funding agency, the National Science Foundation
(NSF). Mentoring during and after the program (during the school year) will be
in place to track students' continued progress toward life-long pursuit of
engineering as a carrier. Lessons learned will be shared with other engineering
schools so that the country will benefit from the NSF investment in education
and research activities for pre-college students at Howard University.