* 1711534
* Role of Small Angle Grain Boundaries in CdTe Solar Cell Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Robert Collins, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 352,547.00

Abstract Title: Role of Grain Boundaries in CdTe Solar Cell Performance

Non-Technical Description: Solar power is of interest to address the growing
global energy demand as it is renewable, low environmental impact, and
potentially low cost. Within thin film solar technology, power is generated from
incident light absorbed in a microns-thin semiconducting active layer of the
device, among a stack of other thin film layers on a supportive substrate to
complete the device. Cadmium telluride (CdTe) solar cells are the current lowest
price thin film technology, industrially mass-produced, and cost-competitive
with traditional non-renewable electric power. Part of the success of this
technology relies on producing high electronic quality material in large-scale
processes. Industrial deposition time of the CdTe active layer is ~ 30 seconds.
However, additional CdCl2 chemical treatment, required to improve material
electronic quality and device performance, adds ~ 30 minutes processing time.
CdTe films can be considered a composite of well-ordered crystalline grains and
grain boundary materials with properties of both impacting device performance.
The role grain boundary structure plays on the electronic properties of CdTe
will be studied with the ultimate intention of identifying as-deposited
structures that enable reduction or elimination of the time-consuming CdCl2
process to lower cost. By combining advanced material deposition to control CdTe
grain boundary characteristics, theoretical modeling of these grain boundary
structures, and fabrication and processing of full CdTe solar cells links
between CdTe layer characteristics and solar cell device performance will be
uncovered. The work has implications for energy and other technological
applications of national interest. The PIs and the PhD candidates will engage in
outreach activities that will contribute to the education of local K-12 students
and teachers, the general public, and industry.

Technical Description: CdCl2 treatment modifies CdTe by promoting crystalline
grain growth, reducing the impact of defects, and changing grain boundary
chemistry by replacing ~50% of the boundary Te with Cl. The role grain boundary
structure plays on the electronic properties of CdTe will be studied with the
ultimate intention of identifying as-deposited microstructures that enable
reduction or elimination of the time-consuming CdCl2 process to lower cost. CdTe
films will be sputter deposited with the substrate normal at an oblique angle
relative to the deposition flux, producing material with controllable grain
orientation and small angle grain boundaries. In situ real time spectroscopic
ellipsometry will be used to monitor, study, and control the growth evolution of
these films. Density functional theory calculations will be performed to
identify energetics of crystallite orientations and grain boundaries. Controlled
orientation CdTe will be incorporated into single junction solar cells as either
full or partial replacement layers for normal incidence sputtered or close space
sublimated CdTe. Impact of CdCl2 treatment and processing time on performance
will be identified for devices with controlled orientation CdTe. Fundamental
connections between grain structure and device performance will be evaluated,
with grain boundary structure enabling reduced CdCl2 processing times identified