* 1711990
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Hydric adaptation in anoles: tracking scale morphology and allele frequencies in response to climate and landscape change
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Matthew McElroy, McElroy                 Matthew        T
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This project focuses on how a species of Puerto Rican lizard,
Anolis cristatellus, has adapted to climate and land-use changes over the last
120 years. The fellow will use specimens collected since 1890 to study how
scale-size and gene-frequencies in this lizard species have changed through
time. Scale-size is a potentially important trait for tropical lizards, because
large scales are thought to reduce the amount of water that is lost through the
skin due to evaporation (i.e. evaporative water loss, or EWL). Therefore,
lizards in drier habitats are predicted to have larger scales than lizards in
wetter habitats. The fellow will measure scale-size variation from contemporary
and historical museum specimens to see if A. cristatellus scale-size variation
over the last 120 years tracks drying conditions due to climate and land-use
changes in Puerto Rico. The fellow will also use genomic approaches to identify
regions of the A. cristatellus genome that are under natural selection. This
research will improve our understanding of how ectotherms respond to historical
changes in climate and land-use, and will facilitate more accurate predictions
of their responses to future changes.

The research will build links between the fields of eco-physiology, genomics of
adaptation, and climate change biology while harnessing the power of
collections-based research. The fellow will test for relationships between scale
morphology and climate, and adaptive allele frequencies and climate, in both
contemporary and historical samples. To determine genes that are under climate-
mediated selection, the fellow will use ecological association analysis and
climate layers to analyze exome-capture data. For genes that are under climate-
mediated selection, the fellow will use a single-base extension protocol to
assay adaptive alleles in historical specimens. The fellow will form a
collaboration between the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology and UC Berkeley's Pre-
College Upward Bound Summer Program to bring museum-based education and
mentorship to high-school students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Results from
these studies will also be published in peer-reviewed journals and shared
through presentations at scientific meetings.