* 1711937
* Underrepresented Students In Topology and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS)
* MPS,DMS
* 11/02/2016,12/31/2017
* Candice Price, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2017
* USD 5,590.00

The sixth annual meeting of the Underrepresented Students in Topology and
Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS) is to be held at Sam Houston State
University on April 15-17, 2016. Speakers will give 30-minute research talks in
various subfields of topology and algebra; these subfields include algebraic
combinatorics, enumerative geometry, knot theory, and representation theory. Two
distinguished graduate students will give hour-long presentations and one
invited faculty member, Dr. Abakuse Mbrika of the University of Wisconsin at Eau
Claire, will give a one-hour keynote address. Invited undergraduate researchers
will participate in a poster session. USTARS promotes diversity within the
mathematical community by providing a platform for collaboration and
professional development. Participants are exposed to a variety of current
research, ideas, and results, and meet underrepresented professors and students
who will become future collaborators or colleagues. The conference also promotes
diversity by encouraging women and minorities to attend and give talks. Indeed,
the conference organizing committee is diverse in gender, ethnicity, and
educational background, and hence is well-positioned to encourage participation
from a diverse group of students. The participants of the conference will
continue to influence the next generation of students by serving as much needed
mentors and encouraging students in the mathematical sciences to advance
themselves and participate in research and conference events.

The primary goal of the symposium is to showcase the mathematical research being
conducted by underrepresented graduate students. This is done by structuring the
meeting so that speakers will give 30-minute parallel research talks focusing on
research leading to their graduate theses. Graduate students will give at least
75% of these presentations. Topics of prior years' presentations include:
combinatorics, braid groups, graph theory, knot theory, representation theory,
number theory, and algebraic geometry. In addition to the parallel sessions, two
distinguished graduate students and one invited faculty member are chosen to
give 1-hour lectures and a poster session featuring invited undergraduates is
also planned. Given the high quality and diversity of talks and participants
"The Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium
(USTARS) Invited Volume" was created in 2014. This is a new series aimed
specifically at disseminating the research of USTARS participants. The intention
of this Invited Volume is to provide graduate students with an opportunity to
publish their results in order to further their development as mathematical
researchers. In light of this, a yearly online volume will be published at the
conclusion of each annual research symposium.

http://www.ustars.org