* 1711994
* GOALI: Design and Fabrication of a Hybrid Drift Diffusion Spin Valve to Investigate Graphene Spin Transport Properties for Spintronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Jun Jiao, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Electronics are based on the manipulation of electrons and other charge
carriers. In addition to charge, electrons have spin that can be manipulated
with magnetic and electric fields, resulting in a spin-polarized current that
carries more information than is possible with charge alone. Spin-transport
electronics demonstrate advantages for design of novel devices to overcome the
limitation of traditional electronics. Graphene, a single atomic layer of
graphitic carbon, has unique physical properties that make it very attractive
for spintronic applications. Various experimental demonstrations of spin
transport in graphene have been achieved by interfacing graphene with other
classes of materials, including ferromagnetic materials, semiconductors, and
metal electrodes. However, the experimental results are still well below
theoretically predicted values. To bridge this gap, two areas of research is
proposed: fabrication of graphene and a design of a novel device to advance
graphene-based spintronic devices that will be capable of higher data transfer
speeds, increased processing power and memory density, and added storage
capacity. The PSU and Intel partnership will significantly enhance the transfer
of research results to industry. It will also broaden the training and
experiences of graduate and undergraduate students involved and facilitate
active interactions between PSU and Intel scientists and train them in emerging
areas of materials science and device technology, where fundamental insights can
result in profound and rapid practical advances. The participation of
underrepresented undergraduates in this project will be leveraged through
ongoing NSF funded REU and LSAMP programs, the McNair Scholarship program, and
the Undergraduate Research and Mentoring Program at
PSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at the design and fabrication of
novel hybrid diffusion drift spin valve (HDDSV) arrays through processes that
are adaptable to industry. The proposed device will allow systematic
investigations of graphene spin transport parameters including spin lifetime,
spin diffusion length, and polarization injection efficiency by variations of
device components and dimensions. The non-local spin valves (NLSV) device
employed to study graphene spin transport has resulted in experimental values
that are orders of magnitude lower than those theoretically predicted. The
proposed HDDSVs are uniquely designed to detect nonlocal signals originating
from a spin accumulation of spin polarized charge carriers, which occurs away
from the influence of ferromagnetic (FM)/tunnel barrier (TB)/Graphene
interfaces. This research effort represents a multi-disciplinary approach of
combining graphene synthesis, device fabrication, and data measurement and
analysis, to advance the understanding of graphene spin transport properties.
The overall goal of this research is to address the principle roadblocks to the
advancement of graphene spintronics. The novel device configuration will have
the capability of isolating the effects of ferromagnetic contacts from graphene
spin transport measurements, while enabling spin and charge carrier manipulation
simultaneously. The proposed device will allow new spin transfer phenomena to be
examined. The study of such a novel device will reveal the fundamental effects
of ferromagnetic contacts and charge carrier drift in relation to spin diffusion
lengths and spin lifetimes in a graphene transport channel. The academic and
industrial research teams' complementary expertise and comprehensive
capabilities warrant success of the proposed goals.