* 1711738
* Collaborative Proposal: RTD-based Relaxation Oscillators (RTD-RO) to Increase Output Power and Overcome DC Stability Issues
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Elliott Brown, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2020
* USD 190,625.00

A 3-year tri-university (Ohio State, Wright State and Texas State) project is
proposed to advance a new class of efficient and stable oscillator circuits
based upon quantum tunneling. It will explore a class of tunnel diode based
relaxation oscillators and extend this to a novel domino effect pulse amplifier
design. Past stability issues of tunnel diode based oscillators are addressed by
oscillating beyond the negative differential resistance region. This larger
voltage swing also provides for significantly larger output powers. Effort will
be made to extend their operational frequency beyond the state-of-the-art
through electromagnetic modeling simulations. Their simplicity and low-power
consumption could also make them a candidate for Internet-of-Things objects.
Tunnel diode based electronics provides a pathway for energy thrifty "green"
circuitry with concurrently high output power and with unprecedented stability.
A full-time graduate student will be directly supported at both Ohio State and
Wright State. The shortlist candidate graduate student for each group are both
female undergraduates who began their research career as undergraduates in
Berger's lab. Supplemental funding requests will be applied for to support 1-2
undergraduates additionally, along with scientific visitations, to perpetuate
this legacy. This project provides tremendous benefits to society and humankind
by advancing low-cost, ultra-low power consumption radio frequency sources, and
stable radio frequency sources for new advances in compact clock signal
generation.

A key aim of this project oscillator design, transmission line modeling and
radio frequency measurements to develop and mature a new type of stable tunnel
diode based oscillator that addresses the tunnel diode stability issues by
oscillating beyond the negative differential resistance region. This larger
voltage swing also provides for significantly larger output powers. Advances by
this team, leveraging their first report of the experimental determination of
the quantum-well lifetime influence upon the large-signal resonant tunneling
diode switching time, this team now is poised to advance compact oscillator
circuits with high conversion efficiencies, generating large and stable output
powers. The tunnel diode based circuitry will provide (i) for the significant
advancement of relaxation oscillators that address the tunnel diode stability
issues which thwarted resonant tunneling diode adoption, and (ii) creation of a
wholly new "domino amplifier" that daisy chains each relaxation oscillator stage
to the next using progressively larger tunnel diode sizes with concurrently
increasing output powers. Without the stability afforded by the relaxation
oscillator design, large tunnel diode based oscillators would be too unstable,
and thus prevent this novel approach. The relaxation oscillators have been
studied in the past and shown to produce radio frequency output power exceeding
1 mW, as expected, but their maximum (repetition) frequency of oscillation has
only been 50 GHz], well below the expectation. This will be an early topic of
the proposed study where full- wave electromagnetics and nonlinear-
device/circuit interactions will be simulated, especially examining the effect
of planar-transmission line dispersion and short-circuit reflectance. This
knowledge will then be used to demonstrate a totally new and potentially
revolutionary tunnel diode switching component - the "domino" pulse amplifier.
The domino amplifier has the ability to utilize inherently fast tunnel diode
switching to create unilateral, large-signal gain. All of the materials for the
proposed effort will be InP based. These materials have produced some of the
best resonant tunneling diodes to date as measured by peak-to-valley current
ratio, peak current density, maximum frequency of oscillation, and switching
time. A systematic exploration and development of resonant tunneling diode
technology in three vertically integrated research thrusts: (i) advanced
epitaxial control and quantum-based device physics design using non-equilibrium
Green's function, (ii) compact high-power resonant tunneling diode based
relaxation oscillators, (iii) novel domino amplifiers, and (iv) nonlinear-
device, integrated-circuit interaction and electromagnetics.