* 1711975
* Theory and implementation of exceptional points of degeneracy for oscillators and array radiators based on spatial combiners
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Michael Green, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 12/31/2021
* USD 380,000.00

High performance electronics is important in a variety of societal applications.
Improvements based on the proposed research effort are expected to be
significant in terms of energy-efficient electronics and of the quality of the
generated oscillating frequency, which are both key features in modern
electronic systems. The proposed work explores a new method to generate
electromagnetic waves with stable frequencies with low noise and without wasting
power. It is expected that the power necessary to provide oscillations is
between one-half and one-tenth of that used by conventional oscillators design
techniques. The other major outcome of the proposed research is an improved way
to generate radiated high power in an efficient fashion, while being
technologically simpler than other current solutions. It is known that high
power generation at millimeter waves is notoriously challenging because single
sources realized using semiconductors cannot provide high power levels. The
solution adopted in this work is based on combining the power radiated by many
individual radiating oscillators; thanks to a self-locking effect due to the
degeneracy condition the oscillation frequency is expected to be pure, i.e.,
have low noise, and to produce high power radiation levels at a specific
direction. Although the research is focused on exploring how to use for the
first time the degeneracy condition in radio frequency systems, the acquired
theoretical knowledge will also be useful for solving a variety of other
problems, such as making highly sensitive sensors. The investigators will
provide interdisciplinary training to participating graduate students through
research; they will mentor undergraduate students in research fostering
diversity in science and technology; and they will disseminate research to both
scientific and layman audiences for the broad population to foster interest in
electromagnetics and electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
activity aims at providing first a theoretical foundation of microwave and
millimeter wave (mm-wave) circuits that are based on the exceptional point of
degeneracy (EPD) in coupled-mode circuits and transmission lines. Second, this
research will explore and implement various novel applications such as robust
conditions of oscillation in distributed oscillators and spatial power combiners
made of array grid oscillators. The novelty is based on the recently discovered
physical phenomenon of giant resonance in coupled waveguides that support a
degenerate band edge (DBE). A DBE is a very special degeneracy condition
occurring when critical coupling is established between two or more guided
modes. This proposal targets two related outcomes: (1) Theory and demonstration
of a novel principle of operation for oscillators in silicon-based technology,
including CMOS, based on the DBE; (2) Theory and demonstration of a novel
principle of operation of radiation by spatial power combiners made of arrayed,
tightly locked oscillating elements operating at an exceptional point of
degeneracy (EPD) present in planar coupled-mode structures. The new principle of
operation will be theoretically and experimentally investigated at microwaves
and millimeter waves, and compared to existing technology of oscillators and
spatial combiners. The proposed research is expected to provide advantages in
terms of energy efficiency, more robust oscillation in the presence of load
variations, lower phase noise, and improved stability of the frequency of
oscillation and radiation. The proposed concepts related to degeneracy
conditions have not yet been explored or even proposed in the area of microwave
or millimeter-wave circuits. Outcomes of this project may enable future
generations of high-efficiency oscillators, distributed amplifiers, as well as
novel grid oscillators, which are the backbone of any communication system at
microwave and mm-waves.