* 1711617
* Developing Effective Strategies for Enhancing Power System Resiliency in the Presence of Cyber-Physical Attacks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Lingfeng Wang, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 264,031.00

As compared with the traditional power system, one of the major characteristics
of the evolving smart grid is the widespread deployment of more cyber
technologies for achieving various measurement, communication, and control
functionalities. However, the implementation of myriad information and
communication technologies will inevitably increase the cyber vulnerability of
the power grid. Besides cyber intrusions, the power grid is also under emerging
threats from physical attacks. For example, attackers could physically attack
deliberately selected equipment to disrupt the power supply. Man-made sabotage
in the form of potential terrorist activities are also receiving more attention
recently. This project will lead to transformative results by addressing several
pressing smart grid cyber-physical security problems. It will significantly
advance the state of the art by developing a comprehensive framework for cyber-
physical risk assessment and mitigation scheme development. The developed cyber-
physical security analysis models will be able to cover a wide range of
uncertainties in physical components, cyber vulnerability, physical
vulnerability, human factors, etc. This is expected to lead to significant
advancement in the field of power system cyber-physical security, resiliency,
and trustworthiness by considering a comprehensive set of uncertain factors. The
quantitative study in the project will enable more informed decision-making for
power system operators and planners. The project outcomes will allow utilities,
regulators, and government agencies to evaluate and improve cyber-physical
security and resiliency of modern electric power systems. In addition, the
research outcomes will be integrated into a wide variety of educational and
outreach activities for equipping the next-generation workforce with the
awareness on the emerging cyber-physical vulnerabilities in national critical
infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of myriad advanced
sensing, communication, and control technologies in smart grid deployment also
increases concerns on cyber-physical vulnerability, and research in this field
will be critical to the success of the smart grid in the long term. The major
goal of this project is to enhance power system resiliency in the presence of
emerging cyber-physical attacks. Three novel strategies are proposed for this
purpose which can be deployed in either the system planning or operation stage,
including the efficient identification of comprehensive critical contingencies
relating to cyber-physical attacks, resiliency-oriented security-constrained
optimal power flow, and robust optimization based power system protection
accounting for uncertainties. The major research tasks of this project are: 1)
developing an efficient procedure for comprehensively identifying the critical
components in a power system based on an integrated state space pruning and
intelligent search methodology; 2) developing a novel resiliency-oriented
optimal power flow framework and an associated hybrid parallel computing
solution; and 3) developing a novel scheme for allocating defensive resources to
minimize damage considering the uncertainties in offensive resources based on a
multiple-attack-scenario defender-attacker-defender model. These proposed
defense strategies could result in major enhancement of the resiliency of
contemporary power grids in the presence of adverse, significant cyber-physical
events.