* 1711564
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Ecological Costs and Consequences of Artificial Light at Night
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Christopher Thawley, Thawley                 Christopher    J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Christopher Thawley, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Jason Kolbe and Bryan Dewsbury at the University of Rhode
Island. The fellow's research addresses the impacts of artificial light at night
(ALAN) on free-living animals. ALAN has become an important, novel feature of
the environment wherever humans live and work, sometimes exceeds natural levels
of sunlight, and can affect stress, reproduction, health, and survival of
organisms. The fellow is using field and laboratory experiments to investigate
the impacts of ALAN on anoles, a type of lizard that lives in natural and urban
areas subject to ALAN. Anoles are an excellent model system for this project
because previous work has characterized their sleep behavior, ecology, and
physiology. The fellow is receiving training in mentoring, inclusive teaching
practices, physiological and ecological techniques, and building outreach and
research programs. Furthermore, the fellow is mentoring students from
underrepresented groups (URM students) in professional development and research,
and expanding a citizen science project linked to the ALAN study system, which
serves K-12 URM students. The fellow is collaborating with local teachers to
design complementary materials for the project and interacting with students to
provide experiences to fill gaps in science education that often
disproportionately impact URM students. This training and experience will
support the fellow in developing an integrative and interdisciplinary approach
to evolutionary ecology and an inclusive approach to mentoring and teaching that
will allow him to support the future participation and success of science
students from a diversity of backgrounds.

The research integrates studies of the impacts of ALAN on anoles in real-world,
field conditions with lab studies designed to reveal the physiological
mechanisms that drive these impacts. Thus, the fellow is quantifying the direct
impacts of ALAN on hormones that control stress and daily rhythms, as well as
effects on immune function, physical performance, and reproductive timing. In
addition, project explores how these mechanisms may impact survival,
reproduction, and fitness of anoles and other organisms in the real world, and
how organisms may adapt to ALAN. This research will provide insights into how
evolutionarily novel, human-induced forms of global change impact organisms and
how these organisms respond to that change.