* 1711099
* Collaborative Research: Nanoprobes for mapping the spatiotemporal evolution of ultrafast optical vector near field
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Zhiwen Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2021
* USD 282,077.00

Advances in optical nanotechnology have enabled a wide range of applications,
such as increased sensitivity for the detection of just a few molecules with
plasmonic nanoparticles. To quantify the performance of optical devices and
develop new capabilities, it is essential to measure the behaviors of ultrafast
optical fields with nanoscale spatial resolution and femtosecond scale temporal
resolution. To address the challenge, this program engenders a novel type of
nanoprobe, integrated with a custom near-field scanning microscope system, for
comprehensive characterization of the ultrafast optical near field. The research
program will enhance understanding by combining the expertise of three
researchers in different research areas at three universities. The exciting
areas in ultrafast optics and nano-optics will provide excellent education
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate as well as K-12 students in the
lab, in the classroom, and through outreach activities. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained through the research activities such as
nanoprobe fabrication, application of near-field scanning optical microscope
system, optical measurements, and numerical simulation and retrieval in a
collaborative setting across the three universities. Results will be
incorporated into courses. In keeping with prior projects of the researchers,
women and underrepresented groups will be encouraged and expected to participate
in the program.

The goal of this program is to develop a nanoprobe based characterization method
that can map the spatiotemporal evolution of ultrafast optical vector near field
in nanometer-femtosecond scale. A nanoprobe, which consists of a second order
nonlinear nanocrystal perched on a nanowire or a near-field scanning optical
microscope (NSOM) probe, will be integrated with a custom-built NSOM system to
achieve sample-probe distance control and nanoscale spatial resolution. The
nonlinear response of the nanocrystal (i.e., second harmonic generation -SHG)
can be exploited to characterize both the amplitude and the phase profiles of
the local ultrafast field as well as the spatiotemporal evolution through the
collinear SHG frequency resolved optical gating (FROG) holography. Due to the
presence of a strong "local oscillator" and the reliance on homodyne detection,
FROG holography will also improve the measurement sensitivity. Finally,
polarized SHG from the nanoprobe is utilized to probe the polarization of the
local ultrafast optical field. Since the second harmonic signal has a distinct
wavelength, it is insensitive to any background noise generated by the
reflection or scattering of the fundamental field. Further, the second order
nonlinear tensor is determined by the material properties such as the crystal
structure and is largely independent of the particle morphology, leading to a
more controllable nanoprobe sensor. Knowledge of the local spatiotemporal fields
enhances the capability to quantify spectroscopic signals from plasmonic
structures, a long-standing challenge in nanospectroscopy.