* 1711693
* Fostering A Community of Scholarship Among Community College STEM Faculty Through Support for Discipline Based Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Jean Ann Vickers, Johnson County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 11/30/2022
* USD 295,951.00

Discipline-based education research (DBER) has been growing rapidly in recent
years. Much of the work undertaken by DBER scholars is applied research in live
classrooms in four-year institutions with undergraduate students enrolled for
course credit. Many four-year institutions have embraced DBER as a specialty
area of expertise for faculty members. Meanwhile, at least half of the students
taking courses in STEM disciplines at the lower division level are enrolled in
community colleges. Many students who begin college as STEM majors do not
succeed in lower division STEM coursework and are unable to continue their STEM
studies as juniors and seniors in upper division courses in 4-year institutions.
The learning difficulties that STEM majors have as freshmen and sophomores are
typically at least as great in community colleges as they are in four-year
institutions. Students entering community colleges have very diverse backgrounds
and this means the teaching challenges faced by instructors in community
colleges are manifold and sometimes unique. Although DBER scholars are able to
help improve the design of lower division STEM courses, most DBER research has
not been conducted by faculty members teaching in community colleges despite the
importance of these colleges to the nation's higher education system.
Consequently, it would be ideal to locate some expertise about how students
learn STEM within the community college system. That is the goal of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will begin to address this imbalance
by providing scholarly training in discipline based education research to 18
community college faculty members drawn from three community colleges in the
central Midwest: Johnson County Community College, Metropolitan Community
College, and Kansas City Community College. The leadership in these community
colleges is supportive of this plan to provide intensive training to faculty
teaching in STEM disciplines. Participants will be encouraged to participate
through course releases and payment honoraria during the summertime. After
several years, these new DBER scholars may be in leadership positions to help
transform teaching in their institutions. This exploratory design grant will
attempt to determine whether this process can take root in community colleges
and be an efficient method for expanding deep knowledge about student learning
to the other STEM faculty employed in community colleges.