* 1711366
* NSF Postdoc Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Scaling up impacts of rainfall seasonality on tropical forest composition and function from herbarium collections and remote sensing data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Naomi Schwartz, Schwartz                Naomi          B
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Naomi Schwartz, is conducting
research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections in
innovative ways, and is being mentored by Jennifer Powers at the University of
Minnesota. The fellow's research explores how seasonality, in particular the
timing of rainfall, affects how plants use water in seasonally dry tropical
forests. Some dry forests experience a very rainy, wet season followed by a dry
season with virtually no rainfall, while other forests experience low, but
constant, rainfall throughout the year, and still other forests have two
distinct dry seasons. These differences in rainfall could affect the way plants
use water and cope with drought. For example, species that are adapted to severe
seasonal drought may be more resilient to future droughts. However, we still do
not understand how seasonality affects plant water use. This is important,
because climate change is already causing shifts in rainfall seasonality and
increases in drought, and we cannot predict how these changes will affect
seasonally dry tropical forests. The fellow is using herbarium collections from
across Latin America, which are being used to measure plant characteristics
related to water-use, as well as satellite imagery to observe links between
seasonality, photosynthesis, and plant growth. In terms of broader impacts, the
fellow is training students in using herbarium collections and satellite imagery
for global change research, and incorporating her results into earth system
models that other scientists can use.

Because rainfall regimes vary temporally and over broad geographic scales, a key
challenge to understanding how seasonality affects composition and function in
tropical forests has been collecting data at the spatial scales necessary to
encompass a range of rainfall regimes. The fellow's research addresses this
challenge by using data from herbarium collections and remote sensing: both are
uniquely suited to analyzing ecological patterns across broad spatial and
temporal scales but are rarely combined into an integrated research program. The
fellow is measuring traits related to water use on plant specimens at four
herbaria throughout the Neotropics, and using these measurements to assess how
rainfall seasonality affects trait variation within and across species in
seasonally dry tropical forests. She is also using remote sensing to map leaf
phenology and productivity, to assess how they are influenced by rainfall
seasonality. Few studies have used herbarium specimens to examine a suite of
traits related to hydraulic function, and the proposed research is making major
contributions in terms of demonstrating the feasibility of using herbarium
collections for study of plant functional ecology and global change.