* 1711217
* Transactive Uncertainty and Flexibility for High Penetration of Semi-dispatchable Renewables in Electricity Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Hongxing Ye, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2021
* USD 198,923.00

The increasing penetration of variable energy resources (VER), such as solar and
wind generation, is challenging traditional power system operations and
electricity market mechanisms. Due to its intrinsic intermittency and
variability, VER generation leads to increased uncertainty in the power grid.
The uncertainty inherent in VERs must be accommodated by available
flexibilities, such as energy storage, demand management, and generators that
can offer large rates of increase or reduction of generation. Existing methods
for managing uncertainty often passively offer heuristic incentives to these
sources of flexibility. However, the available flexibility in the electric power
system is limited. As VER penetration increases significantly, system operators
often heuristically curtail more renewables, and system security can be
jeopardized due to flexibility scarcity. Thus, it becomes crucial to optimize
the flexibility demanded by the uncertain sources. The research project will
explore an active uncertainty management mechanism in the electricity market
with a novel concept, transactive flexibility and uncertainty. Flexibility will
be treated like a commodity, which can be bought and sold in the market, to
completely address the issue of deficiency in a cost-effective way. Due to its
scale and complexity, it is very challenging to solve the associated
optimization problem considering the uncertainties from VERs in real-world
systems. This project will develop fast scheduling tools to meet the timeliness
requirement in real electricity markets. Also, the project results will
contribute to development of a new course to be taught by the Principal
Investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to develop a
theoretically sound yet practical market clearing model and scheduling tool for
power grids with high penetration of semi-dispatchable renewables. Active
uncertainty management will position the flexibility optimally, proactively and
cost efficiently. Clear and fair incentives will be provided to both uncertainty
mitigators and uncertainty sources based on a unified uncertainty marginal
price, which varies with location and time. The research project has three
cohesive parts: (1) developing a new electricity market model with transactive
uncertainty and flexibility satisfying a cost-causation principle; (2) designing
novel solution approaches for day-ahead and real-time electricity markets with
provable computational performance through exploiting the special structure of
the power grid; (3) validating, demonstrating, and promoting the proposed models
and computational methods in real-world power systems. The successful completion
of this project will potentially address the fundamental challenge of
uncertainty management in electric power systems. The systematic framework of
the project is expected to increase social welfare, allow for deeper VER
penetration, enhance the security and reliability of the power grid, and improve
market fairness.