* 1711950
* Genomics of adaptation to agriculture in Striga hermonthica, a plant parasite of cereals
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Emily Bellis, Bellis                  Emily          S
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2017. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The host institution for the fellowship is
Pennsylvania State University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jesse Lasky.
Agronomic weeds pose a serious threat to agricultural productivity, and weed
infestations may intensify under changing climates. To better understand
interactions between biotic and abiotic stressors, this project investigates
mechanisms of specialization to different host crops and abiotic environments in
purple witchweed (Striga hermonthica). Parasitic witchweeds constitute the
greatest biotic constraint to food production in sub-Saharan Africa and
devastate yields of economically important cereals such as maize, sorghum,
millet, and rice. Broader impacts include generation of new genomic and
phenotypic resources to enhance development of resistant crop varieties,
training of undergraduate students, and workshops in witchweed bioinformatics
targeted to African scientists. Training objectives include statistical
evolutionary genomics, ancient DNA sequencing, quantitative genetics, and
experimental plant-parasite interactions.

The main goal of this project is to better understand evolution of crop-parasite
interactions across diverse abiotic environments. First, genomic signatures of
host-specialization and local adaptation will be identified, using targeted
exome sequencing of 200 herbarium specimens collected within the past 150 years
from different hosts of origin across East and West Africa. Loci will be
identified that exhibit statistical associations with environment and host of
origin, with allelic variation that tracks change in regional host crop
production over time. For the second aim, effects of abiotic stress on host
range will be experimentally evaluated. Seed germination, early host-seeking
behavior, and host resistance will be quantified under nitrogen- and water-
limitation for 20 parasite populations across 60 genotypes of three
agriculturally important host crops: sorghum, millet, and maize. Genomic and
phenotypic resources generated during the project will be publicly accessible
through online databases (NCBI; Project Unity, http://phenome-networks.com) and
a dedicated project website including instructional materials, code, and
molecular protocols.