* 1711468
* CCSS: Quickest Detection Under Energy Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Lifeng Lai, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

Wireless sensor networks are commonly deployed to monitor abnormal changes in
their surrounding environment. These changes typically imply certain activities
of severe consequences, such as structure failure or chemical/gas leak, etc.
Quickest detection is a framework that focuses on the design of sequential
detection algorithms to identify such changes as quickly and reliably as
possible so that we can win valuable time to take proper actions. In most of
existing works, it is assumed that there is no constraint on how many and when
sensors can take samples. This assumption may not hold for many applications in
sensor networks whose sensors are powered either by battery with limited energy
or renewable energy harvested from the environment. It is important to design
novel quickest detection algorithms with energy constraints so that the designed
algorithms can be used to detect abnormal activities using sensors powered by
battery or renewable energy with a minimal delay.

The energy constraints present significant challenges and unique features to
quickest detection problems. It is crucial to design adaptive sensing strategies
that rely on information extracted from samples taken so far and energy level at
the battery to make sample and detection decisions. Towards this end, using
tools from optimal stopping theory, the project aims to achieve the following
goals: 1) to characterize the optimal detection schemes for problems with
additional energy constraints; 2) to understand the performance loss associated
with these energy constraints; and 3) to design low-complexity but
asymptotically optimal detection schemes. To achieve these goals, the project
will focus on two research thrusts. In the first research thrust, the project
will focus on scenarios with a hard constraint on the total number of
observations that the sensor is allowed to take. The designed algorithms in this
thrust will be useful for sensors powered by battery with limited energy. In the
second research thrust, the project will focus on scenarios with a stochastic
energy constraint. The designed algorithms are suitable for sensors powered by
renewable energy.