* 1711297
* Character Varieties and Quantum Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Francis Bonahon, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2021
* USD 323,077.00

When modeling practical problems of the physical world, mathematicians and
physicists often use matrices, namely square grids of numbers. In particular,
the symmetries of a given problem are often described by families of matrices,
which are called Lie groups. More recently, the needs of quantum physics and
statistical mechanics have led to the development of deformations of Lie groups,
which are called quantum groups. In the last two decades of the Twentieth
Century great breakthroughs in topology were obtained through the introduction
of techniques from non-euclidean (hyperbolic) geometry, which is based on the
Lie group of 2-by-2 matrices with determinant 1. At about the same time, the
development of quantum groups provided new tools to analyze the knotting of
curves in 3-dimensional space, with the quantum group arising from deformations
of 2-by-2 matrices playing a particularly important role. The projects
investigates various problems where these groups interact with the geometry of
spaces of dimension 2 and 3. In particular, it takes advantage of the insights
developed for 2-by-2 matrices to address higher dimensional groups, involving
n-by-n matrices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many classical problems in mathematics
and in mathematical physics can be expressed in terms of homomorphisms from
fundamental groups of surfaces to Lie groups, such as groups of matrices. For
instance, the great breakthroughs of hyperbolic geometry that occurred in the
decades surrounding the year 2000 have involved the analysis of such
homomorphisms valued in the special linear group SL_2. Similarly, the quantum
invariants of knots and low-dimensional manifolds that were developed at about
the same time are based on the deformations of Lie groups called quantum groups.
In particular, the Jones polynomial invariant of knots can be expressed in terms
of the quantum group U_q(sl_2) deforming the Lie group SL_2. The thrust of the
research is to build on the insights developed for these low-dimensional Lie
groups in order to address higher rank Lie groups and quantum groups. The
project is focused on the character varieties that consist of homomorphisms from
surface groups to Lie groups. Its two main themes build on the interaction
between two different areas of mathematics. The first topic deals with the
geometric and dynamic properties of the so-called Hitchin homomorphisms, valued
in a split real algebraic group such as the special linear group, and on the
moduli spaces of such homomorphisms. The PI and his students will study the
Poisson geometry of the space of Hitchin homomorphisms, will investigate Hitchin
homomorphisms from the point of view of spectral networks, and will study the
group actions on affine buildings that arise as degenerations of such
homomorphisms. The second theme studies the skein algebras that occur in the
theory of quantum invariants of knots based on the quantum group U_q(sl_n), and
their algebraic properties when the quantum parameter is a root of unity. The PI
will investigate the extension to this general case of the "miraculous
cancellations" that he discovered in earlier work for U_q(sl_2). The project
includes a series of separate problems that can accommodate the doctoral work of
graduate students, while enhancing the postdoctoral experience of the junior
faculty in the research group of the PI. The visual aspects of the project lend
themselves to the involvement of undergraduate students, as well as to outreach
aimed at making mathematics exciting for K-12 and undergraduate students.