* 1711348
* Problem Solving Through Practice: Identifying Common Student Struggles in Solving Complex Biology Problems and Developing Tools to Drive Improvement
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jennifer Knight, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,718.00

Developing the ability to solve complex problems is a key challenge in STEM
education. Faculty frequently struggle to understand and help students master
this skill, thus there is a need to explore and characterize how students engage
in this skill and to determine whether problem-solving errors are primarily
based on a lack of content or science skills knowledge, or on a misunderstanding
about how to approach problem-solving. This project will combine an exploration
of what students are thinking as they solve problems with analysis of their
performance on the same questions. The project will also measure students'
ability to reflect on how they solve problems, as well as determine whether
student perception of the difficulty of a problem affects their ability to solve
it. A better understanding of how students think about solving a problem, and
the errors that they make as they solve problems, will then serve as a basis for
developing strategies and practice tools to improve students' problem-solving
skills.

This project has two major objectives: 1) to systematically examine and compare
students' cognitive processes in solving complex problems that are either
content-focused or skills-focused and 2) to develop multiple kinds of validated
problem-solving practice tools. The project approaches understanding students'
problem-solving processes by combining a detailed qualitative exploration of
their cognitive reasoning with a quantitative analysis of how specific kinds of
guidance may assist in their process. Additionally, students' ability to
regulate their thinking process (i.e. metacognition), as well as their
perception of the mental effort required to solve problems, will be measured and
related to problem-solving ability. A better understanding of students' patterns
of thinking and the errors they make will then serve as a foundation to
independently test guidance in three areas - content, skills, and problem-
solving processes. The utility of combining and repeating this guidance can be
tested, along with the contribution of mental effort and metacognition. A
detailed regression model will be built using the quantitative data collected to
determine whether guidance improves performance. This project will also provide
detailed insight into student thinking while problem-solving, and will relate
these patterns to performance and improvement. Ultimately, the project will
deliver these insights along with successful tools for helping students improve
their problem-solving ability. Although this project is centered on solving
problems in biology and life science, learning how to solve problems has long-
term benefits for all college students, therefore these findings are likely to
be broadly applicable to educators and students in a variety of STEM
disciplines.