* 1711637
* Groundwater Contamination in the Northeast: Improving STEM Education By Demonstrating How Science Matters
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Bond, Bennington College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 210,664.00

In 2014, the chemical Perfluorooctanoic Acid (C8 or PFOA) was discovered in the
public drinking water in the Village of Hoosick Falls, NY. As concern over this
discovery grew, other communities began testing their water for PFOA. As of
October 2016, PFOA has been discovered in unsafe concentrations in the
groundwater of Eagle Bridge and Petersburgh, NY, Merrimack, NH, and in
Bennington, North Bennington, and Pownal, VT. In response, select science
courses at Bennington College and Union College will be redesigned in
conversation with this unfolding contamination event. In these courses,
undergraduate students will be trained in chemistry, geology, and environmental
studies and equipped to apply that training in the production of independent
data on a disaster in real-time. The project will craft new curriculum and
teaching modules aimed at incorporating local environmental problems into
science curriculum, as well as new methods for assessing the educational impact
of doing so. The educational data produced by this project promises to inform
and improve existing science curriculum at Bennington College and Union College
as well as offer insights about what works in STEM education on a liberal arts
campus more generally. This project will also produce key data on changing
levels of PFOA in groundwater and regional soils that will provide a much-needed
independent characterization of the contamination plume. This project, then,
will showcase the civic value of an education in science for diverse
undergraduate students and the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding
educational research question of this project is: How can environmental research
on a local public crisis enhance the STEM curriculum for undergraduate students?
Specifically, this project willexamine how training students in environmental
chemistry and hydrogeology and equipping them to apply those discipline-based
skills to help produce key data on a local crisis will influence student
enrollment, fluency, retention, and vocational orientation in STEM fields. The
researchers hypothesize that hands-on experience in meaningful environmental
research will demonstrate the value of STEM fields in a liberal arts education
and enhance student outcomes within STEM for both STEM and non-STEM majors. To
evaluate this hypothesis, this project will produce data on changes in student
attitudes towards and aptitude in chemistry, geology, and environmental studies
while those students participate in environmental research on a nearby water
contamination issue. Education assessment scholars will collaborate with project
personnel to calibrate proven education assessment tools to this project. These
evaluation tools include: pre- and post- assessments of discipline-specific
knowledge, reflective prompts in Assessment Tools in Informal Science (ATIS)
geared towards measuring students' beliefs about and understandings of science,
and the Classroom Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) survey. This project
will also develop a reflexive infrastructure of assessment designed to monitor
the entire learning experience of students in these classes and incorporate
preliminary findings into the overall pedagogy of the project. Together, these
education assessment tools and methods will enable us to evaluate students'
mastery of disciplinary concepts and skills through practical application and
exams as well as through self-assessments embedded in surveys, class
discussions, and reflective writing exercises.