* 1711533
* Impact of Flexible Classroom Spaces on Faculty Pedagogy and Student Behavior
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Most university classrooms feature either a traditional lecture-style layout
with tables and chairs arranged in front-facing rows or round tables permanently
arranged in groups. Some universities, though, are building classrooms of the
future that have highly flexible furniture and integrated technology. These
innovative classrooms can be reconfigured for multiple uses, such as lecture-
style teaching, having students work together in groups, and engaging in a
whole-class discussion. People assume that these flexible classrooms
automatically result in better teaching and learning, but there has been little
research into their effect on faculty pedagogy and student behavior. During this
project, five undergraduate engineering instructors at the University of
Michigan will be supported as they transition from teaching in a traditional
classroom to a new flexible classroom. These instructors will be supported to
learn about teaching practices that leverage the classroom flexibility and allow
them to be more responsive to students. The impact of classroom flexibility on
both faculty pedagogy and student behavior will be a key research focus of this
project. Such research will generate evidence to inform the design of flexible
classrooms, to support instructors using new pedagogies in these flexible
classrooms, and ultimately to improve student learning and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project will rigorously
examine faculty pedagogy (including use of both active learning and responsive
teaching, in which instructors elicit and respond to students' thinking) and
student behavior in five undergraduate engineering courses. These courses will
all be taught in a traditional lecture hall during the first year of the project
and in a flexible classroom during the second year. Before and throughout the
second year of the project, professional development will take place to support
faculty in using the flexible classrooms. The research team will investigate
changes in faculty pedagogy through a new classroom observation protocol that
captures instances of active learning and responsive teaching, through
instructor interviews that investigate how an instructor enacts responsive
teaching, and through a survey for students to report their perceptions of
responsive teaching. The research team will also examine students'
interpretation (framing) of group learning activities by analyzing students'
discourse during such activities in both the traditional and flexible
classrooms. This project will further the nascent field of responsive teaching
in engineering by providing future researchers with a standardized responsive
teaching observation protocol. It will also provide engineering faculty,
professional developers, and classroom designers with evidence-based ways to
enact responsive teaching, implement group learning activities, and effectively
design and use flexible classrooms.