* 1711253
* A Novel Three-Dimensional Thin-film Thermoelectric Generator for Wearable Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mehmet Ozturk, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 378,641.00

Title: &lt;br/&gt;A novel high performance thin and light three-dimensional
thermoelectric generator harvesting human body heat for powering wearable
devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric
generators can convert body heat to electrical energy providing a continuous
source of energy for low power electronics. Small and light weight
thermoelectric generators can be integrated into wearable devices making
battery-less devices a reality. Studies have shown that a large fraction of the
users stop using their wearables after a few months partly caused by the need
for frequent charging. The solution is to make such wearables self-powered
eliminating the need for recharging or replacing the batteries. Such a feat
would also enable the use of wearables in clinical applications. For instance,
self-powered devices would allow physicians to monitor continuously the state of
their elderly patients after they are discharged from the hospital. In addition
to wellness and health monitoring, connected networks of self-powered sensors
could inform decisions in industrial manufacturing, precision agriculture,
environmental monitoring, surveying and civil engineering, and of course smart
and connected homes. &lt;br/&gt;To date, commercial thermoelectric devices are
fabricated in similar way as they were made fifty years ago. They are bulky with
only dozens of millimeter-scale elements per device, as such, their output
voltage is too low (a few milli-volts) and their form factor is not appropriate
for wearable applications. The objective of this research is to make a novel
device architecture that enables integration and stacking of thousands of
microscale thermoelectric elements per centimeter square. The new device is thin
and light weight, and can generate several volts from body heat appropriate for
various wearable applications. Moreover, the fabrication process will be wafer-
scale relying on mature industry compatible processes, which makes it a viable
technology for commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a novel three-
dimensional thin-film thermoelectric generator suitable for body heat harvesting
and powering wearable sensors and electronics. A conventional thermoelectric
generator consists of only a dozen of millimeter-scale elements, which cannot
generate sufficient voltage from body heat. A novel device architecture is
proposed that enables fabrication of high efficiency thin film thermoelectric
devices consisting of several thousands of microscale thermoelectric elements
per square centimeter. Therefore, the new device can generate &gt;1000X larger
output voltage. It achieves this performance enhancement thanks to an entirely
new device architecture, which allows stacking of thin film elements in a three-
dimensional construction, and self-vacuum-sealing that minimizes parasitic heat
losses. The approach not only enables vacuum encapsulation, but also allows
making a thin-film device in which the thermoelectric length is independent of
the thickness of the deposited film. This is a significant improvement over
conventional architectures since optimization of the electrical and thermal
resistances of the elements can be achieved independent of the film thickness.
&lt;br/&gt;Industry compatible, wafer-scale micro-fabrication process will be
used to fabricate the proposed three-dimensional thermoelectric generator on
inexpensive silicon wafers. The fabrication will rely on mature processes and
techniques used in micro-electro-mechanical-systems integration. Furthermore, in
the path to achieving this goal, (a) bismuth telluride based thermoelectrics
will be grown on silicon oxide/silicon substrate and characterized, (b) a
comprehensive three-dimensional model will be developed to better understand and
optimize the device architecture and minimize the parasitic heat losses, and (c)
the device will be characterized for human body heat harvesting and wearable
applications.