* 1711083
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Speciation and Phenotypic Diversification of Australian Squamates and the Role of Ancient Climate Change
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Phillip Skipwith, Skipwith                Phillip
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The fellow,
Phillip Skipwith, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Frank Burbrink at the American Museum of Natural History.
This research investigates how organisms achieve both species diversity and
anatomical diversity in isolated regions, using the snakes of Madagascar as a
model system. This is a group of snakes restricted entirely to Madagascar and is
both rich in species and diverse in terms of ecology. The fellow is using
genetics and anatomy (3D scans of skeletons) to reconstruct the evolutionary
tree of these snakes to determine how different species are related. This study
is generally applicable to the fields of evolutionary biology and environmental
conservation. First, it incorporates cutting edge methods on a poorly understood
group of organisms in a region of the world with a unique fauna. These findings
will provide important information on how animals adapt to novel environments.
Furthermore, Madagascar is an isolated region in dire need of conservation
initiatives, which need to be informed by an understanding of species diversity
and ecology. Studies like this are critical for understanding and conserving
fragile biodiversity for generations to come.

The fellow is using phylogenomic data garnered from a combination of
ultraconserved elements and exons to build a robust phylogeny for Malagasy
snakes. Three-dimensional computed tomographic imaging (3D CT) of the
musculoskeletal system are also being used for comparative phylogenetic methods,
to investigate macroevolutionary dynamics including diversification rates, rates
phenotypic diversification, the relationship between speciation and trait
evolution, and convergent evolution. Ecological niche modeling is also being
used to estimate which regions and major biomes of Madagascar, if any, act as
engines of biodiversity. In terms of training, the fellow is developing the
skills needed for analyzing 3D CT data in a phylogenetic context as well as the
technical knowledge needed for computational methods development. Lastly, the
fellow is increasing minority and underrepresented group involvement in STEM
fields through outreach initiatives and mentorin