* 1711383
* Collaborative Research: Passive RFID Real-Time Temperature-Sensing Based on Programmable Liquid Crystal Elastomers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Taylor Ware, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 06/30/2020
* USD 209,615.00

Many products critical to modern society, including pharmaceuticals and food,
must be processed, stored, and shipped in a constantly refrigerated environment.
Current methods to measure temperature are poorly suited for the high-volume and
real-time measurements that are needed to monitor this cold chain. This
collaborative project aims to provide the basis for new low-cost battery-free
temperature sensing systems that can be integrated into radio-frequency
identification (RFID) packaging. This project advances national health and
welfare priorities by providing the fundamental knowledge for a smart antenna
sensing technology that will enable next-generation low-cost packaging for safe
transportation of food and medicine. This will enhance national capabilities for
disease prevention (e.g., reducing foodborne illness) and treatment (e.g.,
ensuring effective vaccinations). This work is also expected to enable new
sensing systems in agriculture and pharmaceutical manufacturing. This project
will be carried out by a multidisciplinary team with complementary expertise in
electromagnetic systems and smart materials at the Florida International
University and the University of Texas at Dallas, respectively. The results of
this research will be broadly disseminated to both the academic community and
industrial community through conferences, seminars, and publications. This
project also supports educational efforts that are focused on broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM through curriculum development,
undergraduate research programs, and community outreach efforts designed to
impact K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sensing systems will be
based on self-reconfiguring antennas that, in response to a change in
temperature, undergo controllable and reversible changes in shape. This change
in shape will be harnessed to alter antenna performance and enable continuous,
passive, and accurate RFID temperature sensing. Shape change will be driven by
active polymeric substrates that can be programmed to undergo bending, twisting,
or folding. These materials will be synthesized by programming the molecular
order, and therefore the type of shape change, in temperature-responsive liquid
crystal elastomers (LCEs). This project promotes scientific advancement by
addressing the fundamental materials and electromagnetic design challenges
necessary to create shape-changing antennas that also change their measurable
properties over the broad temperature range of interest. Specifically, this work
aims to: 1) synthesize new LCE materials that reversibly change shape in
response to temperatures between -80°C and 50°C, 2) design processes to pattern
electronic materials including conductive antenna traces on LCE substrates, and
3) design and characterize reversibly self-morphing LCE antennas that can
dynamically reconfigure their electromagnetic performance in response to
temperature change. This research is expected to lead to significant advances in
sensors and enable new examples of morphing electronics including antenna arrays
and frequency selective surfaces.