* 1711683
* Making Decisions about Socioscientific Issues in Multidisciplinary Post-secondary Learning Environments
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jenny Dauer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 303,419.00

Undergraduate students must be prepared to examine complex scientific issues and
make socially responsible decisions. As citizens, students need to be informed
and empowered to make choices that have local and global impacts. The
traditional approach to science education is to focus on content knowledge and
disciplinary practices. However, as many researchers have pointed out, the
knowledge and methods of science alone are insufficient to prepare students to
make well-reasoned decisions - they must also learn decision-making skills. In
addition, more than ever, employers are calling for recent college graduates who
have not only knowledge, but the ability to apply their knowledge to complex
issues and problem solving. The project will be conducted within the context of
a large-enrollment, required introductory course, SCIL (Science Literacy) 101,
for all majors in the University of Nebraska-Lincoln College of Agricultural
Sciences and Natural Resources. In the course, students will learn about complex
food, water, energy, and health issues and practice decision-making using a tool
based on normative models of decision-making. Because the course is required it
is anticipated that it will impact up to 1800 STEM students over the course of
three years. The project will advance the theoretical and practical
understanding of how to teach decision-making skills in science courses and
impact the future STEM workforce as well as empower citizens to make high-
quality decisions about complex personal, professional, local, and global
issues.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this foundational, design-
based research project is to refine a model undergraduate course to support
students' science literacy through decision-making practice, and to evaluate the
impact of the course on students' decision-making and reasoning about
socioscientific issues, which involve facets of both science and society. The
barriers for students will be articulated by examining how they make high
quality decisions, for example: how well do they understand and apply scientific
information to decision-making; and how well do they evaluate tradeoffs among
options for solving the problem? Additionally, the project team will investigate
if practices learned in a structured classroom context transfer to an
unstructured setting when students make a decision about a new socioscientific
issue. The products of this research include both new theory and new practice,
including: a transportable evidence-based model course and its associated
materials for teaching decision-making about socioscientific issues, including
assessment rubrics; and a new theoretical framework based in the decision-
sciences and behavior psychology that describes students' challenges in the
decision-making process.