* 1711603
* RET Site in Manufacturing Simulation and Automation
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Faisal Aqlan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 567,325.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site in Manufacturing Simulation
and Automation at Penn State Behrend (PSB) will engage regional high school
teachers and community college instructors in manufacturing simulation and
automation cutting-edge research, to help improve STEM skills and manufacturing
education in their classrooms. Over a three-year period, the site will offer an
intensive 6-week summer research program to a total of 36 teachers and college
instructors from schools and community colleges in the Erie metropolitan area
covering counties in the Pennsylvania, New York, Ohio tristate region. The RET
participants will gain first-hand experience by participating in intensive
research activities to develop effective curriculum modules and engage their own
students in authentic experiences in science and engineering. The project
outcomes will be aligned with the educational standards and the training needs
of modern manufacturing.

Over a 6-week period each summer, PSB will host a cohort of 12 high school
teachers and community college faculty participants from schools and community
colleges that encompass a diverse population and underrepresented groups of
students. The program goals are to: 1) provide a STEM-based platform at Behrend
to engage high school teachers and community college instructors in state-of-
the-art manufacturing research, 2) explore a sustainable educational model that
connects high schools, community colleges, university, and industry to instill
future generations with greater awareness and interest in manufacturing, 3)
facilitate the development of curricular modules, classroom activities, and
other classroom instructional materials that will be implemented in the
participating schools and colleges and also disseminated to a broader audience
nationally, and 4) help fill the skills gap in U.S. manufacturing and prepare
school and college students in the Erie metropolitan area for undergraduate
studies and/or jobs in manufacturing. The project focuses on teaching
manufacturing using simulation and automation and it consists of five main
activities; each representing a manufacturing paradigm. The participants will
develop skills in manufacturing as well as project management, scientific
writing, and academic presentation. The knowledge will be conveyed to students
through hands-on experiments and classroom activities. In addition, the RET team
will help participating schools and community colleges to create manufacturing
student clubs, identify the missions, and provide activity support. This, in
turn, will influence the students to consider careers in manufacturing fields.
It is expected that over 6,000 students will benefit from the proposed program.
The developed materials and activities will be evaluated and revised every year
based on pre/post survey results, as well as feedback from PSB designated
external evaluators and industry advisors. To reach out to a broader audience,
the site experiences will be shared via online education platforms for public
access and nationwide RET symposiums. With an already highly developed K-12
infrastructure and network in place at PSB as well as the newly established
Advanced Manufacturing & Innovation Center (AMIC) and a defined focus on
research and industry collaboration, this site has the potential to have a
transformative effect on research and instruction across the full educational
spectrum.