* 1711986
* Collaborative research:  Linking landslide and windstorm exposure to regional carbon stocks and fluxes in the largest US forest carbon reservoir, southeast Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Adam Booth, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2022
* USD 276,719.00

Landslides are important factors in the global carbon cycle as well as a
significant risk to human life around the world. This project focuses on better
understanding the geophysics of landslides in forested areas, specifically how
they move soils and woody debris. Understanding the complex mechanics of these
debris flows is essential to determining the relationship between landslides and
carbon stocks in forested systems worldwide. By coupling with a regional wind
exposure model, this work will also create a new way of visualizing hazard/risk
to communities in steep terrain, relevant to many small towns in the US and
abroad. Explicit coordination with those communities is
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will address a fundamental question in
disturbance ecology: How much disturbance maximizes carbon on a landscape, and
where is that carbon located? This is globally relevant, as disturbances are
projected to increase as a result of climate warming in most systems. Second, it
will incorporate woody debris into mechanical landslide models, which will
fundamentally advance our geological understanding of this process. Extensive
fieldwork will be coupled with physics-based numerical modeling to synthesize a
full scientific understanding of how disturbances influence the landscape and
ecosystem with respect to carbon cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
cofunded by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program, the Prediction of
and Resilience against Extreme Events Program, and the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research.