* 1711659
* Series Connection of Power Devices for Modular Multilevel Converter based High Voltage Direct Current Transmissions
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Xiu Yao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 274,889.00

As the electricity consumption continues to grow, the need for long distance
bulk power transmission has increased significantly. Compared to traditional ac
solutions, high voltage dc transmissions offer a number of advantages such as
higher efficiency, lower cost, and smaller size. The high voltage dc
transmission technologies have experienced a number of generations coupled with
the development of power devices which form the backbone of the converter
stations. The latest generation is based on voltage source converters enabled by
fully controllable silicon devices that offer tremendous flexibility. However,
the available voltage capacity of these devices has greatly limited the system
voltage levels, which then limits the transmission capacity and efficiency. To
address these issues, this project will develop a series connection mechanism
featured by almost zero loss and simple self-balancing and synchronization
algorithm, as well as its implementation in modular multilevel converter based
high voltage dc transmission systems. The developed techniques can potentially
transform many other high power electronics applications such as power supplies
for medical equipment, industrial motor drives, and pulsed power supplies for
fusion power reactors. These applications will impact various aspects of the
society and promote the usage of clean and green energy. The proposed project is
intrinsically comprehensive involving different facets of power engineering
ranging from device, circuit, to system level research, which will provide
unique and high quality training for the next generation students and engineers.
The proposed educational activities will also broaden the participation of women
and other under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are
to develop a novel series power device connection technique and explore its
implementation in modular multilevel converter with applications in high voltage
dc transmissions. It addresses the most challenging issues in connecting power
devices in series with a simple and reliable topology and voltage self-balancing
algorithm. The application oriented study of the proposed project will generate
critical knowledge regarding component sizing, trade-off and optimization study,
and system level implementation. Moreover, series connection of silicon carbide
devices will be evaluated. The multiple prototypes to be developed will provide
engineering experience and guidelines for real implementation, verification of
the theoretical analysis, and can be used as building blocks for circuit and
system level prototypes. The series connection of power devices will advance the
modular multilevel converter technology with increased voltage rating, reduced
sub-module count, and reduced size of passive components. This project will
transform the realization of modular multilevel converter based high voltage dc
transmissions.