* 1711767
* An Integrated Framework for the Optimal Control of Vehicle-to-Grid Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Ona Egbue, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2022
* USD 363,059.00

The research will establish an integrated framework for centralized vehicle-to-
grid (V2G) systems using algorithms that incorporate preferences of diverse
actors in the system. In the coming decades, plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs)
will revolutionize personal transportation as more consumers recognize that
dependence on fossil fuels is unsustainable, and as electric vehicles become
more affordable. However, the large increase in demand that will accompany the
transition to electric-drive transportation can cause our power infrastructure
to become overburdened. V2G systems, in which PEVs interact with electric grids,
can be used to address this increase in demand and to avoid exacerbated peak
loads. This research project addresses the lack of effective ways of regulating
charging and discharging while incorporating the multi-faceted complexities such
as driving behavior, travel patterns, technical limitations, and social,
economic and environmental impacts. This will be accomplished through the design
of algorithms for optimal scheduling and control of charging and discharging of
PEVs; this will involve the formulation and solving of optimization problems
from the perspectives of major stakeholders including electric utilities, owners
of commercial charging stations, and customers. To this end, the research will
use both offline and online mechanism design in the centralized management and
control of PEVs in a V2G system. By addressing some of the issues that currently
limit the penetration of PEVs, this research will facilitate the transition to
more sustainable transportation and power systems. This research will also
inform decisions by policy makers to design effective infrastructure networks
for PEVs and incentives for PEV stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this study is to design effective mechanisms to facilitate the integration of
PEVs into the electric grid. Specific objectives include: (1) Establishment of a
detailed driver and traffic profile for V2G systems; (2) Design of hybrid
control techniques for battery charging based on performance criteria; (3)
Analysis of the cost of employing PEV batteries for energy storage in power
grids; (4) Establishment of an integrated framework for managing PEV charging
and discharging while incorporating multi-faceted complexities; and (5) Creation
of online optimization models that deal with PEV requests per time step.
Accomplishing the objectives of the research project will result in novel
charging strategies for PEV batteries modeled from predictive methods and the
formulation of robust algorithms for optimal scheduling of charging and
discharging of PEVs in commercial settings. By taking a systems approach, this
study addresses the current gap in research on PEV integration into the power
grid, which focuses narrowly on solving problems without considering multiple
perspectives. The strategies and models resulting from this work will provide
new knowledge on the dynamics and socio-technical dimensions necessary for the
effective integration of electrified transportation systems into the electric
grid, particularly in a centralized management setting.