* 1711032
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Historical pathogen dynamics of an epidemic invasion
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Thomas Jenkinson, Jenkinson               Thomas         S
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Newly invading diseases are a major threat to global
biodiversity, crop security, and human health. Understanding the genetics of
past epidemics can shed light on how pathogens adapt as they colonize new hosts
and habitats. Natural history collections present a valuable opportunity to
learn about epidemics over time because pathogens are preserved along with
animal specimens as they are collected. The idea of unlocking pathogen history
using zoological collections is not new, but its execution has remained a
challenge until recent advances in studying trace amounts of historical DNA.
This research focuses on an invasion of the amphibian-killing chytrid disease
into the Atlantic Forest of southern Brazil. This project will provide genetic
insights into how invasive diseases establish and move across a novel landscape.
A detailed understanding of how spreading diseases evolve will be critical to
controlling future outbreaks, especially as pathogens are increasingly
introduced to new habitats by human activity. This project will recruit
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in biology to participate in
molecular biology research, and will translate project insights into educational
modules for use by the K-12 teaching community.

This research seeks to understand the consequences of human-mediated strain
introduction into an endemic pathogen system. Sometime in the last century, a
global pandemic strain of the amphibian-killing chytrid was introduced to
southern Brazil, where prior studies suggest it has competitively excluded less
virulent, locally endemic strains of the disease. The fellow is adapting
techniques developed for the isolation and genomic sequencing of single cells to
target pathogen colonies in museum-preserved amphibian tissue. Historical
specimens from the University of Campinas, the University of São Paulo, and the
University of California, Berkeley are being studied for this project. Using a
combination of targeted amplicon and whole genome sequencing, this project aims
to: i) test alternative demographic scenarios of pathogen strain invasion; ii)
identify signatures of natural selection accumulated over a century of range
expansion in these pathogen lineages. Results from these studies will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific meetings.