* 1711545
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: The genetic basis of host range and specificity in the fungal parasite Escovopsis
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Caitlin Conn, Conn                    Caitlin        E
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/29/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Caitlin Conn, is conducting
research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections in
innovative ways, and is being mentored by Nicole Gerardo at Emory University.
The postdoctoral fellow is studying the genetic basis of host range in
parasites. Parasitism is a type of symbiotic relationship in which one organism
(the parasite) benefits at the expense of the other (the host). Over time,
parasites often evolve a narrow host range, meaning they specialize on a single
host or a group of closely related hosts. However, parasites sometimes evolve
compatibility with new hosts, either switching hosts or expanding the number of
hosts they can use. Many questions about host-parasite compatibility remain
unanswered, especially regarding its genetic basis. To address these questions,
the fellow has selected the parasitic fungal genus Escovopsis as a study system.
Escovopsis and its fungal hosts have a long coevolutionary history,
characterized by specialization of Escovopsis strains on narrow host ranges, and
occasional host switching. The fellow will sample an extensive collection of
Escovopsis and use cutting-edge tools to investigate the genetic basis of host
utilization. The fellow will also design a course-based undergraduate research
experience (CURE) in which introductory biology students will screen for
host/parasite compatibility using Escovopsis and an associated collection of
hosts. This research will uncover important information about host range, which
may extend to parasites that affect humans, livestock, and wildlife. It will
also train a postdoctoral fellow in diverse research techniques and provide
undergraduates with hands-on research experience. The fellow will sequence and
comparatively analyze the genomes and transcriptomes of Escovopsis strains with
different host preferences to determine whether any genomic features or
expression patterns are correlated with host range. Genomes will be scanned for
positive selection, which may characterize regions that influence host range.
Candidate genes will be phylogenetically analyzed and functionally tested by
targeted mutation. Finally, an analysis of fine-scale host specificity will be
conducted by introductory biology students, who will co-culture Escovopsis
samples and potential hosts and observe the outcomes of the interaction. Through
this fellowship, the fellow will gain new skills in bioinformatics, ecology, and
population genomics by attending courses and seminars and by joining a lab that
specializes in these areas. The fellow will also develop teaching skills through
the design, implementation, and assessment of the CURE. Results from the studies
will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific
meetings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.