* 1711892
* Broadband terahertz metasurface lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Tatsuo Itoh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2021
* USD 401,426.00

This research addresses the challenge of making terahertz semiconductor laser
sources that emit electromagnetic waves with frequencies between 2 and 5 THz
(i.e. wavelengths between 60 and 150 microns). Compact sources of terahertz
radiation that operate with both high output power and excellent beam quality
are needed for a range of spectroscopy and multi-spectral imaging applications
(i.e. where different terahertz wavelengths/colors provide additional image
contrast). For example, applications in the fields of astrophysics, atmospheric
science, biological and medical sciences, security screening, illicit material
detection, and non-destructive evaluation all can benefit from terahertz
sources. Terahertz quantum-cascade lasers are one of the most promising sources
of radiation in this spectral range, however several hurdles must still be
overcome to make them more practical. In past research, this team has
demonstrated a new laser architecture that addresses the challenge of how to get
high power simultaneously with high beam quality, known as the THz quantum-
cascade vertical-external-cavity surface-emitting-laser. The next challenge is
to make this architecture work in a "broadband" configuration, i.e. how to make
lasers that emit across a wide range of wavelengths, without sacrificing power
or beam quality. Hence, the unifying theme of this research is to develop a set
of approaches that allow terahertz lasers to emit either (a) a single wavelength
of light that can be tuned across a wide range, or (b) many wavelengths of light
simultaneously across a wide range. Much of this work focuses upon design of a
key enabling component: the so-called "active metasurface", which can be
considered an artificial mirror, which not only reflects the light, but
amplifies it as well. As a part of the project, the research will train graduate
and undergraduate students, and will support recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minorities to engineering through participation in a targeted
research project course.

The research goal of this proposal is the development of broadband terahertz
quantum-cascade lasers based upon amplifying reflectarray metasurfaces, and that
operate both with scalable high power and excellent beam quality. Within this
overarching theme, we propose two primary thrusts: (a) the development of
widely-tunable single-mode THz external cavity lasers, (b) the development of
broadband multi-mode THz lasers and frequency combs. The enabling component of
the vertical-external-cavity surface-emitting-laser is a reflectarray
metasurface made up of sub-wavelength antenna-coupled microcavities loaded with
laser gain material; this creates an active amplifying mirror which serves as
one mirror in an open cavity. The intellectual merit in the proposed work is
present in the development of novel reflectarray metasurfaces that provide gain
over a large fractional bandwidths. A secondary innovation lies in the novel
laser cavity configurations that are newly enabled by the flexibility of
metasurface design. The power of this approach lies in (a) the ability of the
VECSEL cavity configuration to support scalable high powers in a diffraction
limited beam, and (b) the flexibility to locally engineer the amplitude, phase,
and polarization response of the metasurface in both the spatial and spectral
domain. The impact for spectroscopy and multi-spectral imaging is potentially
large, since many previous demonstrations of tunable single-mode THz quantum-
cascade lasers and frequency combs are either limited in output power, have a
poor beam pattern, or both. The broader impacts are addressed at several levels
including undergraduate and graduate research experiences, dissemination of
results, and technology advancement. Outreach will specifically occur through
the development of research projects for a course designed for the recruitment
and retention of underrepresented minority URM engineering freshmen.