* 1711936
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Leveraging digital herbaria and crowd-sourced photos to understand climate-driven disruption of community flowering phenology
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Ian Breckheimer, Breckheimer             Ian            K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 11/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Research Using Biological Collections. The fellow, Ian Breckheimer, is
conducting research and receiving training that utilizes biological collections
in innovative ways, and is being mentored by Andrew Richardson at Harvard
University. Specifically, the fellow will use digital records from museum
collections and crowd-sourced photos uploaded by the public to measure where and
when plants in different environments are exposed to risky climatic events like
drought and growing season freezing during vulnerable periods in their seasonal
cycle. Climate plays an important role in determining which organisms occur in
which habitats, but exactly how this happens is still unclear, and understanding
the mechanisms will allow us to better forecast the economic and ecological
impacts of changes to the environment. Recent work suggests that, for non-woody
plants like wildflowers, extreme events such as freezing or drought during
vulnerable periods such as flowering strongly influence which plants can survive
in which environments. The fellow will test this hypothesis for a large group of
plants that inhabit mountain meadows in the Western USA. These are economically
important ecosystems that attract millions of visitors each summer, and also
experience extreme variations in climate. This project will advance our
understanding of how climate affects the distribution of organisms, identify
environments and species at risk of climatic disruption, and provide an
important proof-of-principle for using crowd-sourced images to track spatial and
temporal patterns in ecosystems.

At approximately a dozen heavily-visited natural areas in the western USA, the
fellow will use species occurrence information from digital herbarium
collections along with image classifications from volunteer citizen-scientists
and cutting-edge computer vision algorithms to identify common subalpine and
alpine wildflowers in public geo-located photos hosted on social media
platforms. By accounting for variation in the observation process, new
statistical tools will allow the fellow to use these unstructured and imperfect
observations to reliably measure the seasonal timing of flowering and fruiting.
The fellow will then combine these observations with environmental information
from satellites and weather stations to understand how that reproductive timing
is affected by climate, and how geographic distributions and species responses
affect the risk of disruptive climatic events during reproduction at each site.
In addition to developing new knowledge about climatic disruption of ecosystems,
this fellowship will support training in cutting-edge modeling and machine
learning techniques, and advance new methods for combining citizen observations
and museum collections. Results from these studies will be published in peer-
reviewed journals and presented at scientific meetings.