* 1711485
* Scalable Multilevel Multicell Power Architectures Leveraging Cost Effective GaN Power IC Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Zheng Shen, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 359,980.00

Wide bandgap semiconductors such as silicon carbide and gallium nitride are
poised to revolutionize the next generation of power electronics and electricity
infrastructures. Their penetration into the market, however, is hindered by two
major barriers: cost and reliability. The objective of this project is to
explore new multilevel power conversion architectures leveraging cost-
competitive gallium nitride power integrated circuits, and establish a viable
technological pathway for breaking through these cost and reliability barriers.
The demand for electricity is expected to increase significantly with further
electrification of the world driven by renewable energy usage, electrification
of transportation, expansion of efficient electrical heating and cooling,
expansion of information traffic, increased industrial motor usage, and new
smart grid development. By 2030, an estimated 80% of all U.S. electricity is
expected to flow through power electronics. Advanced wide bandgap power
electronics will play a critical role in all phases of the electricity life
cycle including generation, distribution and consumption, and have the potential
to improve electricity efficiency by 10-25%. With the proposed advanced
converter topologies, it is possible to realize efficiency gains by facilitating
higher levels of adoption for cost-effective gallium nitride semiconductors in
applications of power supplies, electric vehicles, data centers, solar
inverters, power conditioners, electric motor drives, and wind power systems.

The objective of this project is to explore scalable multilevel multicell power
conversion architectures to extend the power rating of gallium nitride power
converters to the range of 100 kW, fully utilizing low-voltage (40-300V), cost-
competitive, reliability-proven, commercially available gallium nitride
transistors. This is distinctly different from the mainstream approach on
developing wide bandgap power converters using high-voltage (>1200V)
semiconductor devices, which continue to face cost and reliability challenges.
The new approach, originally developed for megawatt industrial applications, if
adapted properly for the proposed lower power levels, will offer the same
benefits of increased power rating and efficiency, reduced harmonic distortion,
electro-magnetic interference, and improved redundancy and reliability, in
addition to cost and size reduction. These objectives will be met through the
combination of (1) advanced architectures and topologies, (2) new control
strategies and modulation techniques, (3) gallium nitride power IC building
blocks and integrated gate driver, and 4) integration and scalability allowing
for a broader range of power applications. The research plan includes major
research components in the areas of power converter topologies, design,
modeling, prototyping, and testing of the power converters; control and
modulation techniques; development of gallium nitride device integration and
converter scalability strategies; and evaluation and benchmarking against
existing solutions.