* 1711377
* Miniaturization: The Next Wave in Astronomical Instrumentation
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Mario Dagenais, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 01/31/2023
* USD 837,499.00

A spectrograph is an astronomical instrument that divides starlight into colors
and makes precise, quantitative measurements of them. It is essential for a
broad range of astronomical observations; but it is complex, bulky, and
expensive. This project uses photonics technology adapted from the
telecommunications industry to develop a novel kind of astronomical
spectrograph. Photonics technology offers the potential to reduce the size by
orders of magnitude while also lowering cost. Veilleux and collaborators are
developing such a miniaturized, photonic spectrograph for deployment on a
telescope. This demonstration instrument has the potential to transform the
traditional spectrograph, workhorse of any astronomical observatory, into a
lithe 21st century discovery engine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These investigators
borrow several innovations from the telecommunications industry to miniaturize a
spectrograph. The essential one is a photonic lantern, which is a method of
efficiently coupling light from a multi-mode fiber into a single mode fiber.
Multi-mode fibers are the only type that can be used at an astronomical focal
plane. However, coupling to single mode fibers enable using other photonics
innovations: fiber Bragg gratings and complex waveguide Bragg gratings, which
filter out specific wavelengths and suppress unwanted noise. Noise arises from
water vapor / OH sky emission and is the major source of unwanted background in
an astronomical IR spectrograph. The final innovation is an arrayed waveguide
grating -- a lightwave circuit fabricated on silicon that forms the dispersive
element. Each of these individual components has been developed and tested by
the investigators using their institutional access to fabrication facilities.
This project will complete the instrument and deploy it at the 4.3 m Discovery
Channel Telescope. The science goals identified for the instrument included
follow-up investigations of gamma-ray burst afterglows. This field has seen
tremendous advance over the past two decades and will be relevant for years to
come.