* 1711932
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Incidence and Consequences of Prokaryotic Polyploidy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Kristin Moore, Moore                   Kristin        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This is an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology, under the program
Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The fellow,
Kristin A. Moore, is conducting research and receiving training that is
increasing the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The fellow
is being mentored by Jeffrey C. Cameron at the University of Colorado. The
fellow's research aims to increase our understanding of a fundamental question
regarding life, namely, how do cells with varying amounts of DNA ensure that
their descendants receive the correct amount of DNA? Control of genetic
inheritance, the faithful copying and division of DNA, is an essential process
for all living organisms. Disruptions that alter cell DNA content can result in
abnormal development and disease. For example, in humans one additional copy of
chromosome 21 results in Down syndrome. Historically, it has been assumed that
bacteria contain a single circular chromosome. However, recent studies indicate
that many bacterial species contain multiple chromosomes, and that the number of
copies can even vary between individual cells in a population. Furthermore, the
consequences of variable DNA content in bacteria are unknown, even though
bacteria that are important medically, ecologically, and industrially, have all
been shown to have multiple chromosome copies. The fellow's research aims to
bolster our understanding of the extent, causes, and significance of chromosome
number variation in bacteria.

This research aims to identify the molecular mechanisms that regulate genome
copy number as well as the physiological and evolutionary consequences of
polyploidy (multiple identical chromosomes) in a phylogenetically diverse subset
of cyanobacteria. Cyanobacteria, a phylum comprised of photosynthetic microbes
that play critical roles in many biogeochemical cycles, can be either monoploid
(one copy of chromosomes per cell) or polyploid (2-20 copies per cell). The
natural variation in chromosome number, fully sequenced genomes, genetically
tractable model species, and an extensive synthetic biology toolkit make
cyanobacteria an ideal system to study the causes and consequences of polyploidy
in bacteria. Over the course of this multidisciplinary project, the fellow will
gain experience in advanced microscopy, computational biology, synthetic
biology, ecology, and mathematical modeling. The fellow will also gain
experience mentoring students from under-represented groups that will be
involved in the research. Additionally, a unique set of teaching modules will be
created based on the fellow's studies that will provide educators with real-
world projects and data that they can incorporate into their own classrooms.