* 1712953
* Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Stucture
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Samuel Tabor, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 4,698,000.00

This award supports the experimental nuclear physics group at Florida State
University and the operation of the John D. Fox Superconducting Accelerator
Laboratory, as well as other work at national user laboratories. The experiments
include studies of nuclear reactions and decays that play key roles in all
stages of stellar processes. Other experiments focus on understanding where the
chemical elements come from and how they evolved and ordered themselves into
nuclear shell structures. The group will also exploit heavy ion collisions at
the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) to investigate how visible matter
came into being and how it evolved from a quark-gluon plasma. Much of this
program is aligned to address fundamental questions outlined in the 2015 Long
Range Plan for Nuclear Science. The broader societal impacts of this project lie
in the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students in a hands-
on environment. Because of the students' training and hands-on work with high
tech equipment in a forefront nuclear physics laboratory, FSU graduates are in
high demand and now serve in key roles in homeland security, national defense,
high-tech industry, leading edge research, and STEM education. The group also is
active in supporting and strengthening local school systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The John D. Fox accelerator laboratory focuses on programs
in nuclear structure physics through particle and gamma-ray spectroscopy and
nuclear astrophysics with radioactive beams produced in flight by the RESOLUT
facility. In addition, the newly installed Super-Enge Split-Pole Spectrograph
(SE-SPS) at the FSU accelerator is re-establishing a nationally unique resource
for high-resolution spectroscopy of light- and heavy-ion reactions. The group
will have a new research focus on the nuclear physics of unbound states and the
super-radiance mechanism in light nuclei. Another new initiative is the
development of a novel Multi-Sample Ion Chamber (FSU-MUSIC) active-target
detector, to be used in the measurement of fusion cross-sections between exotic
nuclei and at low energy. The detector will be combined with position-resolving
silicon-detectors such that elastic and inelastic scattering, transfer-reactions
and fusion can be measured simultaneously, in an effort to unravel the various
contributions to the fusion mechanism at low energies. Finally, the ANASEN
active-target detector is a leading detector system for reactions of
astrophysical interest at FSU and also in two recent experiments at the re-
accelerated beam facility REA-3 of the NSCL. This is an example of how the
development of a new detector technology and methods at the local laboratory
creates scientific opportunity at national facilities and is a model for the
future role of the laboratory in the era of FRIB.