* 1712065
* Development and Validation of Observational and Self-Report Instruments to Describe Teaching Practices in Online Undergraduate STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2022
* Charles Henderson, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 11/30/2022
* USD 299,861.00

The use of online instruction for undergraduate STEM courses is growing rapidly.
In response to this trend, leaders in the field of STEM education research are
working to develop a common language and tools for researchers and practitioners
to use to describe and assess online STEM instructional methods. In face-to-face
classrooms, educational researchers and practitioners have access to and have
made productive use of validated instruments for studying teaching
effectiveness. Analogous tools do not yet exist for online instruction. These
tools are needed for quality design and control purposes. To meet this need,
this project will develop and validate two measurement tools. The first is an
observational protocol. The second is a self-report instrument. These tools will
be used to reliably collect comparable, non-evaluative data for the description,
study, and improvement of online, undergraduate STEM
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument development project will use a
sequential mixed methods approach to research, design, pilot-test, refine, and
then implement an observation protocol and a self-report survey of instructional
practices for undergraduate online STEM courses. These instruments will fill a
gap in the available set of tools to study teaching and learning environments.
They will be grounded in current theory guiding research on online courses. They
will also be connected to current instruments (developed by this research team
and others), forming a continuum of observation categories and codes, and self-
reported practices that can be adapted for use across the spectrum of course
approaches.