* 1712633
* CIF:Small: Ramanujan-sums in signal representation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* P. Vaidyanathan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

This research explores new directions in the representation of signals, based on
certain&lt;br/&gt;mathematical ideas introduced by Ramanujan many decades ago.
In particular the applicability of&lt;br/&gt;Ramanujan-sums in the
representation of digital signals is studied in detail. Signals acquired
and&lt;br/&gt;stored in many scientific areas such as speech, music, medical,
genomic, and finance often&lt;br/&gt;contain hidden periodic patterns bearing
important information. These are difficult to identify and&lt;br/&gt;localize
because of the large volume of data, and extreme localization of
information.&lt;br/&gt;Conventional representations of signals based on Fourier
and wavelet transforms are not efficient&lt;br/&gt;for this purpose. This
research involves the use of Ramanujan-sums to develop
new&lt;br/&gt;representations that are efficient and economical. These offer
insights into the role of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, especially number theory, in
representation of signals in science and technology,&lt;br/&gt;with emphasis on
particular hidden structures such as periodicities. Such representations
are&lt;br/&gt;expected to have significant impact in scientific applications
involving large data bases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the research
goes deep into Ramanujan subspaces, nested periodic subspaces,&lt;br/&gt;and
Ramanujan filter banks, which are crucial to the representation of periodic
sequences. This&lt;br/&gt;enables one to address some fundamental research
problems in signal processing. This includes&lt;br/&gt;the minimum information
that should be gathered from a discrete-time signal in order to
identify&lt;br/&gt;multiple periodicities, the design of digital filter banks
that serve as projection operators onto&lt;br/&gt;periodicity subspaces, and
optimal design of dictionaries of atoms to represent sums of
periodic&lt;br/&gt;signals with unknown integer periods. The research also
involves the theory and implementation&lt;br/&gt;of gridless methods to achieve
super resolution in period-estimation for continuous-time signals,&lt;br/&gt;and
extension to two- and higher-dimensional signals.