* 1712001
* Improving Undergraduate Research Experiences for STEM Majors and Pre-Service Teachers via Berkeley Undergraduate Research Evaluation Tools (BURET)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Anne Baranger, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 298,168.00

The Berkeley Undergraduate Research Evaluation Tools (BURET) project will
explore how undergraduate research experiences (UREs) in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) help students develop an understanding of
scientific research. Across the U.S., many students engage in UREs each year,
and universities dedicate substantial resources to supporting these programs.
However, there are relatively few studies about the benefits for students in
terms of their learning gains. In response to this deficiency, the BURET project
will develop methods to track STEM undergraduate learning in UREs, study how
participating in UREs prepares pre-service teachers to guide K-12 students in
inquiry-based learning, and develop materials to train graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers to be effective mentors to undergraduate research
students. The results from this work will provide evidence for improving
existing STEM education and teacher education programs, and broadening support
for undergraduate research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BURET project will study
and improve UREs through the following specific aims: (1) Develop, refine, and
test tools to assess how students integrate understanding of scientific
practices and content while participating in UREs, (2) characterize how
undergraduate researchers and pre-service teachers develop an integrated
understanding of scientific practices and content over time, and (3) explore
interventions for improving learning of scientific practices and content for
undergraduate researchers. The project will use a mixed methods approach with
surveys, interviews, and observations to study both the outcomes of UREs for
STEM majors and the effects of incorporating UREs in teacher education on
inquiry-based K-12 teaching practices. The project team will share findings
across STEM departments at UC Berkeley via periodic workshops to improve the
structure, learning goals, and evaluation of UREs. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program is providing co-funding for this project in recognition of
its alignment with the broader STEM pre-service teacher education research goals
of the Noyce effort.