* 1712878
* Leap into Science: Cultivating a National Network for Informal Science and Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Lynn Dierking, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,105,734.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. This project will
develop a national infrastructure of state and regional partnerships to scale up
The Franklin Institute's proven model of Leap into Science, an outreach program
that builds the capacity of children (ages 3-10) and families from underserved
communities to participate in science where they live. Leap into Science
combines children's science-themed books with hands-on science activities to
promote life-long interest and knowledge of science, and does so through
partnerships with informal educators at libraries, museums, and other out-of-
school time providers. Already field-tested and implemented in 12 cities, Leap
into Science will be expanded to 90 new rural and urban communities in 15
states, and it is estimated that this expansion will reach more than 500,000
children and adults as well as 2,700 informal educators over four years. The
inclusion of marginalized rural communities will provide new opportunities to
evaluate and adapt the program to the unique assets and needs of rural families
and communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include evaluation and
learning research activities. Evaluation will focus on: 1) the formative issues
that may arise and modifications that may enhance implementation; and 2) the
overall effectiveness and impact of the Leap into Science program as it is
scaled across more sites and partners. Learning research will be used to
investigate questions organized around how family science interest emerges and
develops among 36 participating families across six sites (3 rural, 3 urban).
Qualitative methods, including data synthesis and cross-case analysis using
constant comparison, will be used to develop multiple case studies that provide
insights into the processes and outcomes of interest development as families
engage with Leap into Science and a conceptual framework that guides future
research. This project involves a partnership between The Franklin Institute
(Philadelphia, PA), the National Girls Collaborative Project (Seattle, WA),
Education Development Center (Waltham, MA), and the Institute for Learning
Innovation (Corvallis, OR).