* 1712425
* A United Theory of van der Waals forces in Non-Local Density Functional Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Timo Thonhauser, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award that
supports research and education towards developing methodologies for the
computational modeling of materials. Our society depends on novel materials for
many aspects of life, ranging from smart phones and computers to transportation
and industrial processes. Historically, such materials have been developed in
experimental labs, but that approach is very expensive and time consuming. With
advances in computer technology, we are now at a point where we can model the
properties of materials before they are ever made in a lab, providing a
potentially less expensive and faster way to develop new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All materials are held together by fundamental
forces between their constituent atoms and/or molecules. Although weaker than
most other forces, the van der Waals force is crucial for many
chemical/biological/industrial processes and phenomena of every-day life,
allowing for example a gecko to run up a wall. Unfortunately, the most widely
used computational technique for modeling materials has difficulty capturing van
der Waals forces. Over time, two distinct approaches have been developed that
represent different design philosophies. With this NSF award, the PI seeks to
combine both, with the objective to derive an improved and unified theory that
combines the advantages of both approximations and overcomes their shortcomings.
The main scientific outcome of the award will be a freely available computer
code that allows researchers to more accurately model materials where van der
Waals forces play an important role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the educational
part of this project, young scientists will be trained and mentored to become
independent researchers in fields that are important to our nation's continued
success. In addition, the research activities are coupled with outreach at a
local science museum to increase scientific literacy and engagement with science
in the community. The proposed Molecular Playground at the local science museum
will serve over 200,000 visitors annually, broadening participation in science
among those who live in the Piedmont-Triad area in North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award that supports
research and education towards developing a unified theory of van der Waals
forces within nonlocal density functional theory. Our society's increased need
for novel materials has shifted their development strategy to modeling a
material's properties on the computer before it is ever synthesized in the lab.
The capability of modern methods to accurately model a variety of interactions
in novel materials has thus come into focus. Of particular interest are van der
Waals interactions, which are crucial for the structure of many materials
reaching from cement to DNA, playing intricate roles in catalysis, gas
sequestration/storage, and biochemical processes. Due to its favorable
computational cost, density functional theory (DFT) is the ab initio modeling
method of choice. However, with standard approximations it unfortunately cannot
reliably capture van der Waals interactions. Two density-based approximations to
the exchange-correlation functional have been developed that incorporate van der
Waals interactions in DFT, both with advantages and shortcomings. The objective
of the current proposal is to derive an improved and unified theory that
combines the advantages of both approximations and overcomes their shortcomings.
The result will be a combined, parameter-free, and generally applicable and
practical method to capture van der Waals interactions in DFT with improved
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While both approximations have a common starting
point in many-body theory, they differ in the construction of their nonlocal
correlation density functional. In both cases, the dielectric function of the
material is approximated through a simple plasmon-pole model, but the specific
models adhere to different numbers of exact physical constraints and thus result
in models of different complexity. Surprisingly, the simpler method with fewer
exact constraints often performs better in terms of accuracy, but suffers from
problems of transferability to materials in different situations. The proposed
work presents a pathway to unify both methods and find an improved description
of the plasmon-pole model that adheres to the more important constraints, such
as charge conservation, but is also simple to evaluate. The main outcome of the
award will be a computational tool to more accurately capture nonlocal van der
Waals effects within DFT. The PI plans to release the developed software as open
source, as part of the public-domain electronic-structure package Quantum-
Espresso, and build a user community around the language by ensuring that
interested researchers are able to contribute to the codebase. This will allow a
wider growth of the  project. This aspect is of special interest to the software
cluster in the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-
funding for this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the educational part of this
project, young scientists will be trained and mentored to become independent
researchers in fields that are important to our nation's continued success. In
addition, the research activities are coupled with outreach at a local science
museum to increase scientific literacy and engagement with science in the
community. The proposed Molecular Playground at the local science museum will
serve over 200,000 visitors annually, broadening participation in science among
those who live in the Piedmont-Triad area in North Carolina.