* 1712796
* An investigation of the impact of culture and experience on reasoning about complex ecological phenomena among students from diverse backgrounds
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Megan Bang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 10/31/2019
* USD 549,793.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. The project will
conduct research designed to deepen our fundamental knowledge about culture,
experience, and ecosystems cognition and to develop innovative practices and
approaches to support learning about changing ecological systems and
environmental decision making. Work on cultural differences in the production of
complex systems knowledge is severely lacking. This gap in knowledge may
contribute to the continued reproduction of inequities in science education.
More broadly findings from this project will have clear implications for
theories of cognitive development, especially those pertaining to how knowledge
is shaped by culture and experience. Focusing on ecosystems may represent an
opportunity to not only increase engagement and achievement in science among
non-dominant communities and Native youth specifically, but also advance
effective learning for all communities. The primary deliverables for the project
are conference presentations and research publications. However, the project
will also develop additional resources freely available to researchers,
educators, and the general public. These will include summer curricular
materials and teaching tools, professional development workshops, practitioner
briefs about research findings that can be used in professional development
workshops and shared share more broadly, and evaluation reports.

A deeper understanding of cultural influences on conceptions of the natural
world can serve to advance the educational needs of children, including children
from diverse linguistic and cultural backgrounds. Project research will include
two interrelated series of studies and is designed to expand knowledge about
human cognition of (complex) ecosystems and the affordances of informal STEM
learning environments in developing and supporting the critical 21st century
skill of ecological systems level reasoning. The first consists of a series of
experiments focused on ecological cognition and the role of humans in nature.
The second consists of design-based research interventions in informal settings,
summer workshops for youth and the communities, focused on ecological systems
level thinking and socio-environmental decision making. The project will recruit
and engage both child and adult participants from two broad cultural
communities, Native Americans and European Americans living in urban and
suburban communities, in part because it affords a sharp test of human-nature
relations. Sampling from two different urban communities will avoid simple
Native-non-Native comparative binaries and to conduct Native-to-Native
comparative analysis. Based on results from this, the project will result in: 1)
foundational knowledge about human learning and reasoning and ecosystems and
environmental decision making, 2) culturally responsive models of learning and
practice about complex ecosystems for indoors and outdoors informal learning
environments, and 3) insights about research-practice-community partnerships.
One important objective of the research is to broaden participation and close
opportunity gaps for under-represented groups in STEM fields broadly and more
specifically for Indigenous people. As in past research conducted by the
project, members of Indigenous communities, who provide strong role models for
other aspiring scholars, will be involved as postdoctoral fellows, research
assistants and graduate fellows.