* 1712411
* Workshop: International Society for Microbial Electrochemistry and Technology (ISMET) 2016 Conference, Stanford University
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2017
* Alfred Spormann, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2017
* USD 13,500.00

1712411&lt;br/&gt;Spormann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Society for
Microbial Electrochemistry and Technology (ISMET) was formed in 2011 as a new
international umbrella organization (private nonprofit) with the goal to link
researchers, engineers, and scientists in the area of microbial electrochemistry
and their derived technologies. This conference, was held at Stanford University
on October 5-7, 2016 with the objective of linking together an interdisciplinary
group of researchers to discuss recent advancements in microbial
electrochemistry and technologies. This technology is one of many that is being
investigated related to the food-energy-water nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
topics that were covered at the North American-International Society for
Microbial Electrochemistry and Technology conference was to integrate both
fundamental and applied research, and cover topics were in the area of
fundamental research: 1. Novel microbial pathways in microbial electrochemistry,
2. Fundamentals of extracellular electron transfer, 3. Synthetic biology
approaches to optimize microbial electrochemical systems, and, 4. Microbial
ecology of mixed culture systems. In the area of applied research the topics
were: 1. Wastewater treatment and other bioremediation/bioenergy/biosensing
applications, 2. Materials: electrodes and membranes for microbial
electrochemistry and technologies, 3. Design towards applications and scale-up,
and, 4. Modeling and optimization. The ISMET promotes the International and
Continental meetings occurring every other year on alternating years. However,
ISMET does not organize these meetings; the annual meetings are organized at the
host level. The interaction among researchers from different fields created a
unique environment to foster ideas and future collaborations. At the same time,
these ideas could lead to novel technologies that can impact the future
infrastructure at the water-energy nexus. The conference also had workshops to
educate new researchers in techniques such as molecular biology and mathematical
modeling. Through these workshops, the PI expected to train students that will
become leaders in our field. The conference also serves to be a springboard for
forging the thought processes of researchers from various backgrounds across the
globe to enable the success of microbial electrochemical technologies.