* 1712074
* Collaborative Research: Promoting instructional change in introductory STEM courses through Faculty Learning Communities focused on the transition from high school to college
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jeffrey Hecker, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Camacho - Walter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 154,910.00

Recent national reports note that fewer than half of first-year undergraduate
students who start in STEM fields have graduated with a STEM degree six years
later. Most of this attrition occurs between the first and second year of
college, and students often cite instructional practices used in introductory
college courses as a prominent reason for leaving. Furthermore, students from
backgrounds that are underrepresented in STEM fields, including first-generation
college students, leave STEM majors at higher rates than their classmates.
Emerging data suggest that the instructional practices used in introductory
college STEM courses differ significantly from those used in high school science
classes and that incoming college students hold expectations that are often not
well aligned with actual college teaching practices. This project is important
because it is addressing directly the teaching practices differences in high
school and college and how to ameliorate the negative impact on students.
Building on these earlier findings, this project will develop Faculty Learning
Communities (FLCs) at the University of Maine and the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln, in which faculty who teach introductory STEM courses will meet
regularly over the course of a year. Participating faculty will examine data
about instructional differences in high school and college; discuss student
transitions with high school teachers; and explore emergent data that provide
insight into why students, especially those who are first-generation, struggle
during the first semester of college. These groups will develop materials about
instructional transitions that can be used in a variety of courses and will
respond to questions from first-year undergraduate students regarding how to
achieve success in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction with the
formation of FLCs at two universities, this project will conduct research to
understand how the FLCs affect participants' teaching beliefs and course
practices as well as how the FLCs ultimately impact students in introductory
classes. This research will use a multi-methods approach that includes
qualitative interviews with FLC participants, video recording and observational
scoring of participants' teaching practices, collection of survey data on
student perceptions of their learning environments, and measurement of student
academic performance. This project will also use online surveys to ask students
about their expectations regarding the teaching practices used in undergraduate
courses and differences they perceive between high school and college STEM
courses. By developing and researching FLCs focused on the transition from high
school to college, this project will produce a model for how to design FLCs
focused on introductory STEM courses; an understanding of the conditions and
experiences that enable faculty to change their instructional practices and how
these changes impact students; and materials that instructors, first-year
advisors, and administrators can use to help students with instructional
transitions.