* 1712025
* Collaborative Research: Developing and Assessing Subgoal Labels for Imperative Programming to Improve Student Learning Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Adrienne Decker, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2019
* USD 33,136.00

Our nation has set a goal to provide computing education to all students, but
computing education remains inaccessible to most citizens. Outside of filling
software development jobs, for which there is a projected growth of one million
jobs, computing is becoming critical in many other industries. Students
preparing for CS careers start with an introduction to computer science (CS)
course; however, approximately half of them will fail, forcing them to either
repeat the course or leave computing. This project will incorporate
instructional techniques identified through educational psychology research as
effective ways to improve student learning and retention in introductory
programming. The research team will develop worked examples of problems that
incorporate subgoal labels, which are explanations that describe the function of
steps in the problem solution to the learner and highlight the problem-solving
process. Using subgoal labels within worked examples, which has been effective
in other STEM fields, students are able to see an expert's solution to a problem
which helps students learn an approach to solving problems before they can solve
problem themselves. Further, learning outcomes and retention will be assessed to
measure the impact of using worked problem examples with subgoal labels. The
knowledge and outcomes of this project have the potential to positively
influence computing and computer science education by disseminating an
educational strategy that not only enhances student learning but potentially
also retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experts, including instructors, teaching
introductory level courses are often unable to explain the process they use in
problem solving at a level that learners can grasp because they have automated
much of the problem-solving processes given the many years of practice. The goal
of this project is to use subgoal labels throughout introductory computing
courses and investigate the impact on student learning and retention. Multiple
worked examples with subgoal labels for each concept in an introductory computer
science course will be developed by the research team. These examples will then
be implemented in multiple classrooms and across multiple semesters in order to
measure the effectiveness of the intervention and to continuously improve the
development and delivery of the learning materials. The use of a mixed-methods
design, incorporating qualitative and quantitative data collection methods, with
use of control groups will guide the investigation and measurement of learning
impact. In the final year of the project, a large-scale deployment of the
intervention and supporting learning materials will be disseminated to a diverse
set of institutions to further investigate impacts. The findings and
instructional materials generated during this project have the potential to
positively impact not only computing and computer science education, but more
broadly other STEM disciplines.