* 1712957
* Investigation of Bayes Procedures: Theory, Modeling, and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Chao Gao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Bayesian analysis is a widely used technique in data science for estimation,
prediction, and interpretation. The new era of complex and big data imposes
unprecedented challenges to Bayesian statistics. This research project addresses
these new challenges from three different perspectives. First, the investigator
will study the relation between prior knowledge and scientific conclusion by
conducting rigorous mathematical analysis in the framework of Bayesian
statistics. Second, the investigator aims to find novel ways of modeling data
sets that can take into account new features of modern big data. Finally, the
investigator intends to push the boundary of Bayesian computation by inventing
new algorithms that are both fast and theoretically sound. The results of the
research are expected to have a positive impact in areas that apply Bayesian
statistics on a routine basis, including population genetics, astronomy,
computer vision, political science, social science, and animal
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian analysis is an important statistical
framework for both modeling and computation. However, applying Bayesian
procedures correctly when encountering a specific problem is non-trivial. The
selections of prior, likelihood, and algorithm all influence the final
conclusion drawn from a posterior distribution. Despite many successful
applications of Bayesian analysis in various scientific areas, solid theoretical
foundations on how to perform Bayesian inference are still lacking. The goal of
this project is to develop a coherent theory on optimal Bayesian inference.
Specifically, the investigator will study: 1) Bayesian theory: optimal posterior
contraction in parametric, nonparametric and high-dimensional models; 2)
Bayesian modeling: likelihood functions that are free of nuisance parameters and
Bayesian edge-exchangeable network analysis; 3) Bayesian computation:
algorithmic and statistical properties of variational inference; and 4)
applications to single-cell RNA sequencing analysis.