* 1712786
* RAPID: Impact of exceptional drought on transformation of a savanna grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Scott Collins, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2019
* USD 70,439.00

Kruger National Park (KNP), a biodiversity hotspot, is experiencing one of its
worst droughts on record. This drought has resulted in large declines in forage
for many grazing species, which have experienced significant population declines
as a result. The remaining animals have been left to consume low quality, mostly
unpalatable, forage. How these changes may alter future plant communities is not
known. For almost a decade, scientists have been studying the impact of fire
frequency and large grazers on ecosystem processes in savanna grassland in KNP
under what used to be considered normal climatic conditions. With the onset of
extreme drought, they now have an opportunity to study how the effects of fire
and grazing may change as climatic conditions change, and what this might mean
for plant productivity and populations of large grazer species. Climate models
predict an intensification of climate extremes globally, a phenomenon that is
already evident in weather patterns today, so there is a great need to develop a
better understanding of how these rare climatic events may be reshaping
ecosystems. In addition to enhancing understanding of savanna grasslands and
testing fundamental ecological theory, this research will provide crucial
information on the impact of climate extremes on plants and their grazers, which
will be of great value to decision makers that manage national parks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will document the effects of a
historically exceptional drought on a savanna grassland (characterized by a
mixture of both woody and herbaceous plants) in KNP in the context of an
existing long-term grazing and fire experiment. Documenting the potentially
transformational nature of rare climatic events is in itself an opportunity
seldom afforded ecologists, but to have pre-treatment data and a long-term,
well-replicated experiment in place that manipulates the key disturbances most
likely to interact with extreme drought is unprecedented. Because forecasts are
for this exceptional drought to conclude in early 2017, this RAPID project
focuses on gathering data at the end of this exceptional climate event to assess
the potential for drought, fire and grazing to trigger a shift in the plant
community that will result in an increase in the relative abundance of palatable
grasses. This research has implications for not only understanding the
determinants of grassland biodiversity, but also for increasing our knowledge of
how rare climate extremes may transform ecosystems. Currently, KNP managers are
grappling with a long-term trend of grassland degradation which has led to the
loss of palatable forage for wildlife. The current exceptional drought, while
exacerbating this problem in the short-term, may increase forage quality across
much of KNPs grasslands. In addition, this project will establish close
collaborative ties between US researchers and scientists in South Africa. The
lead scientists on this project will continue to work closely with KNP
scientists to ensure that all results are communicated in a way to inform
management decisions in KNP. Dissemination of all datasets and results will be
achieved via a dedicated webpage, housed at Colorado State University.