* 1712258
* Code: SciGirls! Media to Engage Girls in Computing Pathways
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Rita Karl, Twin Cities Public Television
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2021
* USD 2,999,453.00

Women continue to be underrepresented in computer science professions. In 2015,
while 57% of professional occupations in the U.S. were held by women, only 25%
of computing occupations were held by women. Furthermore, the share of computer
science degrees going to women is smaller than any STEM field, even though
technology careers are the most promising in terms of salaries and future
growth. Research suggests that issues contributing to this lack of computer
science participation begin early and involve complex social and environmental
factors, including girls' perception that they do not belong in computer science
classes or careers. Computer science instruction often alienates girls with
irrelevant curriculum; non-collaborative pedagogies; a lack of opportunities to
take risks or make mistakes; and a heavy reliance on lecture instead of hands-
on, project-based learning. Computer science experiences that employ research-
based gender equitable best practices, particularly role modeling, can help
diminish the gender gap in participation. In response to this challenge, Twin
Cities PBS (TPT), the National Girls Collaborative (NGC) and Code.org will lead
Code: SciGirls! Media for Engaging Girls in Computing Pathways, a three-year
project designed to engage 8-13 year-old girls in coding through transmedia
programming which inspires and prepares them for future computer science studies
and career paths. The project includes five new PBS SciGirls episodes featuring
girls and female coding professionals using coding to solve real problems; a new
interactive PBSKids.org game that allows children to develop coding skills;
nationwide outreach programming, including professional development for informal
educators and female coding professionals to facilitate activities for girls and
families in diverse STEM learning environments; a research study that will
advance understanding of how the transmedia components build girls' motivation
to pursue additional coding experiences; and a third-party summative evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Code: SciGirls! will foster greater awareness of and
engagement in computer science studies and career paths for girls. The PBS
SciGirls episodes will feature girls and female computer science professionals
using coding to solve real-world challenges. The project's transmedia component
will leverage the television content into the online space in which much of 21st
century learning takes place. The new interactive PBSKids.org game will use a
narrative framework to help children develop coding skills. Drawing on narrative
transportation theory and character identification theory, TPT will commission
two exploratory knowledge-building studies to investigate: To what extent and
how do the narrative formats of the Code: SciGirls! online media affect girls'
interest, beliefs, and behavioral intent towards coding and code-related
careers? The studies aim to advance understanding of how media builds girls'
motivation to pursue computer science experiences, a skill set critical to
building tomorrow's workforce. The project team will also raise educators'
awareness about the importance of gender equitable computer science instruction,
and empower them with best practices to welcome, prepare and retain girls in
coding. The Code: SciGirls! Activity Guide will provide educators with a
relevant resource for engaging aspiring computer scientists. The new media and
guide will also reside on PBSLearningMedia.org, reaching 1.2 million teachers,
and will be shared with thousands of educators across the SciGirls CONNECT and
National Girls Collaborative networks. The new episodes are anticipated to reach
92% of U.S. TV households via PBS, and the game at PBSKids.org will introduce
millions of children to coding. The summative evaluation will examine the reach
and impact of the episodes, game and new activities. PIs will share research
findings and project resources at national conferences and will submit to
relevant publications. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.