* 1712717
* Collaborative Research:   Adaptive Testing and Rare-Event Analysis of High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Gongjun Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 120,000.00

This project aims at developing adaptively powerful testing procedures for high-
dimensional data with applications in genetics, genomics and neuroimaging. Due
to recent biotechnological advances, large amounts of high-throughput and high-
dimensional molecular and imaging data have been collected, resulting in a
number of new and challenging statistical questions. One question is how
polygenic testing in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) may be used to
answer whether some of the millions of genetic variants are associated with a
complex disease like Alzheimer's disease. The answer to this question is
important to uncovering disease-related genes, and thus developing effective
prevention and treatment strategies. The focus on rigorous hypothesis testing to
avoid false discoveries, while maximizing the chance for true discoveries, is
critical to modern genetic, genomic and other omic studies. The methods will be
applied to data related to Alzheimer's disease, for which currently there is no
cure, and more powerful analysis methods are urgently needed to unravel the
underlying biology. Graduate students will be involved in the conduct of the
research and development of the computational tools, and publicly available
software packages will be developed for use by other biomedical
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the frontiers of
modern statistical methodology in hypothesis testing with high-dimensional data
and related rare event assessment. Powerful adaptive methods for testing high-
dimensional mean parameters in generalized linear models as well as high-
dimensional covariance matrix structures will be developed. The adaptive test
statistics are constructed based on high-dimensional high-order von Mises
V-statistics and U-statistics, and will provide uniformly high power against
sparse, dense, as well as moderately sparse or dense signals for flexible
asymptotic regimes. Another thrust of the research deals with the challenging
and important rare-event estimation problem in analysis of genome-wide molecular
and neuroimaging data, where a high stringent statistical significance level is
usually needed. To evaluate such small probabilities, the research will lead to
theoretical tail probability approximations as well as efficient Monte Carlo
methods using non-standard change-of-measure techniques.