* 1712619
* North Star STEM Alliance:  Building on the Legacy of Minnesota's LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Moin Syed, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,019,773.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and
provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the
knowledge-based economy. The North Star STEM Alliance (NSSA) was established in
2007 in response to the need for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce.
That need still exists and is particularly acute in the State of Minnesota.
Participating institutions include three University of Minnesota campuses (Twin
Cities, Duluth, and Morris); seven Minnesota State Colleges and Universities
(Bemidji State, Century College, Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College,
Metropolitan State, Minneapolis Community and Technical College, Minnesota State
University Mankato, and St. Cloud State) a tribal college (Leech Lake Tribal
College) and three private colleges (Augsburg, Carleton, and St. Olaf).
Community partners include the Science Museum of Minnesota, Minnesota High Tech
Association, and the Minnesota Education Equity Partnership. The goals of NSSA
include: 1)Annual completion of 756 underrepresented minority (URM) STEM
bachelor's degrees by 2022; 2) Deeper Alliance collaborations to improve
students' pathways through all stages of transfer from community colleges to
four-year institutions; and 3) Foster institutional change toward greater
diversity and inclusion on Alliance campuses. These goals support the National
Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly
inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the scientific literacy
of all citizens." The goals will be accomplished by creating pathways to
undergraduate research experiences; group study, supplemental instruction and
tutoring; faculty and peer mentoring; community building via cohorts and
culturally based STEM student organizations; STEM conference travel; outreach to
prospective community college transfer students; and campus climate initiatives.
These activities are expected to produce higher rates of retention and
graduation; and moreover, lead to a more talented and diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generating research study
encompasses a mixed methods research elucidating URM students' science identity
development as influenced by research experiences, major and career exploration,
mentoring, and co-curricular activities. The study will provide invaluable
insight regarding how URM students can best thrive in programs that aim to
support academic and career pathways. Evaluation of the Alliance programming and
partnership will take the form of qualitative studies of URM STEM student
experiences, Alliance programming, trend analyses of enrollment, retention,
engagement, and graduation by URM STEM students; and formative and summative
evaluation by an external evaluator.