* 1712605
* I-Corps: Automatic Data Capture System using Machine Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Mequanint Moges, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to transform
existing data entry and document archiving systems by introducing an Automatic
Data Capture System (ADCS) enhanced by machine learning. Today many sectors,
including the mortgage industry, manufacturing, healthcare, and government
agencies, are using cumbersome data entry and document processing techniques.
This process not only adds substantially to cost, but also increases
inaccuracies in the data pool, cutting into the competitive advantage of
industries and agencies. The new system eliminates traditional methods of data
extraction and document classification by using a self-learning software program
that gathers information from any scanned document in any paper-intensive
business processes. Implementing Robotic Process Automation in data entry
business processes in a structured way can accurately extract and process data
much faster at a very low cost point. In addition, the proposed project plan
will enhance knowledge about and research on electronic data capture systems
used in healthcare, allowing the development of more efficient data-processing
techniques that can improve patient care and speed up billing
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will implement an effective
solution that eliminates time-consuming and error-prone manual data entry. The
project will provide valuable insight into the process of scanning, data capture
techniques, and machine learning. The development of technical skills will also
be enhanced by an innovative learning framework that explores the application of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to data capture and processing. This
proprietary approach to utilizing CNNs in a non-traditional manner has led to
exceptional results in identifying and extracting information from scanned
documents, making it possible for the first time to fully automate paper-
intensive business processes. The commercial success of such a software program
is validated by the efforts several companies are making to develop a similar
product themselves because currently available technologies, such as Optical
Character Recognition (OCR), cannot offer the level of accuracy required. This
new Automated Data Capture System will also enhance research on virtual data
systems for representing, querying, and automating data derivation - research
that is used in applications such as virtual data language interpreters and data
grids.