* 1712129
* Deeper Learning of Data Science (DLDS): Studying Real-world Experiences of Engineering Professionals to Prepare the Future Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Aditya Johri, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

George Mason University will address the lack of experts trained in the
processing, analysis and use of large-scale digital data by conducting a study
of how engineers in different fields currently work with this type of data. If
properly analyzed and utilized, digital data can lead to useful insights that
can help empower people, companies, and government agencies across a range of
efforts from education and healthcare, to the design of drones and aircrafts.
The knowledge gained from this study will be used to design curricular materials
to train future engineers to work with data. In particular, case studies of how
data can be used for impact will be generated and tested within a class. These
case studies will be available for use by others who want to provide similar
training. A broad range of topics will be included in this work and the research
study will learn from the perspectives of a diverse range of engineers, with
particular emphasis on learning from those who are typically underrepresented in
engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data Science has been identified as a
critical domain in which trained practitioners are hard to find. The
intellectual merit of this project is its study of how engineering professional
work on data-intensive projects in order to understand the knowledge, skills,
and competencies required for their work. Case studies will be developed to
train undergraduate engineering students. Two interrelated theoretical
approaches 'Professional Vision' and 'Disciplined Perception' will be leveraged
to conceptualize this study with the following research questions: 1) What
contextual challenges do data professionals face while conducting data-intensive
work and how do they overcome them; 2) What techniques, professional expertise,
and domain-specific knowledge do they draw on for their work; 3) What knowledge
do they transfer from prior experiences and what new knowledge do they learn of
necessity and how do they acquire it? A mixed-methods field study comprised of
interviews and surveys will be conducted. Thirty professionals will be
interviewed twice over a period of two years (60 interviews) and a survey of 250
participants will be conducted. The research has promise for advancing student
learning, by providing overall guidance on data science skills desired by the
industry, and by advancing understanding of how professional engineering work
has changed.