* 1712116
* Understanding the Implications of Online Learning and Engagement Strategies with Elements of Competition on Women Students' Engagement and Fit with Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Peter Clarke, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The underrepresentation of women in computer science has begun to garner
attention in both popular culture and scholarly works due to shifts in
demographics and concerns about remaining competitive in a globalized economy.
Post-secondary programs are working to attract and retain women in computing
fields in order to keep pace with industry demands for computing professionals.
This has caused the computer science community to reflect on current educational
practices, community culture, and university departmental climate. This project
will use a cyberlearning environment known as SEP-CyLE (Software Engineering and
Programming Cyberlearning Environment) to study the potential of using online
learning and engagement strategies with elements of competition (known
informally as gamification) as a strategy to enhance the learning, engagement,
and identity development of women in computing. The intellectual merit of the
project is its explicit exploration of gender in a cyber-learning environment.
Despite the wealth of literature that explores gamification on learning there is
no clear consensus on its effects on students by race and gender. Does
gamification have value for improving female students learning and engagement in
computer science courses? The results of this research will provide insight on
gamification in student learning, identity development, and self-efficacy
beliefs, and gender-fit in computer science. The results of this study will form
the basis for more targeted learning and engagement strategies to attract and
retain more women in computing fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
activities consist of a mixed-methods study that explores the effects of
gamification on self-efficacy beliefs and identity development for women and the
usage patterns and learning outcomes for all students. The quantitative data
will be disaggregated on the basis of race and gender to determine if there are
differences in usage patterns and learning gains amongst participants of
different races, genders, and intersections of race and gender. The results of
the mixed-methods study will provide insight into both women's experiences
within computer science and the implication of gamification on their learning
and engagement.