* 1712294
* Regularity, Blow Up and Mixing in Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Alexander Kiselev, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2018
* USD 350,000.00

Fluids are all around us, and we can witness the complexity and subtleness of
their properties in everyday life, in ubiquitous technology, and in dramatic
weather phenomena. Although there is an enormous wealth of knowledge accumulated
in the broad area of fluid mechanics, many of the most fundamental and important
questions remain poorly understood. Of particular interest is the question
whether solutions to equations describing fluid motion can spontaneously form
singularities - meaning that some quantity becomes infinite. Understanding
singularities is important because they often correspond to dramatic, highly
intense fluid motion, can indicate the range of applicability of the model, and
are very difficult to resolve computationally. More generally, one can ask a
related and broader question of creation of small scales in fluids - coherent
structures that vary sharply in space and time, and contribute to phenomena such
as turbulence. The project aims to analyze singularity formation process for
some key equations of fluid mechanics, and to better understand the mechanisms
that generate small scales in fluid motion. Another direction of the project
research focuses on mixing in fluid flow. Mixing in fluids plays an important
role in a wide range of settings, from marine ecology to internal combustion
engines. Here the goal is to find and study fluid flows that are especially
efficient mixers, as well as to produce bounds on mixing efficiency given some
natural constraints. Such bounds can serve as benchmarks in evaluation of mixing
processes.

The research covers three topics. The first topic concerns the Euler equation
for incompressible inviscid fluid. It is nonlinear and nonlocal, which makes
analysis difficult. Many key questions about behavior of solutions to the Euler
equation remain open despite significant research efforts. Recently, the PI
jointly with Vladimir Sverak have constructed examples of solutions to the 2D
Euler equation which exhibit extremely fast formation of small scales. This work
has been stimulated by the new scenario of potential singularity formation in
the 3D Euler equation, proposed by Tom Hou and Guo Luo. The project aims to gain
further rigorous insight into the possible singularity formation in three
dimensions by analyzing a series of model equations. The second topic concerns
properties of solutions to the surface quasi-geostrophic (SQG) and modified SQG
equations. These equations model evolution of temperature on the surface of
Earth. Recently, the PI and collaborators have constructed examples of
singularity formation in modified SQG patches in presence of boundary for a part
of the possible parameter range. These examples are the first available in this
class of equations. The project will involve further work on the modified SQG
patch solutions, in the absence of boundary. The methods to be deployed in the
first two directions of the project involve novel analytic estimates, comparison
principles, asymptotic analysis, partial differential equations (PDE) estimates,
and Fourier analysis techniques. The third topic concerns mixing in fluid flow.
The goal is to improve understanding of flows that are most efficient in
speeding up mixing. Quite often, there are constraints on some aspects of mixing
flow, and it is important to understand how to produce most effective mixing
under these constraints. The problems here are at the interface of applied
partial differential equations, dynamical systems, probability theory and
functional analysis.