* 1712787
* Social and Cultural Influence on the Neurobiology of Adolescent Risk Taking
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Eva Telzer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 04/30/2019
* USD 338,164.00

This project in developmental neuroscience examines the influence parents and
peers exert on adolescents' willingness to engage in risky behavior at the
neural circuitry level. Adolescent risk seeking behavior presents health and
safety risks. This research has to potential to contribute significantly to
national health and welfare by informing the design of effective interventions
with youth at risk for emotional, behavioral, or social difficulties. This
project has the potential to challenge and shift current research, update models
of adolescent brain development, and ultimately inform the design of early
interventions to prevent the rise in adolescent risk
taking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk taking underlies many behavioral and health
problems that contribute to the public health burden during the adolescent
period, such as substance use and externalizing behavior. Emerging evidence from
developmental neuroscience suggests that risk taking behavior increases during
adolescence partly due to changes in the brain's neural circuitry. Despite these
advances, there currently is little understanding of how neurobiological
development interacts with social processes during the adolescent period. This
is an important limitation given that adolescence is a period marked by
increasingly complex social development, and adolescent decision making most
often occurs under conditions of socio-emotional arousal. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Telzer will measure how family and peers
differentially impact the neurobiology of adolescent risk taking. Adolescents
will be scanned using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) as they
engage in a risk taking task and cognitive control task alone, in the presence
of a peer, and in the presence of their parent. Adolescents will be followed for
one year to measure self-reported risk taking behaviors in order to examine
whether social influence on neuro-cognition predicts longitudinal changes in
real-world risk taking. Although self-reported intentions predict some
variability in future risk taking behavior, self-reports are not sufficient to
capture the multidimensional nature of risk taking, particularly among
adolescents. The ability to prospectively predict future engagement in risk
taking based on adolescents' current neural sensitivity can have profound
effects on our ability to develop early prevention programs.