* 1712679
* Leading the Next Generation of Informal STEM Education Broadening Participation Efforts: A Professional Development Program for Mid-Career Professionals
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Bronwyn Bevan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 09/30/2020
* USD 356,566.00

As part of its overall effort to enhance learning in informal environments, the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, seeks to advance new approaches
to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. In alignment with these aims,
the University of Washington will design and pilot an innovative leadership
development program, NextGen Broadening Participation in ISE Professional
Learning Program, to develop the leadership capacity of mid-career
professionals, primarily from underrepresented groups in STEM, whose work
focuses on broadening participation in informal STEM education (ISE). Unlike
most existing ISE leadership models, this pathways project will employ a bottom-
up, iterative design approach to engage program participants and garner new
insights. Formative data and analysis will be used to better understand the
broadening participation context, inform the model, and develop strategies and
resources necessary to best support a more diversified next generation of ISE
leaders. This pilot study is timely and significant. There is currently a
substantial dearth of literature on the intersection between broadening
participation and mid-level professional leadership development. Likewise, there
are few comparable models in the current AISL portfolio. As such, the findings
from this pilot will address critical gaps in the AISL portfolio and in the
field, at large. It has the potential to markedly transform the capacity and
impact of next generation ISE leaders.

Over an eighteen-month period, this feasibility study will design, implement and
test key aspects of the model to determine its potential for short and long term
success. Using a competitive application process, twenty ISE mid-career
professionals, who work primarily within broadening participation in STEM
contexts, will be recruited to participate in the NextGen Broadening
Participation in ISE Professional Learning Program. The year-long program
includes four core components: (a) 4-day workshop, (b) four online webinars, (c)
pilot projects carried out in participants' home institutions, and (d) poster
presentations of projects at a national conference. A small cohort of faculty-
mentors -- leaders from both research and practice in ISE broadening
participation efforts -- will serve as participant mentors and play an integral
role in the design and implementation of the program. Evaluative efforts will
focus on documenting the efficacy of the design strategies (ex., recruitment,
mentorship, social networking), the interests, needs, and professional growth of
participants and the implications for broadening participation in STEM. The
evaluation will be informed by data collected via interviews, surveys, focus
groups, observations, content analyses of discourse, and participant
deliverables. Formative and summative external evaluations will be conducted by
the Garibay Group.