* 1712714
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Methodological Frameworks for Causal Inference of Peer Effects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jun Liu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 238,737.00

Understanding how friends or peers interact and affect each other is often of
great interest in biomedical studies and the social sciences. However, it is not
entirely clear how to quantify and develop inference for peer effects using a
formal statistical framework. This project will focus on the development of a
statistical causal inference framework to address these challenges, with the
goal of developing both theoretical and methodological tools for a wide class of
questions involving inference of peer effects. The methods will be applied to
investigate peer effects among university students with different academic
backgrounds. The research could provide important guidance for decision and
policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classical potential outcomes framework
for causal inference assumes no interference among experimental units. In some
empirical studies, interference is a nuisance that complicates analysis and
should be avoided by careful experimental design. In many applied fields,
however, group or network structures exist and could cause interference among
units. Interference is no longer a nuisance in these applications, because
studying the pattern of causal effects with interference is the scientific
question of interest with important implications for policy or decision making.
The existing literature discusses external interventions on the units, where the
networks, clusters or groups that induce interference are known a priori. The
new framework allows for the development of inferential tools for causal
inference with interference from the Fisherian, Neymanian, and Bayesian
perspectives. Under the Fisherian view, randomization tests will be used to
detect deviations from the sharp null hypothesis without imposing further
structural assumptions. Under the Neymanian view, randomization-based point and
interval estimators, which serve as the basis for finding optimal treatment
assignments will be developed. Under the Bayesian view, hierarchical models will
be developed to accommodate complex structures of real-life data and incorporate
information from multiple groups with longitudinal outcomes. The project will
also lead to the development of open-source R software. This project is
supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics (MMS) Program in the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences.