* 1712080
* Using Bricklayer Coding and Visual Art to Engage Students in Learning Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Victor Winter, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,375.00

Among the challenges facing undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education today, the instruction of mathematics is of special
concern. Mathematics is often at the foundation of learning other STEM
disciplines, yet introductory undergraduate mathematics courses tend to have
high failure rates and present a barrier to success for many students,
particularly for those from economically disadvantaged groups. Lack of interest
and loss of self-confidence in mathematics is common among students. This
project seeks to address these challenges by exploiting the close relationship
between mathematical thinking and computational thinking. Computational thinking
skills, such as breaking down problems into manageable parts, recognizing
patterns, and developing step-by-step solution processes that can be programmed
for a computer, are increasingly viewed as fundamental skills in the technology-
driven world of the twenty-first century. In this Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Exploration &amp; Design (IUSE E&amp;D) project, researchers will
design, implement, and assess a new interdisciplinary general-education course
at the University of Nebraska a Omaha (UNO) that uses the visual arts to
motivate students to develop mathematical and computational thinking skills. The
course will be based on Bricklayer, an open-source educational ecosystem in
which students learn to write programs that create two- and three-dimensional
LEGO, Minecraft, and 3D-printed artifacts. Many such artifacts are based on
mathematical patterns that the students themselves discover. In this inquiry-
based learning environment, mathematical thinking is a means to an end rather
than an end unto itself. It is expected that a positive experience in this
gateway course will lead to more positive perceptions not only of mathematics,
but also of computing and other STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's key research objective is to investigate the educational impact of the
new course in terms of students' interest and engagement in mathematics and
other STEM disciplines while ensuring continued high standards of learning.
Specifically, the research team will investigate the following research
questions: (1) Do students express more interest in mathematics and STEM after
participating in the new course? (2) Do students who take the new course plan to
continue participating in STEM by taking further STEM courses? (3) Does
participating in the new course increase students' confidence and self-efficacy
with mathematics and STEM? and (4) Do students in the new class persevere in
mastering the material at higher rates than in other introductory courses? Data
sources will include interviews with instructors who teach the course, focus
groups with student participants, assessments of students' mathematics content
knowledge, as well as pre- and post-course student surveys that measure
students' attitudes and beliefs about mathematics and interest in STEM
coursework and careers. A within-subject design will be used to measure how the
new course changes students' attitudes, self-efficacy, and interest while a
between-subject design will compare these attributes between students in the new
course and those taking the existing general education mathematics course.