* 1712341
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Active Learning Environments in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Adrienne Traxler, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 01/31/2022
* USD 73,485.00

This project will improve tools to distinguish between active learning
environments and is significant to both physics specifically and STEM education
generally. Evidence that active learning is superior to purely passive lecturing
is decisive, so STEM education research must now build a better vocabulary for
comparing active environments. This work will study several "flagship" curricula
in university physics, describing those classrooms using a common observation
framework and social network analysis to examine student collaboration. The
project will compare classroom features and student networks between these high-
impact examples, and will also promote tools for faculty to gather similar
information about their own classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are: to characterize the social network development within several
research-validated active learning curricula; to use the Classroom Observation
Protocol for Undergraduate STEM (COPUS) to begin to build a standardized
vocabulary to compare these environments; and to begin to link specific features
of learning environments with the characteristics of student social networks
that develop over the semester. Student networks will form the focal measure of
the work because of the prominence of student-student interactions in virtually
all active learning curricula. Data on this classroom aspect currently lag far
behind the detail available for individual-cognitive measures such as conceptual
gains. This project will address that deficiency while simultaneously
documenting the classroom features that support or constrain these collaborative
networks. Data collected will include network surveys and detailed classroom
observations from six research-validated curricula. Analyses will include
comparison and time evolution of degree distributions, network structure and
centralization, and linear modeling combining network metrics with profiles
identified from COPUS analysis.