* 1712663
* Algebra Extravaganza
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Vasiliy Dolgushev, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 02/28/2018
* USD 24,949.00

This award supports participation in the conference Algebra Extravaganza which
will take place on the main campus of Temple University on July 24-28, 2017.
Algebra is a very broad and vital part of mathematics which involves everything
from the study of solutions of polynomial equations to the study of subtle
abstract algebraic structures. It lays the necessary foundation for other
branches of mathematics such as algebraic geometry, number theory,
representation theory and algebraic topology. This conference is devoted to the
recent research activities on the interplay between Noncommutative Algebra with
Invariant Theory, Representation Theory, and Algebraic Geometry. Many recent
conferences in these areas of algebra have focused on parts of these
connections, but this conference will be unique in that it will feature talks on
a large variety of topics. The conference will feature over 20 lectures from
world-renowned experts, and should attract around 75-100 participants from the
international mathematics community. In addition to regular talks by experts,
the conference will feature a poster session as a networking opportunity for
junior participants. Funding will be prioritized for junior participants and for
women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will
bring together research leaders in Noncommutative Algebra, whose expertise have
connections to Invariant Theory, Representation Theory, and Algebraic Geometry.
Focus topic areas include: algebraic deformation theory; cluster algebras and
cluster categories; Hopf algebras and their actions on algebras; noncommutative
invariant theory; noncommutative projective algebraic geometry; noncommutative
resolutions of singularities; and Poisson algebras and Calabi-Yau algebras.
Further information can be found at the conference website:
https://math.temple.edu/events/conferences/k-l/