* 1712028
* The Environmental Project Management Academy (EPMA): An Interdisciplinary Project-Based Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Petrus, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 206,897.00

Employers express concerns that STEM graduates, while proficient in their
disciplines, lack the critical skills necessary for success in the workplace. In
addition, many non-STEM majors do not develop the basic scientific literacy that
could help them succeed in the workplace. To address these needs, the
investigators will design and test an interdisciplinary, project-based
experience, the Environmental Project Management Academy (EPMA), in which
sophomore and junior undergraduates pursuing either STEM or business majors will
work together on a semester-long service learning project. The program will
combine an existing 100-level environmental science course (Principles of
Environmental Science) with a new 200-level project management course
(Principles and Practices of Project Management) designed and taught by faculty
in the School of Business. Through the EPMA, students will collaborate with
community stakeholders as they integrate knowledge of environmental science and
project management in a project involving environmental issues relevant to the
region, such as solar energy, resource commercialization, and rain gardens. The
EPMA will help develop business-competent, STEM-literate graduates with an
understanding of significant environmental challenges as well as the
interdisciplinary thinking and project management skills required to address
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EPMA program will weave the known benefits of
service learning and project-based learning into interdisciplinary STEM and
business education. The objectives are (1) to engage 20 undergraduate students
per cohort (60 over the entire project period), with STEM and business majors
equally represented, in a "cluster course" that focuses on a service learning
project addressing a community need; (2) to establish an effective
interdisciplinary STEM teaching and learning environment in which 85% of each
cohort demonstrates competence in scientific literacy, project management
skills, interdisciplinary thinking, and intangible skills such as teamwork and
leadership; and (3) to determine whether this innovative educational model can
be scaled and sustained long-term, financially and logistically. Program design
and evaluation will be completed in collaboration with a professional evaluator
and an advisory board, including experts practicing science in a business
setting. Broadly applicable results from this project should include (1) a model
for interdisciplinary project-based learning in which STEM and non-STEM majors
collaborate on a STEM-based project and (2) a model for the incorporation of
project management techniques into STEM coursework.