* 1712773
* I-Corps: Printed receive coils for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Ana Arias, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project contributes to
the growth of clinical cases that qualify for the use of diagnostic and
interventional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Currently some patient
populations, such as pediatrics, cannot benefit from MRI mostly due to the lack
of adequate coils. Flexible and printed coils are lightweight and conform well
to the human body, increasing comfort during the exam while increasing
reliability, reducing the exam time due to the increased SNR obtained when coils
are in close proximity to the sample. In pediatric use, the impact will be two-
fold; the coils will increase the accessibility of MRI and decrease the use of
general anesthesia resulting in less failed scans. The commercialization of
these coils could also increase the number of MR-guided non-invasive therapy.
Comfortable and inexpensive coils would assist streamline the process flow in
hospitals, thus contributing to a more efficient, more affordable healthcare
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to identify the decisive
design features required in order to offer the most value to the users of
flexible printed coils for MRI. The project will quantify the benefits brought
by printed coils through metrics relevant to customers and will lay the
foundations of a successful commercialization plan. Receive coils are critical
components to achieve high-quality MR images. Commercially available coils use
conventional, high-end expensive electronics and are designed as one-size-fits-
all with heavy and bulky packaging. Printed coils are lightweight, flexible and
can be manufactured at lower cost, while delivering equivalent results and in
many cases better image quality than conventional coils. With this technology,
coils can be printed to fit all sizes and properly fit the patient anatomy while
offering superior comfort.