* 1712061
* Collaborative Research: Bacterial Flagellar Forests: Designing a Biomaterial for Bio-Enabled Sensing and Actuation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* MinJun Kim, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 57,047.00

The Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research funds the
collaborative efforts of researchers at Drexel University and University of
Nevada Reno to study bacterial flagella as a component of an active biomaterial
that are capable of sensing and actuation. This collaborative project is
cofunded by the Nano-Biosensing program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. Bacterial flagella are
helical self-assembled structures composed of flagellin subunits. Polymorphic
transformations, a key property of flagella, depend on external stimuli
including temperature, ionic strength, pH, optical forcing, and possibly by
concentration of specific ligands. But the specific levels of stimuli needed to
induce transformations have not been well-determined. The goal of the proposed
work is to create a flagellar forest consisting of an array of flagella tethered
to a substrate. In response to external stimuli, flagellar polymorphic
transformations coupled to collective flagellar dynamics will enable the
flagellar forest to sense and actuate autonomously in response to the
environment. To accomplish the goal, the researchers will: (1) create flagellar
forests by gathering filaments into ordered arrays tethered to magnetic motors
on a substrate which are actuated by an external rotating magnetic field en
masse; (2) characterize the response of individual flagella to thermal,
chemical, mechanical, and optical environmental stimuli; and (3) understand how
individual flagella interact to create the collective response of the flagellar
forest biomaterial. The broader scientific impact of this collaborative project
is in developing an understanding how macroscale autonomic behavior in
biological systems that is controlled by charge and mass transport at the
nanoscale, which, in turn, is controlled by the dynamic response of a vast array
of polymeric biomolecules. The educational goal of this project is to
effectively communicate cutting-edge research to younger and broader audiences
and inspire them toward the goal of obtaining a degree in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of biological nanomaterials in an
engineered system presents a critical step toward understanding how the
biological world has evolved at the nanoscale, as well as how scientists and
engineers can improve upon nature using modern assembly and synthesis
techniques. The design of "smart" systems can take advantage of materials which
can respond autonomously to changes in their surroundings. In addition, the work
includes an extensive training component for graduate and undergraduate
students, preparing them for careers in academia and industry with a
comprehensive background in biology and engineering. Throughout the project, the
PIs will continue to recruit and mentor underrepresented groups to work in STEM
fields. The research will be communicated to the public through strong outreach
efforts. At Drexel University, the INSPIRE academy will bring cutting-edge
bionanomaterials and biomanufacturing to high school teachers and students. At
the University of Nevada, Reno, the "Move Like a Microbe" program will bring
this research to life for K-12 students and the public through University's
"Engineer's Day", "Summer Engineering Camp", and "Mobile Engineering Education
Lab" outreach programs. Additionally, web-based and social media outlets such as
YouTube will be utilized to disseminate the scientific discoveries, and to make
science more appealing to K-12 students, teachers and the general public.