* 1712536
* An Integrated Toolkit for High-Dimensional Complex and Time Series Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Fang Han, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2020
* USD 160,000.00

Fundamental questions about how the brain's structure evolves with age and how
gene activities are controlled by transcription factors may be answered by
studies involving high-dimensional data sets. As massive amounts of medical
imaging and genome sequencing data are now being collected, these questions can
be investigated by combining neuroscientists' and biologists' expertise with
powerful data analysis tools geared towards addressing the subtlety and
uncovering hidden patterns in the data. This project aims to develop an
integrated toolkit of scalable, robust, and theoretically sound nonparametric
and semiparametric solutions for high-throughput estimation of complex
biological systems. It addresses the resolution of two major problems. The first
problem considers massive amounts of high-dimensional complex-structured data
that possess complex generating distributions and interrelationships, which
often cannot be captured by simple linear systems. Such data are usually noisy
and contain numerous outliers. The second problem considers data exhibiting
temporal and spatial correlations and a relatively weak signal. Assuming
independent and identically distributed data could lead to erroneous estimation
and prediction, giving rise to inaccurate interpretation of biological systems.
This project aims to provide methods to solve both of these problems.

This research project puts forward new methods for effective analysis of
biological systems, handling the aforementioned challenges in a unified fashion.
One essential feature is the concept of large-scale robust
nonparametric/semiparametric inference. In particular, the project aims to
develop an integrated toolkit of methods that are: (1) easily scalable to high-
dimensional data with a large sample size; (2) robust to data modeling
assumptions and different kinds of data contaminations; (3) built in a
nonparametric or semiparametric sense, where the corresponding generative models
contain infinite-dimensional components that capture the data information or
subtlety as much as possible. To illustrate, the investigator intends to
construct, explore, and apply high dimensional generalized regression models,
(generalized) partially linear models, shape-constrained regression models, and
copula time series models, among others, to unveil hidden patterns in biological
systems. The methods under development are designed to be optimal, namely,
attaining either a nonparametric minimax or a semiparametric lower efficiency
bound.