* 1712146
* Interactive Virtual Laboratory: Using Renewable Energy Experiments to Enhance Student Engagement in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Andrew Otieno, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2022
* USD 298,564.00

By the year 2050, it is estimated that Earth's population will rise to nine
billion. The accompanying increased demand for energy requires that sources
other than fossil fuels (currently about 86% of the world's energy) be found.
There is growing interest in utilizing renewable energy sources such as solar
and wind power for clean production of electric power. The overall goal of the
project is to significantly increase the number of college graduates with
renewable energy and power engineering knowledge and skills in order to ensure a
well-prepared US workforce for the future. The objectives are 1) to develop a
virtual laboratory for studying distributed power generation systems; 2) to
create innovative teaching materials for the virtual laboratory platform; and 3)
to engage college students in the mentoring of high school students on renewable
energy technologies. The virtual laboratory will be interactive and engaging to
stimulate students' interest in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed virtual
laboratory and prototype smart grid will integrate cutting-edge power systems
research by the PIs with a modern power systems educational curriculum. It will
greatly improve the capacity and effectiveness to train students in the
renewable energy field. The curricular enhancements and new learning materials
will focus on authentic problems in renewable energy. An internet portal will be
constructed to permit college and pre-college students to experiment with a
distributed power generation system and collect data for engineering activities.
By graphing and analyzing the data, students will acquire insight on the
relative advantages of different configurations of the smart grid. The research
questions to be investigated will procure answers that will result in the
generation of useful knowledge about the impact of renewable energy interactive
virtual labs on college students and their high school mentees. The virtual
laboratory will also provide the opportunity to network with other educational
institutions as well as a convenient platform for students and faculty to
combine teaching and research activities on renewable energy.