* 1712961
* 2017 CO2 Assimilation in Plants from Genome to Biome Gordon Research Conference, Lucca, Italy
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Stephen Long, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

Plants and algae use the sun's energy to convert carbon dioxide (CO2) into
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats through photosynthesis. This is arguably the
most important process on the planet as the source, directly or indirectly, of
all our food, most of our fuel and fibers, and the oxygen that we breathe.
Global dietary trends and population growth mean that by 2050 the world will
require 70% more food from crops, and ultimately from photosynthesis, than it is
producing today. To avoid destroying more forest and other prime habitat while
not stressing water and fertilizer resources, we need to produce this extra 70%
on land currently in use for food production, such as the US Midwest. However,
the techniques that gave us large yield increases during the Green Revolution
are now reaching their biological limits, and new innovations are needed.
Photosynthesis in today's crops achieves less than 20% of its theoretical
efficiency in terms of use of solar energy, water, and nitrogen fertilizer, and
there has been little improvement in crops over the last 100 years. Scientific
understanding of the process has developed rapidly. In 2016, it became possible
for the first time to move this understanding from the computer and laboratory
to demonstrate productivity increases on farm fields. This meeting will bring
together experts and young scientists inspired by these developments to discuss
how these fundamental science advances are being and will be applied in crop
production to the benefit of global food supply, the environment, and rural
economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing and applying our understanding of CO2
assimilation in plants and algae has never been more important to society than
it is today. The world faces the dual challenges of producing adequate food for
mid-century sustainably and identifying new opportunities to generate renewable
raw materials for biomanufacturing. This meeting will address these challenges
from the gene level to the global level by discussing emerging advances in our
understanding and their application. Topics include: engineering increased
photosynthesis for food security and bioenergy; synthetic photosynthetic CO2
assimilatory pathways; phenomics in accelerating improvement in CO2 assimilation
and yield; overcoming oxygenation at Rubisco; the evolution and development of
the CO2 assimilation apparatus; inter-compartmental fluxes; kinetic modeling of
CO2 assimilation; what is new in carbon concentrating mechanisms; prospects for
modifying stomatal responses and mesophyll conductance; adapting to atmospheric
change; quantification of global sinks for CO2; and engineering landscapes to
offset climate change.