* 1712887
* Spatial Ability and Blind Engineering Research
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Anil Lewis, National Federation of the Blind
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,101,009.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. Blind youth are
generally excluded from STEM learning and careers because materials for their
education are often composed for sighted individuals. In this proposed
Innovations in Development project, the PIs suggest that spatial acuity is an
important element in order for blind persons to understand physical and mental
structures. Thus, in this investigation, efforts will be made to educated blind
youth in the discipline of engineering. A total of 200 blind students, ages
12-20 along with 30 informal STEM educators will participate in the program.
This effort is shared with the National Federation of the Blind, Utah State
University, the Science Museum of Minnesota, and the Lifelong Learning
Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Federation of the Blind, in partnership
with scholars from Utah State University and educators from the Science Museum
of Minnesota will develop a five-year Innovations in Development project in
order to broaden the participation of blind students in STEM fields through the
development of instruction and accessible tools that assess and improve the
spatial ability of blind youth. The partnership with the Science Museum will
facilitate the creation of informal science content for students and
professional development opportunities for informal educators. Evaluation will
be conducted by Lifelong Learning Group of the Columbus Center of Science and
Industry. Activities will begin in year one with a week-long, engineering design
program for thirty blind high-school students at the Federation of the blind
headquarters in Baltimore. Year two will feature two similarly sized programs,
taking place at the Science Museum. While spatial ability is linked to
performance in science, research has not been pursued as to how that ability can
be assessed, developed, and improved in blind youth. Further, educators are
often unaware of ways to deliver science concepts to blind students in a
spatially enhanced manner, and students do not know how to advocate for these
accommodations, leading blind youth to abandon science directions. Literature on
the influences of a community of practice on youth with disabilities, as well as
nonvisual tools for experiencing engineering, is lacking. This project will
advance understanding of how blind people can participate in science, and how
spatial ability can be developed and bolstered through informal engineering
activities and an existing community of practice.