* 1712706
* New Methodology and Theory for Optimal Treatment Regimes with Applications to Precision Medicine
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Lan Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 176,555.00

The problem of finding the optimal treatment regime, or a series of sequential
treatment regimes, based on individual characteristics has important
applications in areas such as precision medicine, government policies, and
active labor market interventions. Depending on the application, a treatment can
represent a drug, a device, a program, a policy, an intervention, or a strategy.
Stimulated by the advancements in fields such as genomics and medical imaging,
the last decade has witnessed exciting and remarkable progress in personalized
medicine, ranging from treatments for breast cancer to treatments for major
depressive disorders. The success of precision medicine depends on the
development of accurate and reliable statistical and machine learning tools for
estimating the optimal treatment regime given the data collected from randomized
experiments or observational studies. This project will develop novel
methodology, theory, and algorithms with the potential to significantly advance
the state of the art in statistical estimation and inference for optimal
treatment regimes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
significantly enhance the availability of statistical methodology and theory for
static or dynamic optimal treatment regimes estimation. A systematic framework
for estimating optimal treatment regimes using a new quantile criterion for a
variety of scenarios will be developed. The research will focus on both one-
stage (static) treatment regimes and dynamic treatment regimes, the latter
allowing for treatments to vary with time. In addition, the research will
address completely observed responses and randomly censored responses (e.g.,
survival times), randomized trials and observational studies, and doubly robust
estimation. The framework will also be extended to alternative criteria such as
Gini's mean difference. This project will significantly advance the theoretical
foundations of a large class of robust estimators of optimal treatment regimes.
Furthermore, it addresses the challenging and important problem of developing
new methodology and algorithms to identity important variables for optimal
treatment regime estimation in the high-dimensional setting. The investigator
will develop software packages and make them freely available to the research
community. Students from minority groups will be especially encouraged to
participate in the proposed project.