* 1712975
* Silencing and reactivation of rRNA genes in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Patrick DiMario, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,942.00

Fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, is a premier model to study how some
parasitic genes copy themselves into the new sites in the chromosomes, spreading
around the genome, and how living species counteract these parasites. Ribosome,
the most important molecular machine in the cell, is encoded by several hundred
genes in fruit fly, and some of these genes are suffering from the invasion of
genetic parasites, known as R1 and R2 retrotransposons. The cells have a way of
turning these genes off, but under some stress conditions, these inserted genes
are turned back on. The proposed study will examine the mechanisms by which
these genes switch from silent to active form. Social impacts of this project
will introduce basic concepts in genetics and cell biology to underrepresented
students in area middle and high schools, provide an opportunity for hands-on
research training for underrepresented high school students and undergraduates,
and train graduate students in advanced genetics and cell biology. This project
will also ensure continued research training for underrepresented undergraduate
and graduate students at Louisiana State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are ~400 ribosomal RNA gene clusters in Drosophila melanogaster, and ~60% of
them contain insertions of R1 and/or R2 retrotransposons. R2 elements naturally
reside within the 28S region of approximately 16% of the rRNA genes in
Drosophila. These inserted genes are normally silent and are considered
heterochromatic, while the remaining active non-inserted copies provide the
required amount of rRNA for the cell needs. Previous results showed that R2
elements are transcribed upon nucleolar stress caused by the loss of the
nucleolar ribosome assembly factor, Nopp140. This project examines the putative
conversion of the rRNA genes with inserted R2 retrotransposons from a silent
heterochromatic state to an active euchromatic state upon nucleolar stress. The
key question that will be answered is whether de-repressed R2 is co-linearly
expressed with extra 28S rRNA by Pol I, or excess enhanced R2 expression is
independent of additional rDNA unit expression. This project will introduce
basic concepts in genetics and cell biology to students from cohorts
underrepresented in STEM in the Baton Rouge area middle and high schools,
provide an opportunity for hands-on research training for underrepresented high
school students and undergraduates, and train graduate students as well as high
school teacher in advanced genetics and cell biology. Out-reach efforts will
include middle and high schools in Scotlandville - a distressed, predominantly
African-American neighborhood. Assessment of middle, high school, and
undergraduate training will employ pre-, formative, and summative.