* 1712089
* Investing in Instructors: Creating Intelligent Feedback Loops in Large Foundational Courses for Undergraduate Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Scott Case, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2021
* USD 298,599.00

A diverse and highly skilled engineering workforce plays a critical role in
maintaining economic competitiveness and protecting national security. To
achieve these aims, engineering programs in higher education must guarantee that
curricula are both rigorous and equitable. As demand for engineering majors
increases, so too do section sizes for foundational engineering courses. There
is growing evidence that such courses represent significant barriers to student
success and that the penalties associated with large classes can
disproportionately affect women and underrepresented groups. Further, these
educational environments make it challenging to implement evidence-based
teaching practices known to be better for student learning. This project will
build a learning organization ecosystem -- a grassroots effort involving
engagement between faculty and departmental and institutional support structures
to collaboratively identify problems and continuously, systematically improve
the quality and equitability of the engineering curricula. During this project,
sixteen instructors responsible for teaching approximately 4800 undergraduate
engineering students in large foundational courses will be impacted. Beyond the
instructors and the students directly impacted, research findings and project
outcomes will be shared broadly so that other faculty and administrators might
similarly improve their educational enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project responds to national calls for undergraduate engineering to become more
data-driven by exploring how existing, diverse data sources can be leveraged to
enhance educational environments. Early efforts will focus on creating
intelligent feedback loops, robust streams of existing institutional data (e.g.,
historical transcript data, student evaluations), existing instructor-level data
(e.g., past exams), and newly collected data (e.g., surveys about how students
spend time pre/post high-stakes tests). Such data sources will be triangulated
and analyzed in a way that can be used by the instructors and the research team.
Summer workshops will also be conducted to engage faculty and administrators in
a participatory design process: (1) to build individual instructor action plans
and (2) to construct an institutional change action plan collectively. Research
efforts center at the intersection of learning analytics and faculty change to
inform how others might productively leverage institutional data to improve the
STEM undergraduate education system. The research team consists of educational
researchers, engineering faculty, and administrative leaders from the college of
engineering, institutional effectiveness, and learning sciences. Thus, the team
is well-poised to not only lead this effort programmatically and from a research
perspective, but also institutionalize project-developed strategies and
outcomes.