* 1712096
* 3D Motion and Swarm Control of Magnetically Propelled Microrobots for in vivo Particulate Drug Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* MinJun Kim, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 321,431.00

This project will demonstrate the use of rotating magnetic fields to propel and
steer magnetic microswimmers for medical applications such as drug delivery.
Unlike previous work in this area, this project considers swarms of
microswimmers instead of single vehicles, and allows fluids with non-ideal
behavior characteristic of, for example, mucus. The results will be
experimentally validated using a controllable synthetic biofluid. The results
will guide future development of control systems for microrobotics, and advance
towards practically controllable magnetic microswimmers in vivo. A complimentary
outreach program will provide and cultivate a unique, interdisciplinary training
environment for K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, exploiting eye-
catching microswimmer control, drug delivery, and haptic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has recently demonstrated that achiral
magnetic rigid geometries are capable of propulsion when rotated by a magnetic
field. This project builds upon that demonstration, by formulating the motion
control problem in the setting of stochastic differential equations, in order to
create a stochastic control system for 3D motion and swarm control of magnetic
microswimmers. Motion control of microswimmers is accomplished with magnetic
control and computer vision feedback. Notably, variations in the physical
parameters of the individual microswimmers will be leveraged to address
uncertainty in the fluid environment. The approach will be used to formulate
control and coordination schemes for the motion of a large number of
microswimmers in heterogeneous 2D and 3D workspaces, using motion planning and
control frameworks that address issues such as controllability and optimality.
The results will be experimentally validated in a non-Newtonian fluid with
controllable parameters that simulates a biological environment.