* 1712128
* Novel Topological States in Correlated Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ying Ran, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in understanding novel quantum states of matter in solid-
state materials. At low temperatures, quantum mechanics can bring materials into
states of matter that have no classical analog. Topological states of matter are
such novel quantum states of matter, and they exhibit striking new physical
properties. For example, charge carriers in some topological states behave as if
they were a fraction of an electron, and their properties can be exploited to
build robust quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thrusts of the research
activities include: 1) Developing a new theoretical framework to systematically
understand topological states and developing new computational techniques to
simulate these states in a reliable fashion. 2) Applying these techniques to
investigate topological states and their physical properties in real materials.
3) Developing guiding principles helpful in searching for new topological states
in materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate knowledge and
computational methods needed for advances in quantum material science and
quantum technology. The educational activities include developing pedagogical
courses, lectures, and journal-club series for undergraduate and graduate
students, with emphasis on the new states of matter discovered in modern
condensed matter physics. As an outreach activity, an interactive website will
be created to disseminate teaching materials and to demonstrate topological
phenomena, with the aim of sparking general interest in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in understanding topological quantum states of matter. Very rich
classes of correlation-driven topological phases have been predicted
theoretically; however, the existence of only few of them has been confirmed in
real materials. The relevant challenges are the limitations of currently
available theoretical and numerical methods for correlated quantum systems, as
well as the lack of physical guiding principles to direct the search for many
correlated topological states. This project addresses both these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities comprise three main
thrusts: 1) The PI will further develop a symmetric tensor network framework and
numerical algorithms suitable for investigating correlated topological phases.
The tensor network can be viewed as a new language for quantum many-body physics
capable of capturing topological properties of quantum states. 2) By applying
this framework, the PI will search for model systems that realize correlation-
driven topological phases, including models for correlated transition-metal
materials. In addition, excitation properties of candidate topological materials
will be computed and compared with experiments. 3) The PI will develop symmetry-
based guiding principles that are independent of microscopic details, aiding the
search for topological states in materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
closely connected to quantum information science and algebraic topology in
mathematics, and it could bring new insight in these disciplines. The
educational activities include developing pedagogical courses, lectures, and
journal-club series for undergraduate and graduate students, with emphasis on
the new states of matter discovered in modern condensed matter physics. The PI
will develop and maintain an interactive website hosting research and teaching
materials, which will include demonstrations of topological phenomena in
condensed matter physics and tensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.