* 1712268
* Building an Inclusive Community of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Educators to Develop Competencies for Facilitating Biomolecular Visual Literacy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2019
* USD 98,416.00

Understanding the structure of biomolecules is a critical component of
understanding their function; this information is important in fields such as
personalized medicine, agricultural production, and biofuels development.
Molecular visualization, or the ability to understand three-dimensionality from
two-dimensional representation, is a useful element in this building this
understanding, yet few instructors teach or assess the skills needed to
interpret two-dimensional images. This project will develop strategies and
approaches to help students gain these important skills. In particular, the
project will build a community of biochemistry and molecular biology educators
who will help develop a set of competencies defining specific tasks that
students will be expected to perform to develop their molecular visualization
skills. Specifically, during the one-year term of this project, a series of
national and regional workshops will be organized to develop a community of
educators who are dedicated to the task of producing reliable and valid
molecular visualization concept inventories. This group will develop a framework
of goals and objectives for understanding four fundamental themes in molecular
visualization - Monomer Recognition, Topology and Connectivity, Alternate
Renderings, and Molecular Interactions. The group will also develop and populate
a website with the competencies arising from the
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand a framework established
following an education symposium at the 2013 American Society for Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology meeting to include competencies that will ultimately lead
to constructing concept inventories in molecular visualization. This project
will focus on four fundamental themes: Monomer Recognition, Topology and
Connectivity, Alternate Renderings, and Molecular Interactions. Understanding
these four themes will build a foundation that allows students to comprehend the
structure-function relationship inherent in biomolecules. Regional workshops
will bring together educators to identify and reach a consensus on competencies
within these four themes. These competencies will be added to the molecular
visualization framework housed at http://cbm.msoe.edu/crest/molviz/ for public
use. This project has already begun to transform the way many biochemistry and
molecular biology instructors use molecular representations in their classroom.
For example, several instructors understand the need to assess their students'
comprehension of the representations of a particular model before they used the
model to draw higher level inferences (e.g. function). In articulating
consensus-based learning goals and objectives and identifying competencies, this
project will identify the foundations upon which concept inventories will be
developed in future years. Importantly, this effort will be built around
workshops that establish a community of practice for the explicit instruction of
molecular visualization skills.