* 1712683
* An Educational Network to Gain STEM Graduates and Enhance STEM Education (ENGAGE)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kathleen Plinske, Valencia Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,499,968.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students from historically
underrepresented minority populations to successfully complete high quality
degree programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. The LSAMP Bridge to the Baccalaureate (B2B) funding opportunity
provides support for historically underrepresented minority STEM students who
begin their instruction at a community college with the intent to transfer into
4-year STEM degree programs in addition to other infrastructure support such as
STEM faculty professional development. This project, Educational Network to GAin
STEM Graduates and Enhance STEM Education (ENGAGE), broadens participation of
underrepresented minority (URM) students and enhances diversity in STEM.
Valencia College, on behalf of the Central Florida STEM Alliance (CFSA), seeks
to significantly increase the number of URM STEM students transferring from CFSA
two-year colleges, Valencia College, Lake-Sumter State College and Polk State
College, to STEM baccalaureate degree programs at regional university partners,
the Florida Institute of Technology, Florida Polytechnic University, University
of Central Florida, University of Florida and University of South Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ENGAGE creates a network between secondary education,
community colleges, four-year institutions and graduate programs to offer viable
pathways to STEM degree achievement. ENGAGE supports URM students' access and
early exposure to STEM disciplines through comprehensive support services with
linkages to university LSAMP partners including the Florida-Georgia LSAMP
Bridges to the Doctorate program. ENGAGE advances research on effective
practices in engaging URM students through the academic, social, and
professional integration of STEM that aligns with the LSAMP model. ENGAGE
informs the STEM community on institutional practices that impact recruitment,
retention, and transfer-readiness strategies specific to URM STEM student
success at two-year colleges. Through this LSAMP B2B partnership, ENGAGE seeks
to achieve significant gains in the development of a diverse, globally-
competitive workforce and create new STEM pathways for URM students leading to
an increase of URM graduates with STEM baccalaureate and graduate degrees.