* 1712525
* Inverse Source Problems, Splitting, and Uncertainty
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* John Sylvester, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 222,114.00

This project studies fundamental problems which arise in the development of
remote sensing technologies. Remote sensing systems are either active or
passive. An underwater array of acoustic sensors that seeks to locate a
submarine (the source) based on the noise radiated from the submarine's engine
is a passive remote sensing system. A mathematical model for passive remote
sensing is the Inverse Source Problem. A sonar array that transmits its own
(incident) wave to locate the submarine based on the properties of the echo, is
an active remote sensing system. In this case, the array, not the submarine, is
the primary source and the submarine is referred to as the scatterer because it
scatters the sound wave in new directions. A mathematical model for active
remote sensing is the Inverse Scattering Problem. Scatterers are also called
secondary sources or induced sources because the primary or incident wave causes
them to radiate a secondary or scattered wave. This terminology emphasizes the
close relationship between the inverse source problem and the inverse scattering
problem. Every scattered wave is a wave radiated by an induced source, the
source is different for different incident waves, but the support (size and
location) is always the same. The principal investigator seeks to elucidate the
fundamental limitations that physics places on these technologies, and to
develop algorithms to extract all information within these
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rephrasing the uncertainty principle of Donoho and
Stark in terms of inequalities for inner products and estimates on an underlying
operator has made it possible to look for applications of these principles in
new contexts, including the inverse source problem. Although the inverse source
problem for the Helmholtz equation does not have a unique solution, the
investigator has developed a well-defined notion of support for far fields
radiated by unions of well-separated sources. The splitting operator decomposes
a far field radiated by such a union of sources into the far fields radiated by
each individual source. A major goal is to estimate the condition number of the
splitting operator, and to develop algorithms to do the splitting and locate the
individual sources. The condition number is estimated in terms of physically
meaningful parameters, which are wavelength, diameters, and distance between
sources. Another related objective is the development of norms and estimates for
partial differential equations related to wave phenomena that, unlike many
weighted norms, can be readily interpreted in physical units, and are therefore
more easily accessible to the broader scientific community.