* 1712733
* Upstate New York LSAMP: Strengthening the Pipeline Between Two and Four Year Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Michele Wheatly, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,000,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete high
quality degree programs in STEM. For the New York State's Upstate Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (ULSAMP), seven partner institutions
comprise this alliance: five are 4-year institutions-Syracuse University,
Clarkson University, Cornell University, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and
Rochester Institute of Technology; two are community colleges: Monroe Community
College and Onondaga Community College. Syracuse University will develop
activities to recruit and retain traditionally underrepresented minority
(URM)students into science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
programs of study and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ULSAMP project goal will
collectively graduate 860 STEM URM students per year by the end of 2022 by
improving the recruitment, academic success, and persistence of URM students in
STEM majors. The alliance plans to expand, refine, and study best practices for
preparing community college students for successful transition into four-year
STEM programs. Activities will be enhanced by undertaking a research study to
investigate the role of research experiences, faculty mentoring, and the
community college pipeline on the persistence and graduation of URM students and
the implications of these initiatives for increasing representation of URM
students in STEM. The alliance project and the associated research project will
generate new knowledge related to the recruitment, academic success, and
persistence of underrepresented minority STEM students that will be disseminated
through social media outlets, alliance websites, e-newsletters, STEM conferences
and scholarly journals.