* 1712131
* Systematic Quality Analysis and Improvement for Block-Based Software: Promoting the Culture of Quality From the Ground Up
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Eli Tilevich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The key functions of modern society depend on software-based systems, with
software quality critically affecting not only the utility of software
applications but also their safety and security. Currently, the standard
computer science (CS) curriculum introduces computing learners to this key
concept very late or leaves it out completely. To address this problem, this
project fundamentally rethinks the process and practices of teaching software
quality to promote the culture of quality from the ground up. This project
explores teaching software quality alongside the fundamentals of programming, by
developing software and related teaching materials based on a professional
software engineering practice for quality control known as "code refactoring."
This educational intervention serves the national interest by providing a simple
pathway for bringing proven, real-world software engineering practices to the
introductory computer science curriculum, imparting the importance of following
principled software engineering practices to novice
programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on the success and
popularity of block-based programming, a highly effective pedagogical tool for
introductory learners. The research team will investigate software quality in
the context of block-based programming and how the proven, real-world software
engineering practice of refactoring, a semantics-preserving program
transformation that improves code and design quality, can be introduced to
promote the culture of quality in introductory CS curriculum. This project will
develop a novel educational intervention for teaching software quality concepts
to introductory students, including teaching strategies and learning materials.
This work will also help create a conceptual foundation of refactoring for
block-based languages, concretely realized as refactoring support for block-
based programming environments. Finally, the project team will systematically
evaluate the developed educational intervention to determine its effectiveness
in fostering student knowledge, skills, and practices, required to improve
software quality.