* 1712406
* Collaborative Research:Engaged Student Learning: Re-conceptualizing and Evaluating a Core Computer Science Course for Active Learning and STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Saverio Perugini, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 218,556.00

"Engaged Student Learning: Re-conceptualizing and Evaluating a Core Computer
Science Course for Active Learning and STEM Student Success" is a collaborative
project that addresses the critical need to prepare students for the
contemporary information technology landscape. The project will develop a new
operating systems (OS) course that will play a central role in the curriculum of
computer science and engineering undergraduate degree programs. The new course
will resolve significant issues of misalignment between existing computer
science courses on operating systems and employee professional skills and
knowledge requirements. It has the potential to better engage students in active
learning, create computer science learning environments that improve student-
learning outcomes, and broaden participation in STEM education and employment.
It will serve national interests by preparing students more effectively for
post-baccalaureate employment where expertise in distributed mobile and parallel
computation, big data analytics, and cybersecurity is increasingly necessary and
in demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are threefold. First,
it will design a contemporary operating systems curriculum and pedagogy model
that incorporates cybersecurity, mobile OS and the Internet of Things,
concurrent programming and synchronization, cloud computing and big data
processing, Second, the project will evaluate the effect of the model on student
learning, retention, growth, and job placement, as well as faculty and STEM/CS
education research community engagement. Third, it will build a community of
practice among computer science faculty at multiple institutions that adopt or
adapt the model for their own academic contexts. Materials and results will be
shared with the faculty community of practice continuously to help improve the
program. Improvement will be measured along multiple dimensions, including
student learning and retention. The project will produce content, laboratories,
and culminating active-learning project designs of the model and a set of
guidelines and tradeoffs, based on the results of model evaluation, to ensure
that the model is transferable and replicable.