* 1712475
* Student Engagement in Statistics Using Technology: Making Data Based Decisions
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Shonda Kuiper, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

There are ongoing national needs on two important fronts for improvements in
undergraduate statistics and data science education. There is a need for United
States residents to establish a deeper understanding of these arenas in order to
make informed decisions in an increasingly diverse and complex society.
Likewise, there is a fundamental need for the country to produce college
graduates in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) areas who
can apply statistics and data science to help provide the Nation with a globally
competitive STEM workforce. The investigators on this project will address these
needs by designing, developing and evaluating inquiry-based online technology
that will simulate current real-world scenarios in statistics and data science
to connect students to the importance of the investigative process of problem-
solving and data-based decision making and to the skills needed for these
activities. In connection with this, the project will take advantage of large,
publically available datasets which are now easily accessible to engage students
with research-like experiences and technologically interactive educational
materials to foster students' abilities in understanding and applying statistics
and data science. In addition to materials for students, resources to be
developed will be specifically designed to help instructors incorporate key
ideas typically not taught in traditional textbooks, such as interactive
visualizations, working with messy data, bias, data relevance, reliability, and
full research-like experiences involving real-world data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key aim of the project is to advance STEM learning
through the creation, implementation, and testing of inquiry-based, interactive,
online investigative labs that will simulate data-based decision making. Goals
of the project include: (1) incorporating research-like experiences for students
into their studies; (2) addressing the increased importance of data science and
challenging statistical concepts not easily addressed in current courses and
textbooks; (3) developing full story line models of real-world scenarios using
game-like simulations; and (4) creating and vetting materials that can be
incorporated into a variety of traditional introductory and advanced
undergraduate courses. The project team's theory of action is built on
developing, implementing and assessing each simulation lab and other components
of the project according to these goals. An important motivation is to allow
students to develop their own research questions, generate and use their own
unique data to make decisions, and then observe and learn from the choices made
through their interactions with the technology. To evaluate success of the
approaches taken, the project will employ a mixed methods approach to compare
learning gains from more traditional materials to the gains made with these new
materials, evaluate student attitudes and engagement, use data analytics to
assess the effectiveness of the components embedded in each lab, and determine
best practices for incorporating the resources into a variety of traditional
introductory and advanced undergraduate courses. These fully immersive online
game-like labs will be significantly different from other current textbook and
online sets of educational materials as each lab will include inquiry-based case
studies that contain real-world data analysis complexities, thereby providing a
solid introduction to the intellectual content and broad applicability of
statistics and data science. In concert with the software lab development, the
team will create and vet a new student assessment tool that will be implemented
to evaluate students' abilities related to understanding of conceptual
connections, communication skills, critical thinking, and problem-solving, as
well as their ability to understand and work through challenges emanating from
real-world, unstructured datasets. Overall, this project will have significant
impact in STEM education by stimulating the power of innovation, creativity, and
excitement that occurs within STEM research and applications.