* 1712864
* From Functional Data to Random Objects
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Hans-Georg Mueller, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Large and complex data that are increasingly collected across the sciences and
by companies pose novel challenges for statistical analysis, due to their
complexity and size. Specific applications that motivate this research come from
brain imaging, genomics, and the social sciences. To make sense of such data and
extract relevant features, statistical methodology that is suitable for the
analysis of large samples of complex random objects is needed. Examples of these
objects include networks, distribution functions, and covariance matrices. A
challenge is that common algebraic operations such as sums or differences are
not defined for such objects. In many instances, objects may also be repeatedly
observed over time, and the quantification of their time dynamics is then of
interest. In this project, statistical methodology that addresses these basic
data analytic needs is developed under minimal assumptions. These developments
also include the theoretical foundations of this methodology and computational
implementations. This methodology is expected to lead to new insights by
quantifying phenomena such as changes in mortality or income distributions over
calendar years, or changes in brain connectivity networks with aging to allow
researchers to distinguish normal and pathological aging processes. Procedures
are also developed to test for significant differences between groups of random
objects, for example, comparisons between mortality distributions of countries,
including the identification of clusters. The methodology to be developed is
based on delicate extensions of basic statistical notions such as population and
sample mean, variance, regression and analysis of variance to the case of more
complex spaces of random objects.

Over the past decade, there have been rapid advances and substantial
developments for functional data, including advanced methods for functional
regression. The developments and methodology for Functional Data Analysis are
limited to Hilbert space valued random variables, such as square integrable
random functions, which limits their applicability. This research is motivated
by the increasing prevalence of examples where random objects are not in a
Hilbert space. Key objects of interest are distributions, networks and
covariance matrices, in addition to general metric space valued random objects.
Core concepts that will be applied and appropriately extended to these random
objects include Frechet mean, Frechet variance, and Frechet regression. For
longitudinally observed random objects, the notion of a general Frechet integral
will serve to quantify projections in general spaces. Such projections will be
studied for their use in representing time-varying random objects. The tools
that will be developed are based only on distances, and are therefore suitable
for general metric space valued objects. For special classes of objects such as
distributions, additional characterizations such as manifold representations and
Wasserstein covariance will also be developed and illustrated in applications.