* 1712740
* Biophysics of protein interactions on membrane surfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Kalina Hristova, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 899,999.00

Many critical cellular functions are regulated by protein interactions in the
plasma membrane. Quantitative measurements of protein interactions in membranes,
however, are challenging to perform due to many limitations of current
experimental methodologies. This work will advance quantitative biophysical
tools and will provide the broad scientific community with better methods to
study membrane protein folding, structure, and function. Ultimately, improvement
in methods will lead to discoveries that help reveal the role of interactions on
membrane surfaces and their biological function in cells. The project will
support training and the professional development of graduate and undergraduate
students at Johns Hopkins University. This project will also provide educational
and training opportunities for young scientists from diverse backgrounds and for
students from Baltimore City Schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
research is to develop a general biophysical methodology that can uncover the
strength and the mechanism of interactions that occur on the membrane surface,
between membrane receptors and cytoplasmic proteins. These interactions have
profound biological significance, as they trigger the propagation of biochemical
signals from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm. They are very common in
biology, as membrane receptors are known to interact with multiple cytoplasmic
partners. Yet, these processes are complex and poorly understood. The strength
of the interactions between membrane receptors and cytoplasmic proteins can
depend on the association state of the receptor. The soluble partners, in turn,
can modulate the interactions of the receptors in the membrane. Quantitative
details, as well as biophysical methods that can yield such quantitative
details, are lacking. The protocols that will be developed in this project will
fill a large gap in methodology. They can be used for any combination of a
membrane protein and soluble protein, and can reveal many new interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and by the Biomaterials Program of the
Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for Physical and Mathematical
Sciences.