* 1712008
* Engagement in Engineering Pathways: An Initiative to Retain Non-Traditional Community College Students Using Peer-Led Instruction and Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Courtney Demings, Valencia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 01/31/2022
* USD 213,116.00

Student engagement in STEM coursework continues to be a challenge in
undergraduate education and continues to be a barrier in the retention of all
students, especially those that are underrepresented and/or non-traditional. To
succeed in diversifying and increasing the STEM workforce, as well as improving
the quality of STEM graduates entering the workforce, student engagement must
improve. Valencia College is a highly diverse two-year, non-residential, open
access public institution that serves the Orlando, Florida area. The goal of
this project at Valencia College is to use peer-facilitated instruction in core
engineering coursework known to have high attrition rates, with the goal of
retaining non-traditional students in engineering. Adopting evidenced-based
teaching and learning practices proven successful at four-year institutions, the
intent of this project is to measure the impact on engineering students'
engagement at two-year colleges with the aim of diversifying and broadening the
participation in engineering. This project has potential to increase
understanding of these methods in STEM courses at two-year colleges, as well as
improve the teaching quality and student engagement at Valencia College.
Further, the new knowledge generated during this project around the use of peer-
facilitated instruction at two-year colleges has potential to improve the
success and participation of non-traditional students in engineering and STEM
disciplines across a broad range of institutions.

More specifically, the project will design and implement peer-facilitated
recitation activities linked to fundamental engineering courses, such as
engineering analysis, statics, and dynamics. At Valencia College, these courses
have the highest failure rate among female and underrepresented minority
students. Through the design and implementation of peer­led, problem-based, and
contextualized real-world applications in these fundamental engineering courses,
the goal of the project is to increase student engagement and persistence. As a
cross-sectional study design, engagement will be measured using scales such as
students' mathematics efficacy, engineering efficacy, academic self-concept, and
sense of belonging. By adopting a teaching and learning model that has been
effective at large research-intensive universities, the proposed project offers
an innovative and adaptable approach to supporting and retaining diverse
students at a community college in introductory engineering courses. Results
from student metrics will inform faculty professional development efforts to
increase faculty support and maximize student learning. The project will affect
institution practices informed by data as well as reach a national audience in
the STEM community to further ignite educational practice and educational
research.