* 1712560
* Theorizing and Advancing Teachers' Responsive Decision Making in the Domain of Rational Numbers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/31/2016,02/28/2021
* Susan Empson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,290,434.00

This project addresses the growing need for research to support teachers in
developing expertise in responsive decision making in which teachers elicit and
build on children's mathematical thinking in the midst of instruction. Specific
objectives include characterizing grades 3-5 teachers' responsive decision
making in the domain of rational numbers, investigating how professional
development can support the development of this form of teaching expertise, and
exploring the relationship between degree of teachers' responsive decision
making and student learning. Theoretical and practical contributions of this
project address the discrepancy in the field's capacity to produce research-
based knowledge about children's thinking versus provide resources to take up
and effectively use this knowledge. The primary organization is The University
of Texas at Austin, and major partner organizations include the University of
North Carolina at Greensboro, SRI International, and Teachers Development
Group.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this professional development design study,
researchers engage approximately 100 teachers in up to three years of
professional development designed to empower teachers to make instructional
decisions guided by a research-based framework of children's thinking about
rational numbers, with an emphasis on children's informal ideas of partitioning
quantities and their understanding of the fundamental properties of operations
and equality. Data sources include direct observation of workshops and teachers'
classrooms as well as teachers' performance and reflection on a variety of
assessments. On the basis of what is learned from these multiple data sources
across 3 cohorts of teachers, researchers will iteratively build and refine a
model of responsive decision making and identify critical features of the
development of this expertise. Further, using approximately half the sample,
researchers collect student data to test the conjecture that responsive decision
making is related to increased opportunities for students to
learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings, assessments, and professional
development generated by this project will help the field respond to the
critical challenge of how to support teachers to take up and effectively use
knowledge of children's mathematical thinking in instruction. Anticipated
intellectual products include a model of teachers' responsive decision making in
the domain of rational numbers, identification of landmarks and obstacles in
teachers' development of responsive decision making, and knowledge about the
relationship between teachers' expertise in responsive decision making and
student learning. Anticipated professional development products include a web-
based tool to support teachers' self-guided collaborative inquiry and a well-
specified, scalable professional development course for teachers with an
immediate outlet for dissemination through the ongoing work of Teachers
Development Group.