* 1712530
* Collaborative Research: Unfolding the Link between Forest Canopy Structure and Flow Morphology: A Physics-based Representation for Numerical Weather Prediction Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Chad Higgins, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jielun Sun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 84,604.00

Numerical weather prediction models are becoming indispensable for severe
weather and air quality forecasts as well as for managements in river flows,
wind energy, agriculture, and food security. Model results of near-surface
weather parameters are routinely supplied to end-users either directly or with
statistical post-processing. To produce more reliable numerical weather
predictions, two main issues must be addressed: (i) numerical resolution and
(ii) representation of the near-surface conditions that shape the local-weather.
While advances in computation are enabling a better representation of real world
conditions in numerical weather prediction models, representing the detailed
vegetated canopy-atmosphere interactions remains a challenge. This is partially
the result of canopy heterogeneities present at different scales whose
variability significantly affects the near-surface region of the atmosphere.
This near-surface region is host to a myriad of relevant meteorological
processes such as fog, frost, dew, and turbulence in general, which if not
accounted for, can distort weather forecasts. To tackle this limitation of
current numerical weather prediction models, the focus of this research project
is on understanding and quantifying the effect of vegetated canopy
heterogeneities and developing new methodologies to properly account for them
within numerical weather prediction models. This will be achieved through the
synergy of wind tunnel measurements and high-resolution numerical simulations.
With the acquired data, new canopy representations will be formulated that
expand upon traditional relationships currently used in numerical weather
prediction models such that the spatiotemporal variability of the flow in
vegetated canopies can be well captured.

This research project will improve the understanding and representation of the
canopy-atmosphere interactions on a heterogeneous canopy cover. A better
representation of canopies within numerical weather prediction models will lead
to more accurate weather forecasts. This research project also provides learning
experiences to graduate students and involves underrepresented undergraduate
students in the STEM fields. The PIs lay out a plan that involves collaborations
with the REFUGES program at University of Utah to increase the number of
underrepresented minorities in academia.