* 1712058
* Adjunct Mathematics Instructor Resources and Support: Improving Undergraduate Precalculus Teaching and Learning Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Ashuwin Vaidya, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Undergraduate students' persistence in STEM is heavily influenced by their
classroom experiences, particularly in entry-level mathematics courses.
Considerable research has been conducted showing that improved instruction by
full-time faculty can increase student motivation and persistence in mathematics
courses. However, entry-level courses, such as precalculus, are often taught by
adjunct and other part-time instructors, who traditionally have tended to be
offered only minimal professional development and support for teaching
undergraduate mathematics. Thus, there is a pressing need to focus on developing
instructional practices among adjunct and other part-time instructors. This
project will build a model of course coordination and adjunct instructor support
to improve the teaching and learning of precalculus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
some work has been done to understand the benefits of supports for part-time
instructors at the undergraduate level, this work has focused mostly on graduate
teaching assistants rather than adjunct instructors. The proposed project will
extend this work to adjunct instructors and will contribute to the research base
regarding the adjunct instructor population. By building a model of adjunct
instructor resources and support, the project will contribute to deeper
understanding of how such efforts impact (1) adjunct instructor knowledge and
instructional practices, (2) adjunct instructor job satisfaction, and (3)
student academic success and retention in STEM majors. This understanding will
help other departments and institutions with similar instructor populations to
better support their adjunct faculty, with the goal of improving student
learning and persistence in precalculus and beyond.