* 1712295
* Promoting Adoption of Team-Based Learning Pedagogy in College Economics Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mark Maier, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2022
* USD 278,182.00

This project will increase the use of Team-Based Learning (TBL) teaching
practices in introductory economics courses. Team-Based Learning has been
successful at improving student learning outcomes in several other STEM
disciplines, but has had limited use in economics. One key project focus is to
study the impact of this approach on the learning outcomes of underrepresented
minorities and first-generation college students. The project will train faculty
members to implement TBL via face-to-face and online active-learning workshops;
empirically test the efficacy of TBL pedagogy in a variety of institutional
settings, including public, private, four-year, two-year, and minority-serving
institutions; and importantly will create an online library of TBL Application
Exercises (AE) that economics instructors can freely adopt or adapt for use in
their classrooms. The TBL Application Exercises and tools promoting their
classroom use will be part of a new pedagogic module in the existing "Starting
Point: Economics online pedagogic portal" previously created in collaboration
with the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton College with NSF
support. In the second year, the project will focus on outreach. Assisted by its
advisory board, the project will conduct webinars, regional workshops, and
conference presentations to introduce economics instructors to TBL methodology
and promote contributions to the AE library at the Starting Point site. The PIs
will continue to manage the Starting Point site and AE submission process after
NSF support for the project ends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate level TBL
pedagogy has been used for several decades in other disciplines, achieving
increased student learning and engagement, particularly by women and under-
represented minorities. TBL is generally used as a whole-course pedagogy that
overlaps with other active learning strategies. It employs techniques that
embody recent research findings in cognitive psychology about how students learn
best, including engaging students actively with the material under study,
requiring frequent retrieval of recently acquired information, spacing out
study, and encouraging a growth mindset. TBL is particularly promising for
economics classrooms because of the potential to engage students in predicting
future trends, diagnosing current problems, and making policy recommendations.
TBL experts serve on the advisory board, including the TBL founder, and will
provide valuable feedback on project initiatives and progress. The Science
Education Resource Center (SERC) is a partner in the project; SERC has extensive
experience supporting web-based NSF projects. The project includes a development
team representing a wide array of higher education institutions, including one
HBCU and five two-year colleges. The project also builds on previous NSF-funded
projects led by the project co-PIs (Awards 0088303, 0411037, 0817382, and
1245802) promoting evidence-based teaching in economics and NSF-funded projects
led by one of the co-PIs (Awards 1043245, 1238279, and 1522234) supporting
community college instructor use of these practices in economics.