* 1712051
* Engineering Design in Scientific Inquiry
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Leslie Atkins, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,877.00

Engineering at the pre-college level is becoming increasingly important, and
yet, teachers receive minimal preparation in this area. This Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Exploration and Design project, the
Engineering Design in Scientific Inquiry (EDISIn) Project, seeks to address the
engineering preparation of secondary science teachers by embedding engineering
design into a science course for single-subject STEM education majors (future
secondary teachers), and developing a sequence of lesson plans and annotated
video for faculty who seek to integrate engineering design into their science
courses. While undergraduate laboratories are rich with designed experimental
apparatus, it is rare that students themselves play a role in designing and
producing artifacts in the service of scientific inquiry. This project makes
manifest the following expectations: (1) existing science courses offer
opportunities for students to engage meaningfully with engineering practices by
solving design challenges that emerge in the construction of scientific ideas;
(2) doing so can capitalize on existing curricula that science education has
developed, facilitating the adoption of engineering design into preservice
teacher education; and (3) engaging engineering faculty in co-teaching and
consulting in these courses will not only strengthen the outcomes of this
project but also better prepare engineers to engage with K-12 education, and
prepare science faculty to more authentically engage students in engineering
design in the context of their courses. As an NSF IUSE funding project, it is
part of a broader effort to transform undergraduate science education, preparing
students to be innovators and leaders in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will modify curriculum in a required science course for STEM majors receiving
their secondary teaching credential, examine where design challenges emerge
during instruction, and use these as opportunities to embed engineering
instruction into courses. The project will use video-based research to explore
where and how these challenges emerge, how they can be addressed, and the
relationships between learning engineering design and science content. Project
artifacts will include curricular materials, paired with annotated video and
students' designed products, for faculty who teach similar courses, and the
research findings associated with three research questions. The intellectual
merit behind this project lies in addressing these research questions through
design-based educational research: (1) Where do design problems and
opportunities emerge in science instruction? (2) How are those problems, their
constraints, and solutions consistent with engineering design, and how do they
differ? and (3) What specific curricular tools and pedagogical practices can
scaffold students' engagement with emergent design problems in science? These
questions are critical for increasing engineering education in the K-12 setting,
for developing courses for future K-12 teachers that prepare them to teach
engineering standards found in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)
engineering standards, and, eventually, to reimagine how undergraduate science
courses can be redesigned to include design throughout STEM majors'
undergraduate career. The products emanating from this work will be disseminated
online via a project website, through the National Science Digital Library, and
through PhysPort and the UTeach network--a cohort of 44 universities that are
implementing a credentialing process integrated with STEM majors. Ultimately,
this project has the potential for broad impact by: (1) creating a cadre of
teachers that are specifically prepared to plan for, enact, and assess science
and engineering practices outlined in the NGSS; these teachers will primarily
serve in a high-need rural state (Idaho); (2) developing and disseminating
curricula that prepare future teachers to address the engineering standards in
NGSS; (3) shedding light on the interactions between science and engineering,
particularly how the two sets of practices may be integrated in meaningful ways
for the preparation of future K-12 teachers; and (4) further develop
relationships at Boise State University between science, engineering and
education to more authentically integrate these disciplines, and serve as a
model for other universities. This important work is supported with funding from
the IUSE program and the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program.