* 1712381
* Improving undergraduate chemistry students' hands-on laboratory skills through video-based assessment
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Marcy Towns, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 290,952.00

This project will improve the assessment of undergraduate students' hands-on
chemistry laboratory skills through an innovative method known as digital
badging. A digital badge allows faculty to create tasks (challenges) that
students complete by uploading media or links that can be assessed by an
instructor. Students will demonstrate how they meet learning objectives through
authentic performances such as demonstrating and describing how to correctly use
a pipet to measure a specific volume of liquid. This project will explore the
relationship between student motivation and digital badging using expectancy-
value theory, a specific theory of motivation. This work represents frontier
research that will bring innovative assessment practices to the undergraduate
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics community and will build
evidence about effective pedagogical practices.

The relationship between student motivation and digital badging, a novel and
innovative approach to improve and assess student's hands-on laboratory skills,
will be explored using expectancy-value theory, which focuses on a student's
expectancies in terms of knowledge, confidence, experience, and value to
characterize the ways in which students interact with digital badges. The
digital badge will allow faculty to create tasks (challenges) that encourage
students to demonstrate how they meet learning objectives through authentic
performances. Students will complete retrospective pre and post surveys
pertaining to their knowledge, confidence, and experience as part of the badging
process. These data will allow determinations to be made about the expectancy
perspectives of the students. Value instruments will be developed and analyzed,
which will allow the characterization of the ways in which students find badging
to be useful, interesting, and attainable, as well as how much it costs in terms
of time or stress. By combining the findings from these surveys, the
relationship between motivation and badging will be elucidated.