* 1712135
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Teaching of Structural Analysis through Mobile Augmented Reality
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Yelda Turkan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2021
* USD 30,000.00

Structural Analysis is an introductory core course that is taught in almost all
civil engineering, architectural engineering, and construction undergraduate
programs across the U.S. Previous research unveils students' deficits in
understanding the behavior of structural elements in a three-dimensional (3D)
context due to the shortcomings of traditional lecturing approaches. In
particular, such approaches often put too much emphasis on the analysis of
individual structural members, thereby falling short in providing a solid, easy-
to-follow, and holistic approach to comprehending and analyzing complex
structures with a large number of interconnected elements. This research is
transforming existing teaching pedagogy in structural analysis and filling a
major gap in how structural engineering is currently taught to the nation's
future workforce in U.S. institutions.

In this project, mobile augmented reality (AR) is used to superimpose views of
the real world with computer generated 3D models of structures under load. In
doing so, the potential of AR for improving learning and increasing student
engagement in the learning process is being systematically assessed. Building
upon theoretical perspectives on how people learn, this project is also
examining if pedagogy involving AR creates an effective learning environment for
students, as well as if it enhances adaptive flexibility, which is deemed to be
essential to be a successful engineer in the 21st Century. The broader impacts
of this project extend beyond its confines through outreach activities such as
integrating AR technology into lower-level engineering courses that aim to
increase the number of ethnically-diverse students pursuing STEM degrees. The
learning modules integrating AR into teaching of structural analysis will be
made available online. A website and online repository are to include specific
details about the learning objectives, implementation procedures, and instructor
reflections on things to consider while implementing the teaching techniques.
The developed software components and 3D models will be open source.