* 1712234
* Making in the Maker Movement: An Investigation into the Impact of Additive Manufacturing on Student Creativity
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Additive Manufacturing (synonymous with 3D printing) is a process in which
successive layers of material are deposited under computer control to create a
three-dimensional artifact. The field is estimated to grow to a worldwide
revenue of more than $21 billion by the year 2020. While additive manufacturing
(AM) is projected to form an important part of the United States' future global
manufacturing competitiveness, current industry demands for a skilled AM
workforce are not being met. This has lead to universities ramping up their AM
course offerings and engineering educators using AM technologies to augment
prototyping and manufacturing learning during the design process. Unfortunately,
there is no rigorous scientific understanding of the best approach to formally
educate students with AM in the classroom or evaluate effective instructional
practices. As a result, instructor efforts may not be properly preparing
students to utilize AM to improve their designs, a growing area of research
termed Design for Additive Manufacturing (DfAM). To address this educational
gap, the objective in this project is to understand how formal undergraduate AM
educational approaches impact design learning and creativity in engineering
students. This will be determined through evaluation of student design novelty
and feasibility as they participate in a variety of DfAM educational units and
design activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions to be
investigated address the impact on student creativity of (i) type of AM
instruction; (ii) complexity of design task and (iii) educational level of
student. Participants will complete a pre-AM knowledge test, participate in AM
training sessions, produce ideas and models for a design challenge and complete
a post-AM knowledge test. Standard metrics for creativity assessment such as the
Shah, Vargas-Hernandez and Smith metric for novelty, quality and feasibility
will be employed.&lt;br/&gt;The best practices identified through this research
will inform the creation of a formal DfAM educational intervention in
engineering design courses that accounts for the findings in the areas of
content focus, design task complexity and structure, activity duration, and
student educational level. This will help engineering educators prepare their
students with the necessary knowledge, skills, and experiences for the nascent
AM workforce, and can be expanded to understand similar effects in Maker Spaces,
K-12 education, and industry settings.