* 1712328
* Improving Student Performance and Engagement via the Human side of Engineering: Human Systems Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Rob Gray, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2022
* USD 298,426.00

There is a growing need for engineers who can solve complex problems at the
intersection of engineering and human behavior. Many of these problems affect
the broad economic, defense, public health, and social well-being of the nation.
For example, one of the National Academy of Engineering Grand Challenges for
Engineering is to "secure cyberspace." Potential engineering solutions include
better hardware, sensors, and secure programming languages. However, the
National Academy of Engineering also directly targets "the psychology of
computer users," including "how people interact with their computers, with the
Internet, and with the information culture in general" as well as the
"psychology and sociology that leads to deliberate computer crime." Human
Systems Engineering education, training and instruction that integrates
psychology and engineering, is hypothesized to prepare future engineers to
better address human needs, goals, capabilities, and limitations. This approach
is expected to ultimately result in engineered systems and solutions that are
more functional, usable, empathic, and socially-
engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will include: (1) analyses of
how student projects incorporate human-centered principles; (2) development and
testing of lessons that infuse psychology into project-based engineering
courses; and (3) a longitudinal evaluation of an introductory Human Systems
Engineering course and students' perceptions of engineering, psychology,
coursework, and careers. Findings from the first and second activities will
reveal human-centered engineering principles that may otherwise be ignored in
students' projects, and which offer critical targets for human systems
engineering instruction. The second activity will begin to test instructional
resources for filling those gaps. This effort will first identify particular
examples, scenarios, and problems that can both inform and engage engineering
students. Subsequently, researchers will generate free, field-tested,
instructional modules that help students understand the synthesis of psychology
and engineering. Findings from the third activity will shed light on students'
beliefs about the role of psychology in engineering, reveal new ways to teach
human-centered principles, and may contribute to better student engagement and
retention. This activity will also adapt and validate a new survey-based measure
of perceptions of engineering and engineering careers that takes into account
Human Systems Engineering concepts and themes. All materials and findings will
be disseminated via an interactive website that encourages community discussion.