* 1712622
* I-Corps: Method and Tool for Time-Domain Processing of Densely Sampled Signals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Dragan Djurdjanovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be primarily in
the semiconductor manufacturing industry. This industry desperately needs a tool
for extraction of useful information from a large number of densely sampled
sensor readings. This need is especially emphasized by the recent dramatic
increases both in the number of available sensor readings, as well as the
sampling rates at which those readings are collected. This tool is expected to
serve a dual purpose in this industry; providing access to information to enable
decision making and serve as a data reduction tool which reduces information
loss. Furthermore, such a tool is expected to be useful in any industry that
employs non-rotating equipment, including the oil and gas extraction,
refineries, chemical process industry etc. It is expected that the volume of
data gathered in many such industries will continue to increase, further
motivating the need to develop and invest in such feature extraction and data
reduction tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will focus on
exploring and improving potentials of a technological innovation that will
enable a fully automated extraction of informative features from signals
generated by non-rotating equipment and processes. Such a tool will be able to
reduce the original data into a feature set that is significantly smaller in
size than the original signal, thus enabling a significantly easier data
management and data mining in a large number of densely sampled sensor signals.
The method in the foundation of this tool has recently been developed. It starts
by segmenting the signal into a series of steady-state and transient portions,
after which each segment of the data is used to construct a number of
statistics-based and dynamics based signatures. The ultimate goal is to create a
tool that will achieve all this with minimal or, hopefully no human involvement,
in contrast to the currently used approaches, which require extensive manual
inputs and analyses.