* 1712943
* Scalable Methods for Classification of Heterogeneous High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Irina Gaynanova, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 162,539.00

Recent technological advances have enabled routine collection of large-scale
high-dimensional data in the biomedical fields. For example, in cancer research
it is common to use multiple high-throughput technology platforms to measure
genotype, gene expression levels, and methylation levels. One of the main
challenges in the analysis of such data is the identification of key biological
measurements that can be used to classify the subject into a known cancer
subtype. While significant progress has been made in the development of
computationally efficient classification methods to address this challenge,
existing methods do not adequately take into account the heterogeneity across
the cancer subtypes and the mixed types of measurements
(binary/count/continuous) across technology platforms. As such, existing methods
may fail to identify relevant biological patterns. The goal of this project is
to develop new classification methods that explicitly take into account the type
and heterogeneity of measurements. While the primary focus is on methodology,
high priority will be given to computational considerations and software
development to encourage dissemination and ensure ease of use for domain
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regularized linear discriminant methods are
commonly used for simultaneous classification and variable selection due to
their interpretability and computational efficiency. These methods, however,
rely on unrealistic assumptions of equality of group-covariance matrices and
normality of measurements. This project aims to address the limitations present
in current discriminant approaches, and has three objectives: (1) to develop
computationally efficient quadratic classification rules that perform variable
selection; (2) to generalize the discriminant analysis framework to non-normal
measurements; (3) to develop a classification framework for mixed type data
coming from multiple technology platforms collected on the same set of subjects.
The key methodological innovation is the combination of sparse low-rank singular
value decomposition, which enables computational efficiency, with geometric
interpretation of linear discriminant analysis, which allows for the
construction of nonlinear classification rules by redefining the space for
discrimination.