* 1712966
* Statistical Models, Inference, and Computation for Multidimensional Time Series Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Vladas Pipiras, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2020
* USD 199,997.00

It is now commonplace for data to be collected over time across multiple (often
many) sources. Examples include the time signals across multiple brain regions
arising from fMRI, ocean wave height series across multiple spatial locations
collected from buoys or satellites, and the multiple economic indicators (GPD,
unemployment, and so on) gathered over time by government agencies and other
parties. Available techniques often either neglect temporal dependencies for
such high-dimensional data arising from multiple sources or do not apply to
situations when the number of sources is large. This research project aims to
develop novel statistical modeling tools that can capture adequately both the
temporal features of such data and also their dependencies across multiple
sources. Such tools have the potential to greatly enhance knowledge gained from
such data. With fMRI data, for example, proper accounting for temporal
dependence and large number of brain regions may facilitate better distinction
among various clinical categories (ADHD, autism, etc.). Understanding the
temporal and spatial dependencies in wave height data can lead to better
predictions of storm activity across the oceans, and further insight into
economic activity is expected from improved analysis of multiple economic
indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at developing an integrated
approach to analyzing large multidimensional time series data, including their
statistical models, estimation, computation (algorithms), and practice. The
research covers both short-range and long-range dependent multidimensional time
series. For short-range dependent series, the focus is on sparse vector
autoregressive and related models, dimension reduction, change point detection
and some nonlinear models. The problems to be addressed concern regularization
techniques, statistical significance, models exhibiting cyclical variations and
other issues. Multidimensional long-range dependence is suggested as the
important class complementing vector autoregressive and related short-range
dependent series, thus gathering the two general classes of models employed in
modern time series analysis. The goal is to develop a new methodology for
multidimensional long-range dependent series with the so-called general phase,
which controls the symmetry properties of multidimensional time series, in both
linear and nonlinear settings. The developed methods should be useful across a
wide range of areas, including neuroscience, oceanography and environmental
sciences, geophysics, economics and finance, and others.