* 1712626
* CIMA Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Usha Gururajarao, St. Philip's College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the number
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and
provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the
knowledge-based economy. The CIMA Alliance - a partnership between St. Philip's,
San Antonio, Northwest Vista, Palo Alto, and Northeast Lakeview Colleges - is
uniquely poised to respond to the need for a more diverse and skilled technical
workforce. That need still exists and is particularly acute in Bexar County
(Texas) where minorities traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields comprise
much of the region's population. The CIMA Alliance's goals are to: 1) Increase
individual student retention and progression to baccalaureate degrees for URMs;
2) Enable successful transfer of URMs from two-year programs into four-year
programs; and 3) Increase access to high-quality undergraduate research
experiences. These goals support the National Science Foundation's strategic
goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering
workforce, and expand the scientific literacy of all citizens." To retain more
STEM majors to graduation or transfer, and to provide an intervention that
addresses multiple factors that influence Hispanic student success in STEM, the
project will encourage students to develop peer and faculty support networks and
improve their sense of self-efficacy in STEM through involvement in student-led
undergraduate research; peer mentorship; faculty mentorship; tutoring;
supplemental instruction, especially in mathematics; and STEM student clubs. The
project supports the goals of the LSAMP program by transforming undergraduate
STEM education at all five CIMA Alliance Colleges via 1) relevant curricular and
co-curricular educational experiences that are designed to meet the specific
needs of underrepresented STEM majors; and 2) professional development in
innovative, evidence-based teaching, recruitment, and retention strategies for
all STEM faculty and academic advisors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of
the evaluation results will provide insight into activities/programs that
establish seamless transfer pipelines into four-year institutions, and the
extent to which these interventions increase the number of underrepresented
community college STEM majors who complete a STEM bachelor's degree within six
years.