* 1712238
* Data Analytics for Efficient STEM Assessment: Developing Equivalent Short Concept Inventories
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Lei Bao, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,897.00

The use of validated concept inventories, which are sets of questions designed
and tested to accurately probe student understanding of a particular field or
topic, is an accepted method of assessing student learning. However, the use of
concept inventories is often avoided by instructors because they take
considerable class time to complete. This project seeks to streamline and revise
existing concept inventories into shortened versions that retain their
statistical power for student assessment. The project will develop a standard
method to create multiple shortened concept inventories from established
inventories currently used in STEM education. Generating shortened but relevant
concept inventories will decrease the class time needed to employ these
inventories and will also mitigate memorization effects that can occur when the
same concept inventory is used to measure learning before and after a lesson is
conducted. Results from this project will provide a powerful new method of
assessing student learning.

This three-year project to refine and apply short concept inventory creation
methodology will result in shortened versions of four commonly used concept
inventories - the Mechanics Baseline Test and the Brief Electricity and
Magnetism Assessment (both from Physics), the Statics Concept Inventory (from
Engineering), and the Biology Concept Inventory. Statistical analysis, item
response theory, factor analysis, equating modeling, and discipline-specific
experts will guide the creation process to help ensure equivalence to the
original concept inventories and between the shortened versions. Randomized
testing will produce data that allows for comparisons between new shortened
concept inventories and the original full length tests to determine the
equivalence of the multiple versions and the appropriate conversion models to
translate scores between versions. Upon successful validation, the shortened
concept inventories will be immediately ready to administer in relevant courses
and the methodology will be applicable to other concept inventories by
researchers across all STEM disciplines. This research will also produce
baseline outcomes for implementation strategies and guide efforts to promote
widespread use of shortened concept inventories. The methodology developed in
this research will be carefully detailed, giving step by step instructions to
apply to further concept inventories by other researchers. In addition, this
research will help to inform future concept inventory development of short
parallel concept inventories to make STEM learning assessment more accessible to
all educators.