* 1712164
* Collaborative Research: Longitudinal Impact of Peer-Led Team Learning on Retention of Chemistry Concepts and Attitudes toward Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Scott Lewis, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 169,288.00

Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) is a teaching method that relies on students who
successfully completed a course (known as "peer leaders") to return to the
course to lead new students in small group learning activities. A strength of
this approach is that it can be used in large introductory college science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses. As a result, PLTL has
been implemented at more than one hundred colleges and universities nationwide.
Research studies have found that PLTL promotes student academic success more
effectively than lecture-based teaching alone. However, most of this research
has only examined PLTL's impacts within a single course. Thus, little is known
about the impacts of PLTL on students' long-term retention of knowledge and
skills. Therefore, this Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR)
Exploration &amp; Design project will fill an important research gap by
investigating the extent to which PLTL supports long-term retention of chemistry
knowledge and skills, in comparison to lecture-based instruction. Because
learning is also affected by students' motivation and attitudes, the project
will also measure these factors. The studies will be carried out at the
University of South Florida (USF), the University of Central Florida (UCF), the
University of New Hampshire (UNH), and the University of Southern Maine (USM).
The results of these studies have the potential to inform college chemistry
instructors regarding how to promote and evaluate long-term student retention of
knowledge and skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the
longitudinal impact of PLTL on general chemistry knowledge retention using two
concurrent approaches. In the first approach, the project team will assess
students' knowledge in upper-level quantitative analysis courses as a function
of whether or not they participated in PLTL in their general chemistry courses.
Instructors at USF, UCF, UNH, and USM will collaborate with the research team to
create assessment items for general chemistry concepts that are central to
understanding quantitative analysis. In addition to more traditional exam
questions, novel Creative Exercises (CEs) will be used. CEs consist of prompts
that ask students to write as many related statements as they can that are
distinct, correct, and relevant. This generative assessment approach is designed
to reveal both correct and incorrect associations students construct with the
prompts. A course-entry survey will identify students in the quantitative
analysis courses who had been involved in PLTL as a student or peer leader in
general chemistry, and determine the nature of their learning experiences in and
out of the classroom. A second approach will be a longitudinal comparison study,
for which students will be recruited at the end of their general chemistry
course. Students will be asked to respond to assessments of their general
chemistry knowledge and skills at the end of the course and twice more within
the following two-year period. The combination of the quasi-experimental in-vivo
approach and experimental in vitro approach will help balance the relative
advantages and disadvantages of each research approach. In addition, other
relevant student measures, including of motivation, metacognition, attitudes,
and self-concept as chemistry learners, will be collected and analyzed. These
data will be used to disaggregate or cluster sub-populations of students for
statistical or descriptive comparisons. Results from the project are expected to
provide insights regarding the long-term value of PLTL for students and peer
leaders, create novel content knowledge assessments for general chemistry and
analytical chemistry, and provide guidance to instructional designers regarding
the aspects of PLTL that are most valuable for
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.