* 1712073
* Collaborative Research: Active Learning for Out-of-class Activities to Improve Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Monika Akbar, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 65,232.00

Motivating and engaging students with course content once they leave the
classroom is challenging. A plethora of research exists on various in-class
student engagement methods. However, there is a dearth of research on keeping
students engaged with traditional out-of-class activities. This project will
provide Computer Science students interactive and motivating out-of-class
activities. Activities will be available in a mobile environment which the
current generation of students actively use. They will accommodate
personalization and adaptation to optimize the learning experience for each
individual student. This approach is expected to motivate students to take
personal responsibility for learning. The project is a collaboration between a
Hispanic Serving Institution and a Historically Black University. The open
source nature of the mobile platform may facilitate its adoption by other
disciplines and institutions. The project addresses the national interest in
developing a strong and diverse Information Technology workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to motivate students to take
initiative for learning outside the classroom. Out of class active learning
activities will be enhanced with four unique factors. First, the activities are
interactive and smaller than traditional out-of-class activities. This allows
for instructional scaffolding. The activities can be deployed more frequently
and with higher expectations. This is expected to motivate students to raise
expectations of themselves. Second, the project's mobile technology-based
learning environment will deliver and administer the activities. Third, social
networking with their peers is incorporated into the learning environment.
Finally, gamification components in the form of online learning and engagement
strategies are used to encourage students to participate and become more engaged
in the activities. The mobile interactive learning environment allows faculty to
facilitate learning even after the students leave the classroom. It allows early
intervention when students fall behind their peers. Active out-of-class learning
experiences enable learning to occur anytime, anywhere, and at the student's own
place. This is expected to promote more effective student engagement, enhanced
student learning, improved satisfaction, and increased student retention. The
project team includes computer science faculty from two universities that serve
unique student population. Through this collaboration, two diverse student
populations will be engaged with the intervention. This will allow better
insights for generalizing the approach to broader audiences.