* 1712339
* Recalibrating Student Learning in Introductory Geoscience Courses Through the Use of a Web-Based Assessment Tool
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David McConnell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,995.00

This project will examine the impact of a web-based system called Confidence-
based Learning Accuracy Support System (CLASS) on student learning at two
campuses, a research university and a two-year college. The CLASS tool offers an
opportunity to improve student learning outcomes and performance in
undergraduate geoscience courses. For the student, CLASS has the appearance of
an online quizzing program in which students also estimate their confidence in
the accuracy of each of their answers. CLASS calculates the gap between the
student's performance and their confidence in their answers. This tool gives
students valuable and instantaneous feedback on both their level of knowledge
and the accuracy of their perceptions about their knowledge. For the instructor,
CLASS provides numerical and graphical summaries of students' performance and
confidence regarding specific course content areas. CLASS can be used at the
beginning of a course to provide instructors with information about the content
areas in which students are overconfident or under-confident. Such information
cannot be ascertained from traditional assessment methods. Instructors can use
this information to redesign lessons that target problematic content, as well as
to provide supplementary instruction or specific learning interventions. The
impact of this newly developed tool will be evaluated and results of the
research will help inform our understanding of student learning. If this tool is
shown to positively impact learning and instruction, it could be used to improve
learning for any subject or course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Confidence-based
Learning Accuracy Support System (CLASS) was developed as a web-based tool that
is grounded in the findings of educational psychology research and a self-
regulated learning theoretical framework. It has benefits for both students and
instructors. This project will iteratively pair conscientious course design and
direct metacognitive instruction to investigate CLASS's potential to serve as a
tool for increasing student metacognitive monitoring accuracy, self-regulation,
and performance in undergraduate geoscience courses. The project will apply the
tool at both a two-year college and a research institution. Additionally, the
implementation of CLASS will be analyzed as a novel metric for assessing
relative effectiveness of instructional strategies in eliciting student learning
gains and monitoring accuracy in the target courses. The overarching goal of the
project is to increase student performance in introductory geoscience courses
across diverse populations via the implementation of a web-based assessment tool
(CLASS) that integrates student performance and confidence measures. The
following project objectives will be implemented: 1. Characterize how the use of
the CLASS tool influences student performance in introductory geology courses
through a sequential program of interventions informed by student data collected
from CLASS quizzes and student interviews and surveys; 2. Compare and contrast
the use of the CLASS tool in face-to-face and online classes to determine the
relative impact across different educational settings, especially given the
increasing prevalence of formal cyber-learning environments; 3. Determine the
relative use and impact of the CLASS tool in different types of institutions by
comparing course data on student performance and metacognition before and after
deployment in similar classes at both a research intensive four-year university
and a two-year college; 4. Develop a suite of customizable CLASS quizzes to
share with the geoscience community that are linked to learning objectives
relevant to content typically discussed in introductory geology courses; and 5.
Disseminate the CLASS resource through an open access website including a
tutorial series so that it can be utilized by other faculty, regardless of
discipline, who seek to create their own materials to support student learning.