* 1712279
* Enhancing the Quality of Undergraduate Investigations in Physical Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Dermot Donnelly-Hermosillo, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 277,504.00

Prospective elementary school teachers are often provided with limited
opportunities to engage in authentic scientific investigations in physical
science laboratories during their teaching preparation. As a result, teachers
commonly struggle to explain scientific phenomena and to facilitate
investigations in schools. The Enhancing the Quality of Undergraduate
Investigations in Physical Science (EQUIPS) project will study the impact of re-
designed physical science laboratories on prospective pre-service elementary
education (PSEE) teachers' explanations of physical science phenomena and
experimental practices, as well as the impact of such laboratory experiences on
their future instruction. These re-designed laboratories will move away from
cookbook-style approaches to laboratories that challenge teachers to develop and
conduct their own investigations of physical science phenomena. EQUIPS will
provide critical insight in laboratory design for increased decision-making and
in assessment design of scientific phenomena and experimental practice
explanations, and how such laboratory experiences transfer to future
instructional practice. EQUIPS laboratories will avoid the fragmentation of
separate physics and chemistry labs, integrate the assessments of teachers'
understandings of physical science phenomena in physics and chemistry, and
provide PSEE teachers with strategies for facilitating investigations that guide
children in experimental design, data interpretation, scientific discourse, and
understanding of disciplinary core ideas, practices, and crosscutting concepts
associated with chemistry and physics. This is consistent with the 3-dimentional
learning called for in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). Such
changes in physical science laboratory experiences will ultimately support
better science instruction in the physical sciences for K-8 students. Further,
EQUIPS will engage a large proportion of first generation teachers and
underrepresented groups in the physical sciences as it is designed, tested and
implemented at an Hispanic-serving institution. Thus, this Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Exploration and Design project will
contribute to the redesign of undergraduate pre-service elementary education and
advance the potential of teachers to create learning environments in which
elementary students can experience success when engaging with phenomena in the
physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through design and comparison studies
over six semesters with approximately 120 PSEE teachers each semester (720
total), EQUIPS will develop, test, and refine new NGSS aligned laboratory
curriculum that support and target disciplinary and integrated explanations of
scientific phenomena in the physical sciences and understanding of experimental
practices. Pre/post items will be developed alongside knowledge integration
rubrics to score students' conceptual development. Laboratory curriculum will
follow an anchor phenomenon (broad, complex, and difficult to investigate
directly) and an investigative phenomenon (testable questions that in part
answer the broader anchor phenomenon) framework. Additional data will be
collected through observations, questionnaires, and interviews to identify
improvements for the laboratory curriculum. Finally, case studies involving
observations and interviews will be conducted with select teachers during and
after degree completion to determine the impacts of the laboratory curriculum on
their instruction. EQUIPS will use design-based research to investigate three
research questions: How do PSEE teachers explain a scientific phenomenon using
different science disciplines and how integrated are these explanations? How can
laboratories be designed to support experimental practices and what impact does
this have on undergraduates' explanations of scientific phenomena compared to
existing laboratories? What impact do redesigned laboratories have on PSEE
teachers' views about experimental practices and physical science, and in turn,
uptake of the course? The curriculum materials, assessments, and findings
resulting from this investment will be disseminated through publications,
conference presentations, workshops, and social media outlets. As such, EQUIPS
will provide other institutions with an important blueprint to guide the re-
design of their elementary teacher science courses towards effective laboratory
experiences for PSEEs in support of elementary students' successful learning of
and engagement with physical science phenomena. This important work is supported
with funding from the IUSE program and the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.