* 1712664
* Nonparametric Estimation and Inference: Shape Constraints, Model Selection, and Level Set Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Charles Doss, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 99,842.00

Larger and more complex data sets are becoming more and more commonplace. It is
thus both advantageous and necessary to use statistical methods that are very
flexible, and which allow the data to "speak for itself," rather than having
researchers make strong unjustifiable prior assumptions about the data. Flexible
methods are thus necessary in the modern landscape, but they have the difficulty
that the practitioner generally must "tune" the methods in order to get reliable
results. This introduces an ad-hoc element to data analysis, leads to a lack of
replicability in results, and means (incorrectly tuned) statistical procedures
may return incorrect results. The unifying theme of this project is the
development of statistical methods that are both very flexible and also fully
automated, meaning they do not depending on user-chosen tuning parameters. The
application areas motivating this project are varied, and include the analysis
of vaccine trials, the study of economic data, and the problem of outlier
detection (used widely in financial services).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Very
flexible nonparametric statistical methods have become necessary tools to handle
the complex nature of large data sets. One difficulty with using nonparametric
tools in practice is their general dependence on (potentially many) tuning
parameters which must be chosen well to ensure reliable performance. The focus
of this proposal is on developing methods which can be implemented and lead to
reliable results without requiring any ad-hoc steps by the end user. Three main
problems will be studied: (a) model selection for shape-constrained estimators,
(b) likelihood ratio type tests for shape-constrained estimators, and (c)
estimation and inference for complex features of multivariate densities. In (a)
and (b) the focus is on using so-called shape-constrained estimators, which have
the benefit of simultaneously being nonparametric but also of automatically
selecting optimal tuning parameters. Furthermore, they arise out of natural or
axiomatic prior information (e.g., economic theory or laws of physics) in many
settings, and in such cases one should certainly use that information. In (c),
the focus is on estimation of complex features of densities (such as level set
manifolds, motivated by outlier detection problems). Both shape-constrained
methods and alternative methods will be considered, when shape constraints are
not applicable. There are few or no effective procedures available in many of
the problems under consideration, because of the nonstandard nature of the
problems.