* 1712203
* Collaborative Research: The Common Problem Pedagogy Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Mary McGuire, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2020
* USD 93,552.00

The economic prosperity of the United States relies on progress in science, the
advancement of national health initiatives, and overall national prosperity in
an increasingly technical economy. This prosperity relies on a talented
workforce with the ability to nimbly address new challenges and develop
innovative technologies. The Common Problem Pedagogy project seeks to improve
STEM teaching and learning through the integration of cross-disciplinary
experiences and applied learning opportunities in ways that will strengthen STEM
workforce preparation and produce a more STEM-literate public. STEM faculty will
partner with one or more colleagues from the arts and humanities to identify a
community partner with a significant problem or issue relevant to their
disciplines. Each faculty member will incorporate problem-based learning
activities in their courses to address the problem. Interdisciplinary teams of
students from their classes will work together, applying the perspectives and
tools of inquiry from their respective disciplines, to develop potential
solutions that will be presented to the community partner at the end of the
semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be implemented on four SUNY
Campuses: Cortland, Oneonta, Oswego, and Plattsburgh. The goals of the project
are to demonstrate the effectiveness of Common Problem Pedagogy on student
learning within STEM disciplines, to increase the number of STEM instructors
proficient in this pedagogy, and to identify strategies for scaling up this
methodology for large-scale adoption across the SUNY system and beyond. Thirty-
two faculty members from the four campuses will participate in professional
development opportunities to learn about the new pedagogy, implement it in their
classes, and then evaluate the impact of this approach on the achievement of
student learning outcomes related to problem-solving using interdisciplinary
approaches. A train-the-trainer model will be adopted, whereby participating
faculty members recruit additional faculty members to participate in future
semesters. The principal investigators will gather data from participating
faculty and community partners to identify challenges associated with
implementing this method, and to evaluate students' success in working with
community partners in cross-disciplinary teams to address meaningful, real-world
problems.