* 1712805
* EAPSI: Development of Amphiphilic, pH Responsive Cationic Copolypeptoids for Nonviral Cell Transfection in Serum
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jessica Simpson, Simpson                 Jessica
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Carried out by the process of cell transfection (CT), the practice of gene
therapy is a promising approach in addressing rare diseases and genetic
disorders (e.g. hemophilia, SCID, and Kippel Trenauny). Among non-viral gene
carriers used for CT polymers have received significant attention primarily
because their chemical versatility, large-scale production, and
cytocompatibility make them potential candidates for biomedical applications.
However, drawbacks such as low transfection efficiency and size related
cytotoxicity limiting full usage of these systems. In this research, responsive,
cationic polypeptoid copolymers will be developed. Under the guidance of
Professor Lichen Yin, an expert in cell transfection at Soochow University,
synthesized copolymers will be used to investigate the particle stability and
behavior of nucleic acid condensed polyplexes during in vitro cell transfection.
This research will provide a strategy to stabilize genetic material during cell
transfection. This approach will also permit the effective release genetic
material intracellularly via endosomal escape.

Poly(N-substituted glycines) are a special class of peptidomimetic polymers
bearing substituents on the nitrogen present in the backbone. Commonly referred
to as polypeptoids, this group of polymers are known for their minimal
cytotoxicity, enhanced proteolytic stability and structural tunability, making
them potential candidates for a variety of biomedical and biotechnological
applications including smart-coatings, antimicrobial agents, and drug delivery.
Currently, the cell transfection of polypeptoid/DNA complexes in serum-
containing media is problematic due to the instability of the complexed
particles in serum. The manifestation of charge shielding, in which interaction
with anionic serum components (lipids, albumin, salts, etc.) reduces polyplex
surface charge, is mainly responsible for this outcome. To address this
challenge, block polypeptoid copolymers containing hydrophilic and hydrophobic
segments will be developed in this project. In this research synthesized
copolymers will be tested for their ability to effectively protect and transport
therapeutic gene p53 during in vitro cell transfection in nuclease. Under
extracellular conditions where charge shielding is permissible (pH= 5.0-5.5), it
is anticipated that copolymers will respond to this biological stimuli by
adopting a micellar structure with a charged, hydrophobic inner core and charge
neutral outer shell. Dr. Yin's group proficiency in the field of cell
transfection will contribute significantly towards efforts to understand and
elucidate the behavior of these polymeric systems in biological environments.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.