* 1712788
* CCF-BSF:CIF:Small:Signal Processing and Machine Learning on Manifolds, with Applications to Invariant Detection and Covariant Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Louis Scharf, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2020
* USD 449,993.00

In many fields of engineering and applied science the problem is to extract
relevant information from a signal or image. Certainly this describes the
problem of identifying cyber attackers in data networks, spotting objects of
interest in closed-circuit TV records, and classifying anomalies in medical
images. The goal of this project is to develop a signal processing theory for
detecting and classifying images that have undergone geometric transformations.
Practical and topical examples are medical features viewed in variable
magnification and orientation, and images of people in arbitrary orientations in
crowded scenes. The solution to classification problems under such imaging
conditions will advance medical practice and national defense. As a broader
impact, the project prepares students for careers in mathematics and electrical
engineering, with an expertise in signal processing and imaging science.

This project develops a theory of matched manifold detectors, based on a
universal manifold embedding that extracts a subspace basis from an image. The
basis itself codes for the coordinate transformation of the image, but its span
is invariant to the transformation. Consequently the extracted subspace is an
invariant statistic for detection, and the basis is a covariant statistic for
the parameters of the transformation. Classification is then a problem of
subspace matching on a Grassmann manifold, and identification of coordinate
transformation is a problem of analyzing a subspace basis in a Stiefel manifold.
We aim to adapt this theory to other problems where a transformation group turns
out an orbit of images, all of which are to be classified as equivalent. The
objective is to develop a theory of signal processing on manifolds that is as
broad in its scope and as precise in its methodologies as modern subspace signal
processing. Such a theory will augment statistical reasoning with geometrical
reasoning, and bring new mathematical methods into play.