* 1712015
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2017: Evolutionary morphology and cranial constraints in piranhas, pacus, and their allies
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Matthew Kolmann, Kolmann                 Matthew        A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2017, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports research and training of the fellow utilizing biological
collections in innovative ways. Piranhas and their allies number almost 100
species and despite deceptively simple jaws, these fishes consume prey ranging
from whole fishes to plant matter like nuts, fruits, and leaves. Researchers can
understand how and why biomaterials and structures have changed by studying the
history of predators and their prey, and noting which behaviors, structures, and
materials keep evolving in tandem (evolutionary convergence). The first step in
understanding how anatomy has evolved is building an evolutionary genealogy
(phylogeny) of living piranhas, pacu, and their relatives to use as a framework.
This project will then examine how the feeding anatomy of piranhas and their
allies is constructed, how these structures perform when feeding on different
prey, and map these traits across the evolutionary history of these fishes.

The fellow will construct a cutting-edge phylogenomic tree for serrasalmid
fishes using targeted exon capture methods. These evolutionary relationships
will be used as a framework for understanding feeding trait evolution,
visualized through iodine-enhanced contrast staining coupled with micro-computed
tomography (micro-CT). The fellow will use biomechanical modeling methods like
FEA (finite-element analysis) to examine how different skull shapes resist
stresses during feeding, and quantify feeding performance by analyzing muscle
morphology and jaw lever dynamics measured from micro-CT imaging. This project
proposes that the skulls of piranhas will show evolutionary trade-offs among
cranial architectural strength, tooth shape, and feeding performance. Certain
combinations of these traits will also be correlated with specific diets like
scale-eating, fruit-eating, and piscivory, among others. This project utilizes
molecular collections from museums to further our understanding of the
evolutionary relationships of charismatic fishes like piranhas. Morphological
imaging of museum specimens will generate a database of piranha CT models for
teaching and outreach methods, free for anyone to download and 3D print.
Training goals include the fellow gaining experience in some of the most
advanced techniques for visualizing anatomy and modeling the material and
architectural behavior of these structures. Broader impacts include educational
outreach targeting university and pre-university students with speech
disabilities, engaging these student's interests in science, and reinforcing
their confidence and ability for entering academia and other research-based
professions. Results from the studies will also be published in peer-reviewed
journals and shared at scientific meetings.