* 1712531
* Centering Women of Color in STEM: Identifying and Scaling Up What Helps Women of Color Thrive
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Angela Johnson, Eureka Scientific Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 07/31/2021
* USD 343,289.00

The economic prosperity of the United States relies on progress in science, the
advancement of national health initiatives, and overall national prosperity in
an increasingly technical economy. This prosperity relies on a talented
workforce with the ability to nimbly address new challenges and develop
innovative technologies. Colleges and universities can best prepare this future
workforce by ensuring that educational environments are effective for a diverse
range of students. In the United States from 2001-2012 women received 20% of the
bachelor's degrees granted in physics, but Black women and Latinas received only
2%. While women also received about 20% of engineering and computer science
bachelor's degrees, only a modestly higher percentage of those women - when
compared to their colleagues in physics - are Black and Latina: 3.4% in
engineering and 6% in computer science. This project will build on prior work
studying STEM departments at coeducational, predominantly white institutions in
which women of color are thriving. In prior studies, few of the over 600 women
of color found support within their own undergraduate departments. This project
will explore actions STEM professors can take so that women of color can find
support within their departments rather than having to seek refuge from those
departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from Eureka Scientific, Inc. and
St. Mary's College of Maryland will conduct in-depth, mixed-method studies of
out-performing STEM departments in the United States and England in which women
of color are thriving in numbers significantly higher than averages elsewhere.
The project will serve to identify shared approaches across these departments;
develop a body of tested, practical elements of success that STEM departments
can adopt; and a set of measures that will let the departments monitor the
success of their transformation process. The project will advance research-based
knowledge to promote systemic change in STEM education and will provide a
clearer understanding about factors that promote success for young women of
color in a variety of institutional contexts. The project will culminate in a
meeting with participants from 11 institutions who will examine the
applicability of the findings at their home institutions including: doctoral
universities, master's universities, baccalaureate colleges, open enrollment,
public and private institutions.