* 1712922
* Modeling the Interactions of Stimuli and Ongoing Activity in Cortical Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Bard Ermentrout, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,999.00

How we perceive the world is governed both by the sensory inputs with which we
are constantly bombarded, by ongoing activity in the brain, and by our previous
experience. This activity as well as the natural wiring of the nervous system
shapes the spontaneous behavior of our brains and this spontaneous activity
strongly modulates the sensory inputs. In this project, computational and
mathematical models of neurons (the cells that make up the brain) are used to
understand what kinds of spontaneous behavior are possible, how this depends on
the wiring and how this activity interacts with sensory inputs. The ongoing and
evoked behavior is carefully controlled by a balance of positive (excitatory)
and negative (inhibitory) influences. The loss of this balance can disrupt
normal behavior and lead to diseases such as epilepsy and schizophrenia.
Mathematical models of the nervous system provide a way to test hypotheses put
forth by experimenalists and to also suggest new experiments based on the
predictions of these models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing activity in the
nervous system and how it impacts sensory and other inputs is the subject of
much recent experimental activity. In particular, it is clear that the intrinsic
interactions between neuronal circuits in absence of inputs can have a strong
impact on how the system responds to incoming stimuli even at the large scale
cognitive level. Thus, nonlinear dynamics methods will be applied to problems in
theoretical neuroscience dealing with this question. Various forms of
spatiotemporal activity are observed in experiments which include spatially
localized activity, oscillations, and propagating waves. Perturbation and
numerical methods will be used to analyze the dynamics of these patterns when
subjected to various stimuli such as flickering light, localized or moving
stimuli, and spatially periodic patterns. Uniform flickering stimuli lead to the
perception of moving geometric patterns and these can be explained by the
analysis of mean field models of visual cortex. In collaboration with an
experimental group we will use the modeling to make predictions about how this
percept is altered as parameters of the flicker vary. Related to this is the
appearance of flicker when presented with high contrast spatially periodic
patterns. Stability of the steady periodic state will be studied in order to see
if the appearance of oscillations is the result of a Hopf bifurcation. This
effect may also offer an explanation for why some images (such as op art) can
induce visual discomfort. The existence an properties of traveling waves in
nonlocally connected networks will also be studied in this project.