* 1712588
* Polar (DCL 16-119): Engaging Students and the Public in Polar Research through Live Interactive Planetarium Shows
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Harry Stern, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 364,873.00

Scientists at the University of Washington's (UW) Polar Science Center and
science educators at Pacific Science Center in Seattle, WA will collaborate to
create polar science planetarium shows using the new Digitalis projection system
in Pacific Science Center's Willard Smith Planetarium. The polar shows will be
presented daily at the planetarium, for a total of 700 showings over the course
of this project. Polar scientists and graduate students will participate in a
course designed to teach skills in public communication of science and then will
participate in a smaller number of live presentations of the planetarium shows.
Selected polar shows will also be "Domecast" to other planetariums around the
country. Researchers will contribute to the study of cognition in the affective
realm, looking specifically at how choices made in the presentation style, image
selection and content can result in emotional engagement of the viewer and
increased interest in the content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The content for the
shows will consist of two parts: (1) general material about the polar regions,
made suitable for elementary school children in grades 3-5, and (2) material
derived from active research projects, made suitable for general audiences. The
proposed activities are meant to inspire greater interest, appreciation, and
enjoyment of science; stimulate students to consider careers in STEM fields;
inform the public about NSF's contribution to polar science; impart an awareness
of the Earth's polar-regions and their role in global climate; and increase
participating scientists' comfort and ability to communicate with public
audiences. Evaluations will determine the impact of these planetarium shows on
the engagement of the public with the polar sciences.