* 1712657
* Level Crossing of Likelihood Functions in Sequential Decision Problems and Statistical Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Xiaoou Li, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 128,988.00

The last decade has witnessed remarkable progress in statistical methods for
applications arising from various fields including education, psychology,
finance, and engineering. The properties of many of these new methods remain
unclear, calling for theoretical insights. This research project aims at (1)
studying the theoretical underpinning of effective methods in statistical
learning and sequential decision making and (2) developing new methods with
provably efficiency and reliability. This research will not only address a class
of fundamental problems in statistics but also have a positive impact on
scientific research in other disciplines. One important application will be in
the adaptive design of educational testing and personalized learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three types of problems will be considered in the project:
information quantification for model selection, measuring the feasibility of
classification, and sequential allocation. A common feature of the research
problems involves handling the probability that a likelihood function exceeds a
high level. The analysis of such a probability is statistically challenging,
especially under the asymptotic regime where this probability decays at an
exponential rate. Standard numerical evaluation tools, such as Monte Carlo
methods, are computationally intensive to achieve a reasonable accuracy level
for simulating such a small probability. Novel techniques will be developed to
obtain sharp asymptotic approximations as well as provably efficient numerical
methods simultaneously.