* 1712251
* Investigating the Effectiveness of Pair Programming for Students with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Wu He, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

This study will investigate whether pair programming, a collaborative form of
programming in which two students work side-by-side on one computer, impacts the
performance and retention of students with learning disabilities (LD) in
computing courses. Growing post-secondary enrollment of students with LD has
created a commensurate need for research on accessibility and success for
students with LD in higher education. Students with LD who set out to pursue
careers in computing often struggle with computing courses and abandon career
pathways that would provide rewarding job opportunities. Pair programming has
been used successfully with students without disabilities in computing courses.
It has increased learning, decreased frustration, and reduced the confidence gap
between male and female students while improving the confidence of all students.
However, little research has examined the pair interaction involving students
with LD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project serves to develop and diversify the
nation's computing workforce. To study pair interaction, participants will be
engaged in collaborative problem solving. Students enrolled in introductory
information technology and programming classes will be randomly assigned to
course sections that serve as control or experimental groups. Students in the
experimental group will be trained in effective pair programming as well as how
to fill the role of driver, the one who writes or types in the code, and
navigator or observer, the one who reviews each line of code as it is entered
and considers the strategic direction of the work. Partners will complete ten
programming activities with two different partners, switching their roles
(driver/navigator) every ten minutes. Researchers will observe and record
participants' interactions. Data collection will include pre- mid- and post-test
questionnaires to measure participants' programming experience, programming
self-efficacy, attitude and motivation toward programming. Student learning
outcomes will be measured through programming exercises, assignments, and
midterm/final exam grades. A focus group will be held during the last class
meeting in which participants will be encouraged to share their experiences.
Open-ended answers to survey questions, focus group interview responses, and
observation notes will be analyzed using qualitative analysis methods.
Quantitative data will be analyzed using multivariate general linear models to
compare groups. Research results have the potential to be applied in teaching
high-school and middle-school students and used in K-12 settings to support
students with LD or those who approach learning differently, increasing the
likelihood that they will follow the path to computing careers.