* 1712066
* Developing Science Leaders Through Applied Learning Experiences and Reflection
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lisa Brown, Austin College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

Austin College will fill a critical gap in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and to promote the national interest by producing a
workforce ready for 21st century STEM jobs. The guiding philosophy of the
project is that all thoughtful and scientifically trained people should be
prepared to assume leadership roles at some point in their careers. By
integrating education in five leadership behaviors--communicating ideas, problem
solving, foresight and planning, collaborative work, and acting responsibly--
with research and service learning, Austin College will prepare its students to
be leaders and active participants in the 21st century workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Developing Science Leaders Through Applied Learning
Experiences and Reflection project will integrate leadership training directly
into the STEM curriculum. Using a framework developed as part of the STEM
Teaching and Research (STAR) Leadership Program, the project will employ high-
impact educational practices including providing common intellectual
experiences, collaborative assignments and projects, undergraduate research
opportunities and service- and community-based learning. The research component
will assess whether students' leadership capabilities grow as a result of the
project and will determine whether the applied learning components of the STAR
Leadership Program contribute to a sense of belonging, interdependence-
independence, growth versus fixed mindset, and self-efficacy in STEM. To
increase the impact, the proposed research will leverage an ongoing longitudinal
study, developed as part of a prior S-STEM award, which examines the impact of
the leadership curriculum. The results could add to the STEM educational
paradigm by demonstrating that including more holistic training in personal
attributes helps students to succeed in the STEM workforce and graduate
programs.