* 1712602
* Representation Frames and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Deguang Han, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,000.00

In many engineering applications signals pass through linear systems, but in
this process the recorded phase information can be lost or distorted. Examples
of this problem occur in speech recognition, quantum state tomography, x-ray
crystallography, and electron microscopy. The frame based phase retrieval
problem is to recover a signal from the absolute values of its frame measurement
coefficients. The central theme of this project lies in the investigation of the
theory of phase-retrievable representation frames and its state-of-the-art
applications in signal processing and information theory. The main objective is
to establish the theoretical foundations for phase-retrievable representation
frames and develop new representation frame based recovering algorithms that
will address the computational cost problems in the existed recovering
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on three main problems
in frame based phase retrieval. The first is representation frames and phase-
retrieval. Due to their nice algebraic and/or geometric features, well-
structured frames are excellent candidates for applications. This part of the
project will focus on establishing the theory for finite group projective
representation frames that admit phase-retrievable frame vectors. The goal is to
completely characterize all such representations, and obtain simple and easily
verifiable criterion for all the phase-retrievable frame generators so that they
can be easily constructed for applications. The investigation on the
representation phase-retrievable frames for ordered product of semi-groups is in
line within the scope of representation frames and is directly targeting at
applications such as dynamic sampling. The second project will focus on phase-
retrieval for signals in the union of lower dimensional spaces. Many
applications often face great computational challenges when recovering lower
dimensional signals sitting in a very large dimensional Hilbert space. Building
the theoretical foundation for the existence of phase-retrievable representation
frames with much smaller length for such signals will greatly reduce the
encoding frame length and obtain good characterizations for all such frames. The
third project is on representation frames in erasure-corrupted signal
recovering. Data transmission often causes erasures and other type distortions.
In many cases the locations of erased frame coefficients are unknown, and/or the
received partial data might be disordered. This project will investigate several
practical problems with applications of representation frames in signal
recovering from disordered partial frame coefficients and in the frame design
problem for encoder-decoder protections.