* 1712469
* Collaborative research: Creating an upper division additive manufacturing course and laboratory for enhancing undergraduate research and innovation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Meng Zhang, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2023
* USD 82,689.00

American economic and social theorists have predicted that Additive
Manufacturing (AM) heralds the beginning of the Third Industrial Revolution,
succeeding the production line assembly that has dominated manufacturing since
the late 19th century. AM, also known as 3D printing, refers to a process used
to create a three-dimensional artifact by printing successive layers of material
under computer control. The significant drop in price of 3D printers over the
last decade has made them relatively common in undergraduate engineering labs,
thereby opening up the opportunity to provide students with extended first-hand
experience of AM. The goal of the project is to help K-12 students and
engineering undergraduates learn about AM so that they are better prepared for
the renaissance in U.S. manufacturing. Student learning will be supported by the
labs, projects, course materials, and a textbook on AM that will be developed
during this project. The institutions involved are Texas Tech University (TTU),
a university with high research activity (RU/H), California State University,
Northridge, a non-PhD-granting institution that is both an HSI (Hispanic Serving
Institution) and an AANAPISI (Asian American Native American Pacific Islander
Serving Institution), and Kansas State University (KSU), both an EPSCoR and an
RU/H institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through creation of the AM course, the
following goals will be met: (1) the development of intellectually rigorous
course materials (e.g., textbook, lab manual, lecture notes) that will be
publicly accessible via hard copy and a virtual classroom website; (2) the
conduct of important educational research on the impact of the new AM curricula
on changes in student attitudes and self-efficacy in STEM, the results of which
will be published in engineering and education journals; (3) the development of
simplified 3D printing projects for K-12 students and Maker Space users.
Outreach by engineering undergraduates to K-12 students through one-on-one
mentoring relationships will help to build the K-12 STEM pipeline by creating
excitement and interest in engineering as a career.