* 1712608
* A SYSTEMS BIOLOGY APPROACH TO UNCOVERING THE HIDDEN REDOX REACTIONS OF PLANT AND BACTERIAL METABOLISM
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Gilles Basset, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2023
* USD 649,970.00

This project aims to identify and engineer plant and microbial enzymes that are
required for the production of beneficial molecules like vitamins, dietary
antioxidants, and plant compounds that participate in photosynthesis or defense
against pests. This research will generate novel targets for plant breeders and
metabolic engineers who seek to increase crop value, nutritional quality, and
productivity using the chemistry of nature. Because this project combines
multidisciplinary expertise in biology, chemistry, and computing, it will
provide opportunities to students and postdoctoral researchers to further their
career development in a broad range of skills and interests. This cross-
disciplinary training is in high-demand in academia, private industry and in
government. This project also includes a pilot outreach program aimed at raising
nutritional awareness in children of middle school age and their
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pilot investigations suggest that the redox state
of a number of vital aromatic compounds determines their eventual methylation
and/or further lactonization (cyclization) in vivo, and that plants and bacteria
have captured this chemistry to create regulatory nodes in their metabolic
networks. Dedicated oxidoreductases, which have so far remained hidden to
conventional biochemical and genetics approaches, appear to be central to these
processes. This project aims to identify and characterize such enzymes,
determine how oxygenic photosynthetic organisms use the corresponding reactions
to control the biosynthetic output of some of their aromatic metabolites, and
use the gained knowledge to engineer the cognate pathways. Specifically, the
project will combine comparative genomics, gene network modeling, and
biochemical genetics to: 1) Identify eukaryotic and prokaryotic oxidoreductases
involved in the methylation and the lactonization of metabolites; 2)
Characterize the corresponding reactions of oxidoreduction in vitro and in vivo,
and propagate the resulting functional annotations and metabolic reconstructions
to reference genomic, metabolic and enzymes databases; 3) Build synthetic
metabolons that protect redox active aromatic intermediates from spontaneous re-
oxidation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.