* 1712467
* Using Interactive Online Labs (IOLab) to provide Investigative Science Learning Environment (ISLE)-style labs at scale.
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Timothy Stelzer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,979.00

A hands-on lab class is a key and unique element of the introductory physics
experience, yet the implementation of effective labs can be both challenging and
expensive. A particular problem is that approaches which work extremely well in
small classes can be difficult to scale up to large enrollment courses. The goal
of this project is to take a powerful and proven approach to labs, the
Investigative Science Learning Environment (ISLE), and to combine it with an
inexpensive wireless lab system developed at the University of Illinois,
Interactive Online Labs (IOLab), to enable an innovative new approach to the lab
component of any large introductory physics class.

Recent pilot studies involving several hundred introductory physics students at
the University of Illinois have demonstrated that moving away from the
traditional highly structured concept-focused lab to a more unstructured
approach that emphasizes experimental design, sense-making, and scientific
communication, can actually improve a student's ability to interpret data and to
reason scientifically, with no negative impact on conceptual understanding.
These results are especially encouraging since the approach used in the pilot
studies is inherently scalable and the IOLab system is inexpensive and readily
available. The goal of this project is to assess the content and pedagogy that
will be developed to provide similar design-based labs for all 3000 students
taking introductory physics at the University of Illinois each semester. A key
part of this effort will be to develop the tools and training needed to make
this new approach accessible to instructors and teaching assistants that have
little prior experience.