* 1712481
* Hypothesis Testing in High Dimensions Without Sparsity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jelena Bradic, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 125,000.00

The exponential growth of diverse scientific data represents an unprecedented
opportunity to make substantial advances in complex science and engineering,
such as the discovery of novel materials or drugs. The collection and analysis
of information on massive scales has clear benefits for society: it can help
businesses optimize online commerce, medical workers address public health
issues, and governments interrupt terrorist activities. This project aims at
designing rigorous statistical framework and advanced tools for propagating and
managing uncertainty in the modeling and design of complex physical and
engineering systems. The ultimate goal of this project is to facilitate
significant hypothesis generation and accelerate discovery by correlating data
across scientific domains in systems with multi-scale and uncertain parameters
in extremely high-dimensional spaces, including for example aerospace,
engineering, neuroscience, gene-protein disease networks, materials science,
climate science, autonomous systems, and cyber-physical systems or self-
organized biological systems. This project will enable the design of systems
with verifiable properties; reveal how to value the trustworthiness of results
in a wide variety of applications; allow conclusions to be probed for their
sensitivity to uncertainties and practical experimentation and
validation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the complex and increasingly
data-intensive world around us relies on the construction of robust empirical
models, i.e., representations of real, complex systems that enable decision
makers to predict behaviors and answer "what-if" questions. Novel statistical
research is needed for dealing with the underlying high dimensionality of the
space of uncertain parameters, active multi-physics coupling, and uncertainty in
the models themselves. Besides, there is no fundamental theory for decision
making under uncertainty for these large-scale systems. To address these needs,
this project intends to develop the following capabilities: new methods for
inverse modeling to scale to high-dimensional multi-scale/multi-physics systems;
a quantifiable and generalizable understanding of uncertainties and inadequacies
in the physical models themselves and entirely new paradigms for decision making
that is extremely robust to model misspecification and assumptions. In
particular, new decision theory for high-dimensional regression models will be
developed that is highly and provably robust to the model misspecification,
including missing, non-sparse and large-scale (exploding) data structures. As
such, these methods will be the first attempts at understanding the fundamental
limitations of dense high-dimensional models. Moreover, censored analysis models
(log-rank, additive hazard, proportional hazard and competing risk) will be
studied under the setting where perfect estimation or variable selection is not
possible; these studies will be able to bridge the gap between the practice and
theory in the high-dimensional setting. Furthermore, a new framework for
aggregating heterogeneous and disparate data structures that may be correlated
and time-dependent will be developed. The added flexibility in analyzing
disparate data going from one stationary source to many moving sources of
observations must be carefully balanced with parsimony.