* 1712656
* Hamiltonian and Celestial Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Richard Moeckel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 180,001.00

This research project concerns dynamical systems theory, with emphasis on
questions in classical and celestial mechanics. Dynamical systems theory is
devoted to the mathematical study of systems that evolve in time, including the
gravitational n-body problem. The research in this project has direct
applications to understanding the possible motions of celestial bodies such as
planets, moons, and asteroids. But its primary importance lies in the
development of new mathematical methods that can be applied in other contexts.
From the mathematical point of view, the questions under study involve finding
and understanding the solutions of a complex system of differential equations.
Such equations are too complicated to solve explicitly, and instead are studied
using a combination of computer simulations and theoretical, mathematical
reasoning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planar three-body problem is a classical
dynamical system with a long history that still presents formidable mathematical
challenges. Many simple and beautiful periodic motions have been discovered, but
only a few have been understood at the level of mathematical proof. The system
is formulated as ordinary differential equations in five dimensions. Using
Poincare sections, the periodic orbits can be found as fixed points of four-
dimensional mappings. One part of this project is devoted to developing new
topological methods for finding periodic orbits. One of the characteristic
features of celestial mechanics is the presence of singularities. The behavior
of orbits near collisions can be chaotic. There are several open questions in
this area under investigation as part of the research. The simplest periodic
orbits in the n-body problem are relative equilibrium motions that arise from
planar central configurations. Understanding central configurations in the plane
and their generalization to higher dimensions is another goal of this project.
It is a difficult algebraic problem to find or even count the central
configurations. The problems of finiteness of the number of central
configurations and the question of stability of the resulting periodic solutions
will be investigated.