* 1712261
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Asynchronous Discussions to Engage Students in Scientific Argumentation
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* James Wolf, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 59,285.00

A critical part of the scientific process is discussing ideas with other
scientists to articulate concepts, to make sense of information, and to explain
findings and interpretation. Learning how to participate in this type of
discussion, called scientific argumentation, is an important component of STEM
education. Scientific argumentation is included in the definition of scientific
literacy established by the National Research Council, which defines "engaging
in argument from evidence" as a practice to be incorporated in STEM classrooms.
The goal of this project is to integrate a study of developing skills in
scientific argumentation and online learning to examine how to best engage
students in scientific argumentation using online discussion boards. Many
undergraduate institutions provide classes online; however, it is unclear how to
optimize these virtual classrooms to promote effective argumentation skills.
This project will examine the framing of questions for argumentation and will
ask whether questions that more closely align with students' lives and interests
promote more fruitful online argumentation. The project will also examine
factors related to student identity (e.g. gender, group dynamics and group
inclusivity) in participation in online argumentation, as well as whether
participation in online argumentation affects conceptual and/or cognitive
development in students. Findings from the project are expected to contribute to
the ongoing analysis of the benefits (or drawbacks) of online STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online discussion boards are used widely and are
potentially valuable instructional tools, but little is known about the science
learning that occurs via these discussion boards. This project's goal is to
bridge intellectual circles examining scientific argumentation and online
learning to provide a greater understanding of how to engage students in
scientific argumentation using the asynchronous discussion board. This project
will answer three research questions: (1) to what extent does introductory
question-driven discussion affect students' abilities to frame productive
scientific argumentation as behavior appropriate to a science classroom? (2) To
what extent do group characteristics (e.g. gender) mediate the scientific
argumentation behaviors that group members engage in during online and fact-to-
face discussions? (3) How much conceptual development occurs when student engage
in epistemic versus relational discourse, both in online and face-to-face
contexts? Examining these questions will yield potential solutions to challenges
to engaging students in scientific argumentation.