* 1712771
* Urban Massachusetts Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Robin Cote, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,610,667.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and
provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the
knowledge-based economy. The Urban Massachusetts Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (UMLSAMP) program was established in 2007 in response to
the need for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still
exists and is particularly acute in the Eastern Region of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. Participating institutions include three University of
Massachusetts campuses (Boston, Dartmouth and Lowell); Wentworth Institute of
Technology; and four community college partners (Bristol, Bunker Hill,
Middlesex, and Roxbury). The UMLSAMP's goals are to increase the number of 1)
Black, Hispanic, and Native American STEM students by 50%; 2) Baccalaureate STEM
degrees awarded to Black, Hispanic, and Native American students by 150%; and 3)
Students who successfully transfer from Alliance community colleges into BS STEM
majors by 150%. These goals support the National Science Foundation's strategic
goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering
workforce, and expand the scientific literacy of all citizens." The goals will
be accomplished by strategies based on the previous 10 years of Alliance
experience to include but are not limited to: Facilitated Study Groups,
Supplemental Instruction, Research Skills Development Workshops, Mentored
Research Experiences for Undergraduates in STEM, and Community Service
Projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generating research study will
employ a multi-layered, mixed-methods design with the supposition that
understanding the specific programmatic aspects that contribute to LSAMP's
success, institutionalizing these at Alliance institutions, and replicating them
across the higher education sector can make a significant contribution to
diversifying the nation's STEM-skilled workforce in all fields. Lessons learned
and programmatic outcomes will be disseminated through online communication
channels, participation in national and international student success and STEM
related conferences and workshops, and peer-reviewed publications. Progress
towards project goals will be carefully tracked internally in accordance with
the UMLSAMP Logical Model and through the engagement of an external evaluator.