* 1712033
* IUSE-EHR Building Excellence with Scientific Teaching (BEST): Transforming the College of Biological Sciences with a Scientific Teaching Certification Series
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Julie Brown, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 291,481.00

Many national reports have recommended that STEM (science, technology,
engineering and math) educators incorporate evidence-based teaching practices
into their courses, to better prepare future scientists, and to create a
scientifically literate citizenry. Despite the demands for reform, many STEM
faculty members are reluctant to change teaching practices, for reasons ranging
from lack of institutional support to a concern over sacrificed time for
covering content. Thus, it should come as no surprise that the teaching
assistant-individuals in charge of many laboratory sections in introductory STEM
courses-are similarly ill-prepared to use evidence-based teaching practices in
their own teaching. The result is teaching assistants who are ill-equipped to
facilitate inquiry in laboratory courses, which are the natural venues for
beginning students to engage in scientific practices and acquire critical STEM
competencies. Building Excellence with Scientific Teaching (BEST) is a three-
year project that will train undergraduate teaching assistants to apply
evidence-based principles to engage all undergraduate students in the process of
science. BEST will promote evidence-based instruction through the use of
Scientific Teaching (ST)-with its emphases on active learning, inclusive
teaching, and assessment-and inquiry-based instruction in laboratory settings.
As a result of BEST, several thousand introductory-biology students will learn
science by doing science, facilitated by TAs who are trained to use evidence-
based practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
rests on the goals to (1) implement a two-semester Scientific Teaching
Certification Series for undergraduate teaching assistants leading labs that
emphasize discovery-from open inquiry to course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CURES); and (2) investigate which training elements are most
effective in helping these teaching assistants facilitate inquiry. Project
evaluation will include direct observations of the undergraduate teaching
assistants while they are teaching, surveys of the undergraduate teaching
assistants, and measures of learning by students taught by teaching assistants
who received this training and those that did not. Both the trained
undergraduate teaching assistants and their students will benefit from this
project. Teaching assistants who complete the certification series will acquire
increased knowledge about the core concepts of active learning, assessment, and
inclusivity; will increase their use of evidence-based teaching practices in
class; will develop increased confidence in their own science abilities; and
will demonstrate increased acceptance of the Scientific Teaching model for
teaching and learning. Students enrolled in lab sections taught by program
participants will demonstrate greater acceptance of the ST model, along with the
gains associated with inquiry-based laboratories and scientific teaching
methods, such as increased confidence in their own science skills, and
improvement in science competencies.