* 1712280
* Technology-Rich Units for Future Secondary Teachers: Forging Dynamic Connections Between Geometry and Functions
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Karen Hollebrands, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 314,816.00

This project will address the documented need for undergraduate prospective
secondary mathematics teachers to possess strong content knowledge in order to
develop in their future students the rich mathematical understandings necessary
to pursue STEM careers. While preservice teachers often take twelve or more
undergraduate mathematics courses, they typically fail to see the deep
mathematical interrelationships between the courses and their relevance to the
mathematics they will teach. Prospective teachers need experiences in thinking
about and knitting together these big mathematical ideas as well as making clear
their applicability to school mathematics. This project will create and test
five web-based units for preservice teachers that address these goals by
promoting an interactive, geometry-based approach to middle school and high
school mathematics through the use of web-based technology.

The project will build on the foundations of cognitive science, technology, and
pedagogy to advance the goal of strengthening the mathematical background of
future mathematics teachers. It will employ a geometric approach to functions as
an overarching framework for technology-rich investigations of geometric
transformations, analytic geometry, trigonometry, complex numbers, and relative
rates of change with connections to calculus. Additionally, the project will
capitalize on the ability of Web Sketchpad, a new web-based software, to design
mathematical tools tailored to the needs of each particular activity. The
project will construct measures aligned with each unit to assess what preservice
teachers learn, pilot test each unit and make revisions based on data
collection, and design teacher support materials for implementation. Project
curriculum materials and project findings from the research will be shared with
mathematics teacher educators to inform their preparation of secondary
mathematics teachers. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program will provide
co-funding for this project in recognition of its alignment with the broader
teacher preparation goals of the Noyce effort.