* 1712909
* Collaborative Research: New Measurements to Understand Coastal Ozone Production During the 2017 Lake Michigan Ozone Study
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Elizabeth Stone, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2019
* USD 138,483.00

This project includes a multi-institutional team of scientists who are making
advanced in-situ atmospheric measurements to investigate questions relevant to
ozone formation and the occurrence of high concentrations of atmospheric ozone
that can be damaging to human health. The Lake Michigan Ozone Study includes
remote sensing activities being supported by NASA and the US EPA. The project
will provide training for graduate and undergraduate researchers in atmospheric
chemistry and build regional capacity in atmospheric science through a
collaboration between university, state, and federal
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the proposal are
to: (1) establish concentrations and speciation of key ozone-related chemicals
(volatile organic compounds (VOC), nitrogen oxides (NOy), and VOC oxidation
products) at a representative coastal site where high ozone levels commonly
occur; (2) quantify and explain the role of the above species in dictating the
production efficiency and NOx sensitivity driving coastal ozone; (3) determine
the particulate and ozone influences of biogenic-rich and biogenic-poor regional
air masses, urban plumes, localized emissions, and shipping for regional
atmospheric chemistry; and (4) diagnose shortcomings and advance model skill for
simulating critical aspects of coastal meteorology and chemistry in the current
and future atmosphere. The results will improve the ability to predict high
ozone episodes that may be harmful to human health and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists supported by this award will
deploy a Proton Transfer Reaction Quadrupole Interface Time-of-Flight Mass
Spectrometer, an Iodine Chemical Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer,
and off-line measurements of aerosol chemical and physical properties during the
summer of 2017 at the Zion site in Lake County, Illinois located approximately
1000 m from the Lake Michigan coastline in the Illinois Beach State Park. The
data collected will provide the additional information needed to address the
important questions related to coastal ozone chemistry and its representation in
current chemical transport models.