* 1712119
* AF:Small:Geometric and Combinatoric Algorithms for Contact and Intersection Representation of Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stephen Kobourov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,062.00

Networks of nodes connected by links are a useful abstraction in many areas --
from sociology and biology to engineering and transportation. Networks are used
to model causal structures, hierarchies, and scheduling. Although networks are
typically drawn as node-link diagrams, several areas use geometric
representations of networks (molecules in chemistry or floor-plans in
engineering). This project explores intersection and contact representation of
networks, where nodes are geometric objects (e.g., rectangles, segments) and
links are realized by intersections (e.g., segments crossing) or contacts
between the objects (e.g., rectangular duals). A geometric representation is
more than just a way to display the network; it reveals underlying combinatorial
structures which can often be described only using geometry. The goal of this
project is to leverage these connections and build new bridges between geometry
and combinatorics, in order to develop algorithms for intersection and contact
representations of networks, with broader impact in information visualization,
network analysis, and computational cartography. Educational activities, such as
new coursework development, graduate and undergraduate student advising and
outreach are integral parts of this project. Finally, continuing the
investigator's tradition of implementing new algorithms and deploying software,
dissemination of results will not only be accomplished by publishing in
scientific journals, organizing workshops and seminars, but also by making
software and data available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research agenda
is to identify connections between geometry and combinatorics in the context of
intersection and contact representations of graphs. As a result of studying the
classes of graphs that can be represented as contacts between simple polygons
(e.g., triangles and quadrilaterals), the combinatorial properties of these
graph classes will be used to design algorithms for constructing such
representations. Efficient algorithms will be designed and implemented for
constructing proportional (value-by-area) contact representations and for
creating static and dynamic cartograms. These problems are addressed on two
fronts: (a) by finding necessary and sufficient conditions for specific types of
intersection and contact representation, developing new representation
algorithms, and establishing tight bounds for the problems; and (b) by directly
applying the theoretical results to practical problems in information
visualization and cartography, as well as implementing and experimentally
evaluating the new methods, which are made available as fully functional online
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.