* 1712141
* Increased Access to Authentic Research Through a Linked Sequence of Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences in Organic and Analytical Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Joi Walker, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 07/31/2021
* USD 355,972.00

The ChemCUREs project will implement a Course-Based Undergraduate Research
Experience (CURE) sequence in Chemistry that links a lower-division, organic
chemistry course to an upper-division, analytical chemistry course. The goal of
ChemCUREs is to transform the relationship between academic coursework and
science research to enrich students' experience and enable greater research
productivity for participating science faculty. The focus of student research
will be the tardigrade, a microscopic extremophile, which produces sugar
molecules to survive desiccation and freezing. ChemCUREs students will first
create a variety of modified sugar molecules in the organic CURE, and then test
the interaction properties of those molecules in the analytical CURE. The study
of these modified sugar molecules should lead to insights for the development of
new cell preservatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ChemCUREs will build on documented
evidence of improvement in students' perceived participation and persistence in
science coursework when enrolled in CUREs. In order to ascertain the causal
mechanisms underlying the effectiveness and sustainability of CUREs, a
comprehensive education research design will inform the collection of evidence
from faculty and students in three university laboratory contexts: CUREs,
conventional laboratory courses, and research internships. Assessments of
student learning will focus on experimental problem solving, laboratory skills,
and writing in context for the three student cohorts. Evaluation of faculty will
center on their development and implementation of ChemCURE series and their
revision of the CUREs using empirical evidence. Ultimately, the project will
result in a transformed and sustainable system, and the process of course
transformation will provide a unique opportunity to examine the effect of a CURE
sequence that links a lower-division course to an upper-division course.