* 1712014
* A robotic telescope for rapid astronomical observations and demonstration of hybrid adaptive optics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Christoph Baranec, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 981,497.00

Adaptive optics is a method of correcting telescope images for distortion caused
by the Earth's atmosphere. This technology enables ground-based astronomical
telescopes to achieve resolutions otherwise obtainable only from space. In this
project, Baranec and collaborators build upon their highly successful precursor,
Robo-AO, to deploy a second robotic adaptive optics system. Innovations and
upgrades will enable this new system to detect tens of thousands of astronomical
objects per year and respond within minutes to unexpected discoveries. It will
be deployed at the University of Hawaii 2.2. m telescope on Mauna Kea, one the
world's best observing sites. It will inform development of adaptive optics on
larger astronomical telescopes and provide training for students including
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This current instrument will have
several notable improvements over the previous design. It will use a Selex
Avalanche Photodiode Infrared Array (SAPHIRA) IR detector, whose development for
adaptive optics is being independently supported by NSF. Other upgrades will
include a deformable mirror with more actuators (MEMS device from Boston
Micromachines), and a UV laser guide star system. The UV laser simplifies
scheduling observations because it is not a safety threat to aircraft. This
project will demonstrate the hybrid-AO technique in which wavefront sensing of
the laser guide star is used to improve the faintness limits obtainable with
simultaneous sensing of natural guide stars. This innovation greatly increases
the on-sky availability of suitable targets for adaptive optics astronomical
observations.