* 1712210
* Collaborative Research: vObjects - Understanding their Utility to Enhance Learning of Abstract and Complex Engineering Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Scott Huxtable, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2022
* USD 229,562.00

Thermodynamics is a subject that often features engineering problems that are
not well-defined and abstract concepts that are often hard for students to
understand. In addition, the scale at which thermodynamic phenomena occur makes
it difficult, if not impossible, for students to interact with authentic
physical objects that exhibit such phenomena. To address these challenges, this
project will use virtual objects (vObjects) to enhance learning by closely
mapping the learner experience to real-life engineering scenarios. This study
will be one of the first to systematically evaluate characteristics and features
of a virtual learning environment designed to support the "messiness" of real
world problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ
technological advancements for manipulation of vObjects to help students apply
foundational knowledge to the solution of ill-defined problems and to address
the improvement of virtual learning for future engineering curricula. A
comprehensive understanding of the utility of vObjects in engineering will
contribute to the development of online learning environments, including
augmented reality environments. Virtual learning of engineering skills can also
be used as a tool for broadening participation in STEM by providing the
opportunity for greater access by diverse students. In broad terms, this
research will contribute to improving and transforming undergraduate engineering
education by enhancing student learning of theoretical and abstract engineering
concepts.