* 1712682
* Probabilistic Methods in Discrete Structures and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Robert Hough, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

This is a project developing quantitative results in probability theory,
analytic number theory, and connections between the two fields. Probabilistic
reasoning has played an important role in several recent breakthroughs in number
theory, including the solution of Paul Erdös' minimum modulus problem for
covering systems, which had been open since the 1950s. One aspect of this
project refines the analysis to study the related odd covering problem.
Techniques used in analytic number theory can be employed to study models in
statistical physics that are governed by Markov chains. Often these techniques
give rigorous proofs of phenomena observed in computer models, and sometimes the
rigorous analysis uncovers errors from model predictions that result from a
limited model size. The project aims to extend recent strong estimates on the
spectral expansion of the shape of cubic fields to similar spectral estimates
for the shapes of quartic and quintic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution
of the minimum modulus problem combines the method of moments with techniques
from probabilistic combinatorics, including the Lovasz local lemma and the use
of pseudo-random measures. In developing quantitative results regarding covering
systems, this project will apply structural decomposition techniques currently
in use in additive combinatorics. Oscillatory integrals, the method of
stationary phase, and van der Corput's method are used frequently in analytic
number theory to obtain sharp estimates. These techniques are often useful also
in the asymptotic analysis of the mixing time of Markov chains, and will be
employed in continued work on analysis of the two-dimensional abelian sandpile
model and a new local limit theorem on nilpotent groups.