* 1712517
* University of Utah - Operation of the Telescope Array, TALE, and the TAx4 Expansion
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,424,080.00

Cosmic rays are highly energetic sub-atomic particles from space that travel at
velocities near the speed of light. The origin of cosmic rays and their
acceleration mechanisms are unknown, but they likely originate in extreme
astrophysical phenomena both within and beyond our galaxy. The Telescope Array
(TA) is the largest cosmic ray observatory in the northern hemisphere. Located
outside Delta, Utah, and representing a joint US-Japanese effort, TA was
designed to study the nature and origin of the highest energy particles in the
Universe. This award to the University of Utah supports the continued operation
of TA, the TA Low Energy extension (TALE), and the expanded observatory (TAx4)
as it comes online. The University of Utah is the host institution for TA and
therefore plays a critical role in its daily operation. This award will also
support the University of Utah group's involvement in the Astrophysics Science
Project Integrating Research and Education (ASPIRE) program, which engages area
teachers, students, and the public through a web site of interactive educational
materials and visits to local schools. The group will also host associated
experiments in other fields that benefit from the TA location and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the TA experiment
are to measure the energy and spatial distributions, and the chemical
composition of the highest energy cosmic rays in order to address the nature and
origin of ultra-high energy cosmic rays. The cosmic ray physics group at the
University of Utah plays critical roles in the design, integration, deployment,
operation, and management of TA. These efforts include facility and detector
maintenance, staffing for observing shifts, data handling, simulation and
analysis, and maintaining compliance with the Bureau of Land Management
regulations.