* 1712384
* Collaborative Learning in Cloud-based Virtual Computer Labs
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Yi Pan, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 333,072.00

Computer labs in which students work through assignments using specialized
software and/or hardware play a critical role in computing education and in STEM
education in general. Traditionally these computer labs have been carried out in
computer centers on campus due to the need for specialized software and/or
dedicated hardware. Collaborative labs help students to: (1) learn through
experience, (2) leverage the perceptions of their learning partners, and (3)
form their own opinions through social constructivism. The evidence to date is
that collaborative labs consistently demonstrate positive effects on student
achievement, self-esteem, and attitude toward learning. Advances in cloud
computing and virtualization technologies enable students to complete labs on
virtualized resources remotely through the Internet. However, while virtual
computer labs provide anywhere, anytime, on-demand access to specialized
software and hardware, the virtual workspaces to which students are assigned
lack support for sharing, causing the collaborative aspect of learning to be
lost. This project serves the national interest in producing a highly-qualified
STEM workforce by developing and evaluating an environment that supports
collaborative learning in cloud-based virtual computer
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to integrate three models
of virtual collaboration into a collaborative lab software tool: shared remote
collaboration, virtual study rooms, and a virtual tutoring center. The
environment will allow students to reserve virtual computers labs with multiple
participants and will support remote real-time collaboration among the
participants during a lab. The learning environment will be evaluated in
computer science and other STEM discipline courses, and a virtual tutoring
center for evaluation will be developed. The collaborative lab environment has
the potential to significantly enhance students' collaborative learning in
cloud-based virtual computer labs and benefit a wide range of universities and
colleges that use virtual computer labs in education. It is expected to support
collaborative learning in many STEM disciplines using virtual computer labs,
benefitting traditional undergraduates as well as returning adult and distance
learning students in both formal and informal settings. The collaborative lab
software tool will be distributed as an open source project with all materials,
designs, and source code available on a public web site for wide dissemination.