* 1712872
* State Space Models:  A New Look at Smoothing, Parameter Inference, and Model Choice
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Pierre Jacob, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 202,589.00

Time series are repeated observations of objects over time; for example, hourly
prices of a financial asset, daily population sizes of plankton in the ocean, or
monthly case counts during a disease outbreak. All of these examples are
routinely studied using state space models, under which observations are treated
as noisy measurements of an unobserved stochastic process. The underlying
process can be modeled using any equation considered relevant for the object at
hand, but flexibility comes at a computational cost. For instance, if the
process is modeled using nonlinear differential equations, the associated
statistical computations might become prohibitive. This is particularly acute
for long and high-dimensional time series. This project introduces new methods
for three important questions regarding state space models: how to estimate the
unobserved process, how to estimate the model parameters, and how to compare
multiple models. These historical questions will be revisited in the contexts of
parallel computing hardware, of large datasets with vast amounts of missing
values, and of limited prior information on the parameters. The toolbox under
development will participate in a global effort to quantify uncertainty in
scientific models for time series. It will be implemented in efficient and user-
friendly software packages, made publicly available during the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State space models form a very flexible class of
time series models, under which observations are assumed conditionally
independent given a latent stochastic process. The project concerns three
fundamental questions in these models: latent process estimation, parameter
estimation and model choice. For latent process estimation (1), an unbiased
estimator of smoothing expectations is developed and investigated. The approach
relies on a novel coupling of particle filters, using maximal couplings and
ideas from optimal transport. The unbiasedness property allows a complete
parallelization of the estimation procedure, and the construction of reliable
confidence intervals. For parameter estimation (2), similar couplings of
particle filters can be leveraged to drastically reduce the variance in score
estimators and in Metropolis acceptance ratios, especially for long time series.
For model comparison (3), a novel criterion is investigated following a
predictive sequential approach. It is designed for situations where prior
information on parameters is limited, contrarily to Bayes factors. The project
aims at helping current users of state-space models, for instance in
econometrics, genetics, neuroscience, ecology, and marine biogeochemistry, and
to assist scientists for whom currently available methods are insufficient. On a
more fundamental level, leveraging ideas from coupling and optimal transport for
computational methods is of independent interest and paves the way to a wide
range of new sampling and optimization methods.