* 1712423
* Improving Scientific Writing In Undergraduate STEM Classrooms: A Training Program for Students and Teaching Assistants Aided By Information Extraction Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Allen Johnson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 278,578.00

Scientific thinking and communication skills are vital for 21st century STEM
careers. Research indicates that cycles of writing drafts, receiving actionable
feedback and coaching, then making further refinements until a final product
emerges is the most effective way for students to develop these skills. Ideally,
students should be writing and revising routinely, but this may be time- and
labor-intensive to be practical in high-enrollment STEM courses. Also, college
teachers may not know how best to make high-impact writing instruction part of
their classes. This project uses a research-based curriculum designed to develop
scientific reasoning skills through writing, combining text analysis technology
with an integrated writing training program. The project will test whether
students' writing skills development can be accelerated by combining reading and
text annotation exercises, automated feedback using text analysis technology,
and holistic feedback from instructors. Graduate teaching assistants' mastery of
these training methods will also be examined. Finally, the project will look
directly at technology impacts by measuring how much automated feedback students
use, and how that translates into progress towards writing
mastery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to improve scientific
writing skills of undergraduate students by promoting adoption of evidence-based
writing training. The project has three interacting elements. 1) STEM Automated
Writing Help Tool (SAWHET) is a computer-based tool designed to teach
undergraduates scientific writing according to best practice principles. SAWHET
collects texts of draft student lab reports, conducts text analysis, then gives
students tailored feedback. 2) The Biology Thesis Assessment Protocol (BioTAP)
is a protocol for assessing undergraduate STEM research theses. BioTAP will be
used to teach students to score published papers and training reports before
writing their first report. 3) Graduate teaching assistants will be trained to
teach and assess scientific writing more consistently. The central research
question will be addressed: Can an integrated writing training program combining
these three elements accelerate student writing skills development? Assessments
will include standardized student and teaching assistant knowledge, self-
efficacy, and experience surveys; videotape analysis of classroom instruction;
lexical complexity modeling of student writing; qualitative analysis of
instructor comments on reports, and student lab evaluations. This project will
provide much-needed data on how technology support affects development of
scientific writing skills. Project products will include a repository of
approximately 4,000 annotated biology student lab reports that can be used as
training data for linguistic analyses, to test other automated systems, and
other research.