* 1712613
* I-Corps Teams:  Software for Optimized Infrastructure Asset Management, Repair, and Recovery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Iris Tien, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this I-Corps project is to provide a
solution for prioritizing investment in management and retrofit of critical
infrastructure. Critical infrastructure systems include water, power,
transportation, communication, and fuel networks. These systems are
interconnected and interdependent. They are also aging and subject to increasing
hazards, with billions of dollars of investment required to modernize, repair,
and retrofit these systems. This project will identify the critical components
of these systems such that the resources invested have the greatest impact in
mitigating the effects of natural disasters and human attacks on infrastructure,
including minimizing the potential for cascading failures across multiple
systems given an event. It will improve the performance of these systems for
both daily operations and disaster response to provide critical infrastructure
services to communities.

This I-Corps project is based on previous work in interdependent infrastructure
systems modeling. Specifically, a novel probabilistic framework has been
developed to model the complex interdependencies between critical
infrastructures. This captures the effects of events, outages, and component
failures across multiple systems. It includes uncertainty modeling to perform
risk and vulnerability analyses. The I-Corps technology is a generalized
software tool based on this research that accounts for interdependencies, is
developed for both normal operations and unexpected disruptions, and is suitable
to any infrastructure system. Compared to current systems that rely on
experience or subjective judgment, and only consider individual systems, the
technology enables infrastructure owners and system managers to consider impacts
across systems to optimize asset management, repair, and recovery decisions to
improve infrastructure performance.