* 1712800
* Discovering What Matters: Informative and Reproducible Variable Selection with Applications to Genomics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Chiara Sabatti, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

This project will develop statistical methods to discover which variables, in a
large collection, are meaningfully related to an outcome of interest. An example
of the problem is the identification of which genetic variants, among the
millions we measure, influence disease risk. The methods developed will allow
analysis of all variables at the same time, accounting for their
interdependence, and leading to the identification of "actionable" ones. The
approaches put forward come with the guarantee that, on average, a large
fraction of the discovered features truly influence the outcome. The ability to
correctly identify important variables will increase knowledge in many domains,
and allow experts to devise interventions. For example, understanding which of
the variables recorded on a patient are more relevant with respect to his/her
response to therapy, can help develop personalized medical interventions with a
higher success rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed will enlarge the
tool-box available to statisticians and data scientists as they attempt to
extract meaningful information from datasets comprising a very large number of
variables. The approach builds on the "knock-off" framework, a very flexible and
novel approach that does not require specifying a model for the relation between
an outcome of interest and possible co-variates. The inferential guarantees
provided are on the selected variables, with control of the False Discovery Rate
(FDR), where a discovery is considered false if a selected variable is
independent of the outcome given the remaining covariates. This provides
assurance on the reproducibility of results, as well as on their
interpretability. The approaches developed will be used to analyze genetics
datasets with the goal of obtaining more complete models of how DNA variation
influences medically relevant phenotypes. This project is supported by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.