* 1712678
* Smart Cities and Connected Communities: A Workshop Bridging Rural, Peri-Urban and Urban Sustainability
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Sabine O'Hara, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This is a workshop sponsored by the National Science Foundation in conjunction
with the National Institute of Food and Agriculture. The workshop, "Smart Cities
and Connected Communities: A workshop bridging rural, peri-urban, and urban
sustainability" brings together leaders in science, technology, and community
and economic development to identify research challenges addressing challenges
in sustainability in food production and distribution in the context of smart
and connected communities. Some of these challenges include increased food and
nutritional security through high output and resilient local agriculture
technologies and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop agenda includes a
mixture of plenary and targeted short talks, and breakout sessions. Key
questions to be addressed include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) What are the
commonalties/differences that rural, peri-urban, and urban communities face in
building&lt;br/&gt;smart, connected, and sustainable communities?&lt;br/&gt;b)
What examples of connected communities focused on food systems security and
nutritional security&lt;br/&gt;exist, and what have we learned from
them?&lt;br/&gt;c) What strategies will meaningfully increase the resilience and
reliability of connected agricultural&lt;br/&gt;communities?&lt;br/&gt;d) What
measures can be consulted to assess progress toward smart, connected and
sustainable&lt;br/&gt;communities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discussion on these
specific questions will help inform new research strategies as we look towards
building future smart and connected communities bridging rural and urban
settings.&lt;br/&gt;