* 1712803
* Understanding How Narrative Elements Can Shape Girls' Engagement in Museum-Based Engineering Design Tasks
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,341,588.00

Makerspaces and engineering design spaces have proliferated in science museums,
schools, libraries, and community settings at a rapid pace. However, there is a
risk that some of the same inequities that exist in the engineering field are
being replicated in these settings. Research has provided evidence of persistent
gaps between boys' and girls' levels of interest in engineering as it has been
traditionally represented in informal learning environments, particularly in
Making and engineering spaces. This Research-In-Service to Practice project
intends to address this gap by employing a design-based research approach to
examine if and to what extent narrative elements can interest and engage middle
school girls in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and
promote equitable, effective engineering design experiences and practices. This
work is significant, as it will build upon current research and conceptual
understanding of how to design narrative-rich engineering design activities for
informal learning spaces, especially for girls, and within museum drop-in
experiential learning contexts. It will also contribute to the evidence base
regarding how girls approach and choose to persist in solving engineering design
problems. The project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New
York Hall of Science (NYSCI) in collaboration with the Amazeum in Bentonville,
Arkansas, the Tech Museum of Innovation in San Jose, California, the Creativity
Labs at Indiana University and a team of advisors will conduct the 30-month,
design-based research project in two phases. In the first phase, NYSCI will
garner ongoing input from its partners to develop parallel versions of six pairs
of engineering design activities, one with narrative elements and one without.
These activities will be iteratively tested in NYSCI's Design Lab, a 10,000
square foot exhibition devoted to hands-on exploration of engineering design.
Several research questions will be explored, focused primarily on building
evidence-based design knowledge, establishing appeal and comprehensibility, and
understanding facilitation. Observational and interview data will be garnered
from 30 girls aged 7-14 and their family groups for each of the twelve
activities developed, totaling 360 girls in the study sample. The results of the
research on the paired activities will be iterative and provide insight on how
narrative elements can most effectively invite girls into sustained engagement
with the core engineering concepts and practices highlighted in each activity.
In the second phase, formative and summative evaluation will be conducted to
study the impact of the narrative and non-narrative versions of the engineering
design activities on participating girls' engagement and persistence, by
contrasting the quality of girls' engagement across the two types of activities
while they are implemented across three museum sites. Project deliverables
include journal articles reporting on project findings; documentation of
activities that meet project goals; design guidelines for exhibit and curriculum
developers who are interested in using narrative effectively to frame
engineering design activities; and practical guidance for facilitators seeking
to ensure that they are supporting girls effectively as they explore those
activities.