* 1712220
* Negotiating the Certification-to-Workplace Transition: What Helps Pre-service Middle-School Science Teacher Candidates Bring Responsive Teaching Practices to Their Classrooms?
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,473.00

The pre-service teacher certification program for middle school mathematics and
science teaching at the University of Maryland, College Park, faces a problem
also confronted by other mathematics and science teacher preparation programs.
The University's Middle School Mathematics and Science Teacher Certification
Program focuses on helping future teachers learn ways to elicit and build upon
middle grades students' common-sense knowledge and ways of thinking -- an
approach used by exemplary teachers and supported by research about K-12
students' learning. Many of the future teachers buy into this approach to
teaching in principle, but once they graduate from the certification program and
become professional teachers, many of them rarely if ever approach their
teaching in this way. This project explores why this occurs, with the goal of
informing modifications to the certification program that could help teachers
apply, more frequently and more fully, effective teaching practices learned in
their certification program. The project, funded by the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education (IUSE) program and the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program,
will inform improvements not only to the particular teacher preparation program
studied in the project but to the hundreds of other programs that emphasize
helping future teachers learn similar sets of effective teaching
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the Middle School Teacher
Certification Program mentioned above focuses on responsive teaching -- a set of
approaches in which teachers consistently notice, attend to, interpret, and
respond to the substance (as opposed to just the correctness) of students' ideas
and adjust their instruction accordingly. A growing body of research suggests
that responsive teaching can help diverse students learn science, and a growing
number of teacher education programs are attempting to support novice teachers'
responsive teaching practices. To help pre-service teachers (PSTs) learn
responsive teaching, the Middle School Teacher Certification Program engages
PSTs in pedagogies of practice-based teacher education: PSTs observe models and
representations of responsive teaching, they "approximate" responsive teaching
by practicing with a classroom of virtual student "avatars," and they enact
responsive teaching in lessons in their early field experiences. The goal of
this research project is to explore the extent to which PSTs in the program
focus on core practices of responsive teaching and enact responsive teaching
practices in their student teaching as well as in their first years in the
workforce. The project takes a qualitative case study approach, triangulating
between cases studies of particular program courses and longitudinal case
studies of particular PSTs as they navigate the transition from the program into
teaching. The data collected includes video recordings of PSTs engaged in the
practice-based pedagogies of the courses, recordings of each PST with the
avatars, PSTs' program coursework, interviews with case-study participants, and
observations and video recordings of case study participants in their student
teaching and in their first year of teaching. This small-N exploratory study
helps articulate hypotheses and explanations about preparation for responsive
teaching that will inform future large-N multi-institutional research and future
design-based research on individual PST programs.