* 1712056
* The STEM Faculty Institute to Promote Faculty Change
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Nelson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2023
* USD 324,945.00

The STEM Faculty Institute at Brigham Young University (BYU) will provide
intensive training on student-centered teaching strategies for faculty members
from the colleges of Life Sciences, Physical and Mathematical Sciences, and
Engineering. Over the course of the project, as many as 10,000 students in
large, introductory STEM courses will be affected by these improved teaching
methods, resulting in improved success and retention in STEM majors, and
contributing to the national need for a highly skilled STEM workforce. In
addition to analyzing the impacts on engaged student learning, the project will
study factors that influence faculty motivation for improving the quality of
their teaching practices, contributing knowledge about how to best structure
faculty development programs for maximum impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM
Faculty Institute will support institutional change through an evidence-based
faculty development program with four components: (1) intense training that will
include an annual week-long summer workshop to assist faculty members in
understanding student-centered teaching theories and developing their own
classroom techniques and strategies; (2) mentoring by colleagues who will work
closely with them over the course of two semesters, supporting their
implementation of evidence-based teaching practices; (3) accountability based on
the production and evaluation of deliverables; and (4) meaningful incentives,
including open badges that certify participant success at student-centered
teaching, for recognition and rank advancement. To improve understanding of how
to motivate faculty to change their instructional practices, the project team
will gather quantitative and qualitative data about how faculty members are
experiencing this process of change, and about the effect of increased use of
student-centered instructional practices on student learning and engagement at
BYU. In a design-based research cycle, the results from each year will be used
to refine the structure of the STEM Faculty Institute and improve faculty
success in pedagogical change. Ultimately, this project will improve student
learning, engagement, and retention in STEM fields by supporting faculty
implementation of evidence-based teaching practices.