* 1712774
* EAGER: Linking the Chlorine and Carbon Cycles in the Arctic Coastal Plain
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* David Lipson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 211,359.00

The element, chlorine, is not normally studied in natural environments, except
in areas that have been contaminated with toxic compounds like pesticides,
industrial solvents or radioactive 36Cl. It is often assumed that chlorine
enters non-contaminated ecosystems mostly in the form of chloride (the same
negative ion in table salt), and that chloride does not interact with plants or
soil microorganisms. However, there is growing evidence that chloride is taken
up and transformed by plants and soil microorganisms into complex chlorine-
containing organic compounds. In environments where oxygen is scarce, some
bacteria can use these chlorinated organic compounds instead of oxygen in a form
of anaerobic respiration called organohalide respiration (OHR). In this way,
these bacteria can quickly use up energy sources that would otherwise be used to
produce methane. This means that an active biological chlorine cycle could
reduce the amount of methane that is released into the atmosphere. Methane is a
strong greenhouse gas, trapping about 30 times as much heat per molecule as
carbon dioxide. The Arctic region has been warming faster than the rest of the
planet, and large amounts of organic carbon are stored in Arctic soils. It is
thus important to understand how much soil carbon will be lost to the atmosphere
in the form of carbon dioxide or methane, since these two gases have different
effects on the climate the climate system. This project measures rates of
biological chlorine cycling in locations across the Arctic Coastal Plain of
northern Alaska, and tests whether organohalide respiration does in fact
significantly reduces methane production in these areas. This project could
inform models of greenhouse gas emissions, improve understanding of the fate of
chlorinated contaminants in Arctic soils, and further the basic science of
biological chlorine cycling. The project will involve students at a minority-
serving institution (San Diego State University) and a high school teacher, who
will lead broader outreach and education efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research addresses the following two questions: (1) Does OHR inhibit
methanogenesis via competition for H2? (2) How does the relative magnitude of Cl
cycling and its relationship to CH4 flux change along a coastal-inland gradient
in the Arctic Coastal Plain? The experimental approach consists of a field
survey that compares CH4 fluxes and indicators of Cl cycling along a gradient of
coastal influence from Barrow to the foothills of the Brooks Range, and a
laboratory incubation experiment to study the relationships among OHR,
methanogenesis, other terminal electron acceptor processes, and H2 availability.
Indicators of Cl cycling include sizes and transformation rates of soil Cl
pools, metagenomes describing the relative abundance of genes and microbial taxa
associated with Cl cycling and other anaerobic processes, and 37Cl and 36Cl
isotopic analysis to infer the dominant Cl cycling processes and to constrain
long-term cycling rates. The laboratory incubation will follow anaerobic
processes (OHR, iron reduction, methanogenesis, acetogenesis, and sulfate
reduction) in microcosms varying in Clorg and H2 concentration to establish the
thermodynamic hierarchy among these processes and whether competition is
alleviated by increased H2.