* 1712389
* Connecting Physics and Engineering through a Modernization of the Advanced Laboratory Curriculum (CPE-MALC)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Austin Harton, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 298,727.00

Connecting topics, experiments and methods in physics and engineering through
the modernization of the advanced laboratory curriculum plays a significant role
in motivating student interest and addressing the national needs in the STEM
workplace. Our current workforce environment is one of unprecedented challenges
and opportunities, demanding innovation and leadership skills. Current STEM
students must be forward thinking and community orientated in order to solve
grand challenges and take advantages of diverse opportunities. This Chicago
State University (CSU) project focuses on building on traditional perspectives
to include modern perspectives to address science and engineering applications
to inspire students who can address local and global
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to a complete
modernization of the advanced laboratory curriculum for physics and engineering
students. The project will have outcomes that include: 1) Outlining a curriculum
plan for the modernization CSU's applied physics/engineering laboratory with the
inclusion of modern equipment, applications, and new experimental Learning Lab
modules, 2) Establishing a student learning community that will inform
instructional revisions by incorporating student input through the use the
Learning Assistant Program, and 3) Providing outreach opportunities for
increasing STEM interest by utilizing the student-developed modules at local
high schools. In the first phase of the project, we will design modules that
will include interactive technology, modern research techniques, assessment
materials, and lesson plans leveraging student input through focus groups and
expert input from an external advisory board consisting of university faculty
and industry representatives. The second phase of the program will focus on
assessing the effectiveness of this curriculum and dissemination of the project
to diverse institutions. Specifically, the project will add to the small but
growing body of research on how a modernization of the advanced lab curriculum
can enhance student communication skills, experimental analysis skills, content
understanding, and attitudes and expectations toward experiments and
experimentation.