* 1712188
* Establishing Evidence-Based Curricula for Evolutionary Medicine
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Daniel Grunspan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 292,767.00

Evolution is foundational to biology. Although undergraduate biology majors
often have interest in pursuing careers in medicine and allied health, they may
not have opportunities to engage in evolutionary thinking in the context of
medicine. Evolution has historically been neglected in medical research and
medical education, leaving many medical professionals with an incomplete
understanding of human biology. Evolutionary medicine is a growing
transdisciplinary field that applies evolutionary theory to human health and
understanding our vulnerability to diseases. This perspective has made unique
contributions to almost all major areas of health, including aging, cancer,
infectious disease, mental health, and reproductive health. However, few
resources exist to help college instructors teach the applications of evolution
that are critical for human health. This project aims to provide college
instructors with the resources to enhance the teaching of evolution, a core
concept of biology, in ways that are of most relevance to students who are
planning on careers related to human biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is to establish a suite of resources that can
help evolutionary medicine instructors teach in evidence-based ways: 1)
articulating the core principles of evolutionary medicine and learning goals for
evolutionary medicine courses, 2) developing validated tests based on student
misconceptions in evolutionary medicine that can be used by instructors to
accurately measure student learning in evolutionary medicine, and 3) creating
and curating open-access evidence-based teaching resources and materials. These
resources will provide evolutionary medicine instructors with the tools they
need to teach in student-centered, active learning ways aligned with defined
learning goals and measure the impact of their instruction on student learning.
These resources will be packaged for broad dissemination to have the largest
impact on undergraduate students interested in medicine and allied
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Environmental Biology and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).