* 1712354
* Polar (DCL- 16-119): Collaborative Research: Computational Guided Inquiry for Incorporating Polar Research into Undergraduate Curricula
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Penny Rowe, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2021
* USD 191,833.00

This project will explore impacts on student learning when computational guided
inquiry (CGI) is used to allow undergraduate students to experience polar
research in a meaningful way. In a CGI-structured course, the instructor guides
the students in scientific inquiry using computational tools for managing,
analyzing, and visualizing data. This project will create a set of seven CGI
modules (e,g, Jupyter notebooks, Excel spreadsheets) that will incorporate polar
research and data into a variety of undergraduate classes. The aim is to improve
student climate literacy and to increase student ability to use real data to
conduct scientific inquiry while at the same time enhancing learning outcomes
for course objectives. Instructors will be trained in deploying the CGI modules
in an active learning framework in a summer workshop and will then implement the
modules in a variety of undergraduate classes (atmosphere science, chemistry,
physics, environmental economics, and computer science). Independent evaluation
will be used to explore learning outcomes. A second workshop will address
challenges and lead to improved modules and instructional material that will be
disseminated on an educational website portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will improve our understanding of how students learn, including how
learning outcomes can be improved through integration of (1) use of real-world
data (2) the active-learning technique of classroom flipping and (3)
computational tools. Use of real-world datasets is believed to authentically
engage students in questions that are relevant to them. The CGI modules
represent a novel curricular tool, which has the potential to foster cross-
disciplinary learning: students learn course topics while also learning about
polar data, how to use real data in inquiry, and computer programming. The
proposed work is a first step in testing and evaluating the potential of these
CGI modules to enhance student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
represents a range of broader impacts, including education of undergraduate
students, development of course materials, advancement of active learning
methods and undergraduate student participation in research. This work will
benefit society through increasing climate literacy, understanding of the Polar
Regions and their role in the climate, and computational literacy at the
undergraduate level. Furthermore, the skills acquired by students engaging in
the active learning activities proposed here are expected to be useful in
contexts beyond the classroom. These include collaboration, critical thinking,
data analysis, and problem solving skills, which are vital in helping students
learn to think scientifically about engineering solutions to complex challenges;
these skills are believed to be as critical to successful STEM education as the
content itself. Student engagement in inquiry with real data and bona fide
research tools will help change their self-perceptions from passive learners to
realized scientists. The educational materials developed as part of this
proposal will directly impact a variety of undergraduate courses through the
engagement of instructors from a range of institutions, including state
universities, liberal arts colleges, and community colleges. This project has
the potential of reaching an estimated 1000 undergraduate students during the
grant period. To achieve wider dissemination, and to continue to reach
undergraduate students after the grant period ends, all materials will be shared
in an online educational portal.