* 1712524
* Simulation-Based Inquiry-Oriented Linear Algebra
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ashish Amresh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2023
* USD 337,999.00

A well-established National workforce need and critical challenge is to recruit
and train students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
fields. Since mathematics is a fundamental part of all STEM disciplines, success
of undergraduate students in mathematics is a crucial ingredient to address this
challenge. Linear algebra is a vital transition course for students in the STEM
disciplines because of its unifying power within mathematics and its
applicability to areas outside of mathematics. Accordingly, effective
instruction at this stage in students' development is paramount. The focus of
this project will be to improve teaching, learning, and student success in
linear algebra by incorporating a blending of technology and several learning
theories and applications to lead to new research results and production of
curriculum resources. This project will leverage the investigators' previous
research and curriculum development in Inquiry-Oriented Linear Algebra (IOLA)
and expertise in Technology Based Learning to explore the unification of
curriculum design and technology design theories and
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to: (1) create a
digital platform that will equip students with a virtual experience of a version
of the IOLA curriculum; (2) document the affordances and constraints for
learning using a game platform (IOLA-G) in comparison to face-to-face
instruction by experienced IOLA instructors; (3) compare different digital
gaming formats to determine which are most conducive to inquiry-oriented
learning; and (4) use the knowledge gained from (1), (2), and (3) to improve
student learning through the developed technology, and, reflexively, to enhance
the existing IOLA curriculum and teacher support resources. The project team
will investigate students' mathematical activity and learning while the students
are engaged with the digital platform and will use this insight to inform
further refinement of design. Building on prior research efforts in the learning
and teaching of linear algebra and expertise in Game Based Learning (GBL), the
team will design IOLA-G to mimic the problem-centered approach of the existing
IOLA curriculum and will iteratively refine this platform through teaching
experiments with students throughout the project. The project also will explore
the extent to which GBL can provide a dynamic approach to addressing the
constraints that larger class sizes place on instructors' implementation of
inquiry-oriented curricula. In addition to, and as part of the process of,
creating the resource technology, the investigators will incorporate a mixed
methods approach with a blending of game-based learning design, curriculum
design theory, and research from inquiry-based learning to explore the following
research questions: What are the mathematical practices that students engage in
and the conceptual understandings students develop using IOLA-G compared to when
using only the face-to-face IOLA curriculum? What are the affordances and
constraints of different game environments in terms of enacting an inquiry-
oriented curriculum? The impact of the project will include the positive effects
on STEM discipline student learning, knowledge, abilities, and overall success,
which will lead to strengthening United States workforce needs in STEM areas.