* 1712378
* GeoConnections: Evaluating the Impact of Place-Based, Culturally-Relevant Geoscience Learning Modules on Undergraduate Students' Connections to Geoscience Concepts and Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Jonathan Harbor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

GeoConnections is a research project designed to test the idea that including
cultural relevance in introductory geology lessons will increase undergraduate
students' connections to geoscience concepts and careers. Researchers from
Purdue University in Indiana and Heritage University in Washington will test
this idea by developing and assessing the impacts of geology activities built
around cultural connections for Native American students. While some research
has been conducted on Native Americans' understandings of geoscience, there has
been less emphasis on recognizing and leveraging common connections Native
students make between their traditional cultures and Western science. Thus, a
key element of this research is to identify connections Native American students
make between introductory geology concepts and their everyday lives and cultural
traditions. The researchers will use these connections in modified geology
activities that connect to the cultural as well as geographical sense of place
experienced by students. This allows the researchers to assess the degree to
which enhancing the cultural relevance of introductory geology activities
increases undergraduate students' connections to geoscience concepts and
careers. This approach may then be used with other student groups and their
cultural connections to geologic concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GeoConnections project will develop and assess Geoscience Education Modules
(GEMs), which are based on cultural and geological connections. The GEMs are
also created with the educational needs of geoscience instructors and Native
American undergraduate students as a guiding focus for creating transformative
learning experiences through metacognitive and reflexive pedagogies. By
collecting and analyzing quantitative and qualitative data on underrepresented
and majority students' knowledge and conceptions of geoscience concepts and
careers, both pre- and post-involvement in GEMs, the researchers will
triangulate the impacts of including culturally relevant educational modules in
undergraduate geology instruction. This will increase the collective knowledge
of Native American views of science within a variety of educational settings and
enhance understanding of the impacts of education based on ways that Native
American students find relevance in Western scientific concepts through their
individual cultures. This has the potential to be valuable to Native American
students who have previously been unable to easily find cultural relevance in
Western geoscientific concepts, and may provide an adaptable and expandable
model to bridge the gap between the educational experiences of underrepresented
groups and the overarching goal to create an equitable learning environment for
diverse populations.