* 1712496
* Developing Innovative Privacy Learning Modules to Engage Students in Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Mengjun Xie, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The rapid development of Internet services such as cloud computing, social
networks, and mobile applications has increased attention to privacy protection
by both industry and academia. Demand for information security is at an all-time
high, creating an urgent shortfall in the national workforce. Despite recognized
and critical societal needs, privacy education has not been integrated
satisfactorily into undergraduate Computer Science (CS) curricula. A serious
lack of effective learning materials to help students understand critical
privacy concepts and gain hands-on skills has created a barrier to expanding
privacy education. To address this concern and better prepare qualified
graduates for the future U.S. workforce, researchers from Prairie View A&amp;M
University (PVAMU) and the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC) will
collaboratively develop hands-on learning materials on privacy protection and
explore optimal integration of privacy into undergraduate cybersecurity
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project serves the national interest by
designing and develop innovative learning modules on cutting-edge privacy topics
identified by federal funding priorities to respond to the lack of hands-on
based curriculum in privacy and cybersecurity education. These new self-
contained learning modules with real-world hands-on labs will not only enrich
the CS curricula at the two participating institutions (PVAMU and UTC), but also
ensure that they can be easily adopted by other institutions. With these
modules, the PIs will revamp related CS core and elective courses, and develop a
new course on privacy, which will have profound impacts on both the CS
curriculum and student learning at PVAMU and UTC. As an HBCU, underrepresented
minorities at PVAMU will benefit from this project. In addition, the project
will evaluate the effectiveness of an experiential learning approach based on
student learning outcomes, experiences, and motivation, and attitudes toward
privacy issues. Project research data, developed learning modules, and teaching
materials will be actively disseminated to the research and educational
community to benefit other institutions and enrich the NSF cybersecurity
learning material repository.