* 1712160
* Collaborative Research: Taking the Long View: Investigating the Role of Biology Interest and Far-Sighted Career Goals on Students' Persistence in STEM career Pathways
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Lisa Corwin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 98,839.00

Many efforts are underway to meet the science and technology workforce needs in
the United States. Although students enter college with interests in STEM
fields, many do not persist in these majors. This project will investigate two
fundamental, yet understudied factors that may limit participation of students,
including those from underrepresented groups in biology careers: the strength of
students' interest in the discipline they are pursuing and the clarity of their
career goals throughout their studies. This proposal lays the groundwork for
investigating the influence of these two factors on post-college preparedness by
documenting the current range of interest and career goals in entering
undergraduate biology majors at two institutions and investigating whether these
factors predict the critical experiences students pursue during their
undergraduate career. Students without clear career goals and interests may not
recognize which experiences are important to pursue during their undergraduate
career, may have trouble choosing among different beneficial experiences, or may
not be motivated to persist when things get difficult. This project will also
advance our understanding about how early students need to develop these goals
and interests to become competitive during college. These findings will inform
the design and deployment of effective interventions to help students develop
career goals and stronger disciplinary interests before they lose opportunities
to access critical experiences.

The intellectual merit of this project is to bring interest development theory
and, for the first time, vocational development theory to characterize the roles
of biology interest and career goal clarity in advancing students' progress in
biology career paths. Retrospective interviews with medical and graduate
students in biology will characterize the timing of and relationships between
students' interest and career goal development and their pursuit of critical
disciplinary experiences during their undergraduate career. A longitudinal study
of a large sample of entering biology majors with different levels of biology
interest and at different stages of career goal development will complement this
analysis by tracking when students acquire critical disciplinary experiences
over the first three years of college. Together, these studies will provide
evidence on 1) how early and how often students who matriculate to medical and
graduate school access critical experiences, 2) whether disciplinary interest
and career goal development impact pursuit of critical experiences and
maintenance of biology career goals, and 3) whether students from historically
underserved groups are less likely to enter college with developed biology
interests and/or career goals. In addition, the project will increase
understanding the importance of biology career pathways as an alternative to the
traditional measure of persistence: retention in the biology major.