* 1712738
* Bridge to the Baccalaureate: Tampa Bay Bridge to the Baccalaureate Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Natavia Middleton, St. Petersburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,499,641.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. The Tampa Bay Bridge to the Baccalaureate
Alliance (TB-B2B) focuses on activities that provides effective educational
tools and resources to prepare underrepresented minority (URM) community college
students for successful transfer to and completion of STEM baccalaureate
degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TB-B2B will use a holistic system to recruit and
strengthen students' preparation for STEM baccalaureate programs by focusing on:
1) awareness and outreach to encourage enrollment into the STEM pipeline through
informal learning events, digital marketing and social networking; 2) intrusive
guidance, deep engagement activities and experiential learning opportunities to
retain students using STEM Learning Communities, including dedicated advising,
peer and faculty mentoring, undergraduate research, internships and job
shadowing; 3) academic supports to fortify math foundations, inclusive of math-
based adaptive learning tools and summer bridge programming; and 4) transfer
guidance to encourage matriculation to STEM baccalaureate programs. Faculty
learning communities and professional development workshops complete the
framework, ensuring an institutional shift in URM student outreach, preparation,
retention and transfer. A comprehensive evaluation allows for greater evidence
demonstrating the efficacy of these interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TB-B2B
is led by St. Petersburg College in partnership with State College of Florida
Manatee-Sarasota and Hillsborough Community College, a Hispanic-Serving
Institution, and the University of South Florida System as an informal partner
and point of transfer. TB-B2B builds on existing articulations between these
institutions to bolster a region-wide effort in STEM degree attainment and
career achievement.