* 1712752
* Metal-insulator Transitions in 2D and 3D Refractory Nitrides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Daniel Gall, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 456,664.00

This project is co-funded by two Division of Materials Research programs: (i)
Ceramics, and (ii) Electronic and Photonic Materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project studies new materials which are expected to
combine two key properties: high-temperature stability and electrically
semiconducting. The combination of these properties is very promising for
various applications, including, for example, devices that convert waste-heat
from automobile engines to electricity, low-power devices for mobile
applications which dramatically increase the time between battery recharging
cycles, and high-speed switching and filtering devices for mobile communication
with enhanced data bandwidth. In this research, two specific materials are
synthesized by combining the required atoms in a vacuum deposition process. Both
of these materials have never been synthesized before, but have been
theoretically predicted to exhibit desired electronic properties that may lead
to the aforementioned applications. The project determines the process for
making these new materials and experimentally quantifies the relevant materials
properties to determine their potential applications. Students are trained for
careers in the semiconductor and defense
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research project
studies metal-insulator transitions in unexplored transition-metal nitrides. It
is motivated by two recent theoretical predictions: (i) TiMgN2 exhibits a stable
ordered phase with a 1.1 eV bandgap and (ii) insulating CrN forms a 2D electron
gas for layers of ~4 nm thickness. The project employs epitaxial thin film
growth, electron transport measurements, and optical characterization techniques
to confirm these predictions and study the composition and quantum-confinement
space for the metal-insulator transitions. The two material systems are used as
starting points to develop nitrides including ternaries and interface materials
with promising opto- and thermo-electric properties. This project has the
potential to create a new research field of "semiconducting transition-metal
nitrides" with potential for transformative impact on the coatings industry by
providing a range of new applications for transition-metal nitrides, ranging
from refractory semiconductors for extreme environments to high-temperature
thermoelectric and optoelectronic materials to new piezoelectric and spintronic
thin films. Graduate and undergraduate students as well as high-school interns
are trained on thin film deposition and electronic characterization methods
which are very important in the coating and semiconductor industries.