* 1712331
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Skills and Success in Introductory Computing
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Mohsen Dorodchi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 44,997.00

Prior research studies have found that low spatial ability is a predictor of
failure in several engineering disciplines. Furthermore, there is evidence that
some students from underrepresented groups in engineering and computer science
(e.g., women and African Americans and Hispanics), demonstrate statistically
lower spatial abilities, but low spatial ability can be improved. Engineering
students who have gone through interventions to enhance their spatial abilities
have succeeded in great numbers in undergraduate engineering programs. While
engineering and computer science are STEM disciplines that are often thought of
as being related, it is still unknown whether spatial ability is also a factor
in student success in computer science coursework. This project will explore
whether spatial ability is a predictor of success in first-year college
computing courses. If so, this project will study whether students with low
spatial abilities can be trained to improve, and whether their performance in
computing classes (and their retention) improves as a result. The short-term and
long-term impacts of improving students' spatial abilities will be determined.
This collaborative partnership includes faculty at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln, Texas Woman's University, and the University of North Carolina-
Charlotte.

Determining the 3D spatial skills components most important to succeed in
introductory computing courses will enable the development of spatial skills
interventions for computing students. The research team will determine the
impact of spatial skills interventions on the performance and overall retention
of computing students. In doing so, it will also explore whether providing
spatial skills training also improves the experience of female and
underrepresented minority students, thus increasing the likelihood that they
will choose to take additional computing classes. This project will demonstrate
a series of approaches that can improve students' spatial abilities. It is
expected that the results of this work could be applied to other domains. For
instance, many researchers within the algorithm visualization community have had
limited successes with the creation and use of educational tools/visualizations.
If there is a correlation between a student's low-spatial ability and the
student's inability to learn from a particular algorithm visualization, this
work will have provided this community with a means to improve the effectiveness
and the impact of the tools/visualizations they are creating to improve student
learning. Results of this project will be disseminated through conferences
papers, workshops, and through a project's web site where all materials will be
accessible to the public.