* 1712155
* Collaborative Research: Scaffolding Pre-service, Early Childhood Teachers to Debug Block-based Programming
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Brian Belland, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2019
* USD 136,725.00

Engaging early grades students with STEM content in an inquiry-oriented manner
is challenging. One way in which this can be done is by having students
participate with robots in dramatic play and other student-centered approaches
to early childhood education. Programming, and, by consequence, debugging, is
critical to the ability to control robot movements. It also contributes to the
development of problem-solving skills. It is unreasonable to expect early grades
students to gain these skills without being helped by a teacher who has the
ability and self-efficacy to engage in debugging. In this three year,
collaborative research project, this Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
(IUSE) Exploration and Design project will prototype and research the
effectiveness of strategies to help pre-service, early childhood education
teachers learn to debug block-based programming. In so doing, the project has
the potential to invite members of a population that is overwhelmingly female
(early childhood education pre-service teachers) to participate in computer
science, a field in which women are drastically under-represented. It also has
the potential to positively influence the teaching of computer science in the
early grades among students who are from low-resourced settings or from ethnic
minority backgrounds - a very important goal for both social justice and
ensuring the widest possible talent pool for the computer science workforce of
the future. This aligns with the goals of NSF's IUSE program in that it seeks to
enhance STEM education processes and outcomes among pre-service, early childhood
teachers, who often suffer from weak STEM education
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific project aims are (a) to determine
the nature of the motivational and cognitive challenges that impede successful
and efficient debugging among pre-service early childhood teachers, and (b)
match scaffolding techniques with specific learner characteristics to promote
successful and efficient debugging among pre-service early childhood teachers.
To address these aims, the project team will engage in 5 studies - (1) an
exploratory study of cognitive and motivational challenges that impede
successful and efficient debugging among pre-service early childhood teachers,
(2) meta-synthesis of exploratory studies (including pilot studies prior to this
project) and clusters of participants according to challenges, (3) data mining
of a scaffolding meta-analysis dataset and prototyping scaffolding strategies,
and (4-5) implementation studies of scaffolding prototypes. Furthermore, the
project team will disseminate results to (a) university educators through
workshops and webinars, and (b) STEM education researchers through publication
of peer-reviewed journal articles. This important work is supported with funding
from the IUSE program and the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program.