* 1712443
* Increasing Diversity and Engagement in Undergraduate Computing with Enhanced Collaborative Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Yunjeong Chang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,971.00

Despite many efforts and investments, women and minorities continue to be
underrepresented in computing disciplines and occupations. This pilot study will
examine the serious and long-standing problems that face female and under-
represented minorities in computing fields. The imbalance is of national concern
as it contributes to the deficit of computing professionals in contrast to the
number of available jobs. With a focus on increasing student engagement and
diversity in undergraduate introductory computing courses, this project will
integrate collaborative learning activities and diversity-focused instructional
strategies to ultimately improve diversity in computing. Introductory courses
are critical as they are the gateway into computing majors, minors, and
concentrations. Further, the availability of computing courses to educate a
scientifically literate populace in computational thinking and problem solving
is steadily increasing, so the impacts of this project are broader than just one
introductory computing course. At the University of Virginia alone, this project
will be deployed to reach more than 2000 students. By improving student
engagement, study results and findings will contribute in three ways: (1)
improving the teaching and learning of future computing professionals, (2)
promoting the participation and persistence of females and under-represented
minorities in computing courses, and (3) establishing a basis for the
development and implementation of collaborative learning strategies throughout a
computing curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the knowledge gains from
two previously funded NSF awards, this project will adapt diversity-focused
instructional strategies to enhance students' engagement in undergraduate
introductory computing courses. The study begins with an exploration of
students' perceptions and needs in computing courses. Recognizing students'
needs, the pre-designed diversity-focused instruction and collaborative learning
activities will be iteratively tailored to support classroom teaching and
learning practice over a duration of multiple semesters. To understand the
relationship between diversity-focused collaborative learning activities and
student engagement in computing, a mixed methods research design approach will
be used to answer specific research questions. Quantitative and qualitative
research methods will be used for deepening understanding of the learning
environments. Research findings will generate new knowledge about ways to
improve instruction for undergraduate computing courses and ultimately will lead
to new understanding of how to extend the practices across the computing
curriculum. To maximize impact, the diversity-focused enhanced collaborative
instructional strategies will be widely disseminated, and the adoption of its
methods and content will be promoted using open digital resources and social
networks, such as Computer Science for All and the National Center for Women
&amp; Information Technology.