* 1712159
* Developing Simulations for Introductory Physics with Feedback from Learning Assistants
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Andrew Duffy, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 295,284.00

Simulations are of great importance in teaching introductory physics. They
illustrate things that are too small to see, happen too fast to see, or cover
concepts that are not visible in everyday life. The use of simulations is one
way to bring these ideas to life, allowing students to investigate and visualize
physics concepts. This project will develop four new simulations for
introductory mechanics and research their effectiveness for student learning.
Some questions to be addressed will be to what extent do simulations help
students learn and what are the features of a simulation that lead to more
effective learning. There is already considerable existing simulation research,
but most of this research was not done on mobile devices (where student
ownership of the device becomes a major factor which this project will make
possible). These simulations are likely to be immediately put into wide use by
the physics community as there are few high quality javascript/HTML5
simulations. The simulations will be publicly available on ComPADRE. A second
research question focuses upon Learning Assistants (LAs): What role can Learning
Assistants (LAs) play in the design, testing, and pedagogical implementation of
simulations? LAs are trained undergraduates who return to a course they took to
help deliver interactive pedagogy and help students learn. In this project, LAs
will apply their expertise to provide feedback about improving the simulations.
This is a novel aspect of the project, possibly leading to new use of LAs
elsewhere in curriculum development. Other data-gathering methods include A/B
testing, think-aloud interviews, and video analysis of students using the
simulations during class, through which the project will investigate conditions
that improve student learning.