* 1712157
* Collaborative Research: Bridging the Gap Between Academia and Industry in Approaches for Solving Ill-Structured Problems
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Bora Cetin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 04/30/2020
* USD 208,949.00

Engineers play a crucial role in the development of solutions to today's complex
problems. Real world engineering problems are inherently ill-structured,
complex, defined by both non-engineering and engineering constraints, often
contain missing or conflicting information, and do not have one 'correct'
solution as typically taught in engineering classrooms. In order to ensure that
engineering graduates are competitive and well-prepared with the skills
necessary for the complex problems in the workplace, efforts are needed to
improve undergraduate education's focus on solving problems. This project will
examine the ill-structured problem solving approaches of undergraduate students,
faculty, and professionals within civil engineering. The investigation will
involve identifying similarities and differences between problem solving
approaches used by engineering professionals and engineering students.
Participants' approaches to problem solving and their personal characteristics
(e.g., years of experience, demographics, learning style, creativity) will also
be studied. Translation from research findings to educational practice will
result in recommendations on improving the instruction of complex, ill-
structured problem solving in undergraduate engineering education. Educational
resources will be developed and disseminated widely to benefit both professors
and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the goal of this research
project is to investigate differences in the problem solving approaches among
engineering students, faculty, and professionals using a mixed-methods data
collection and data analysis approach. A mixed-methods approach is ideal for
such a study as it involves both quantitative and qualitative data sources to
offer a broad and deep examination of engineering problem solving. A diverse set
of participants will be recruited for this study to solve ill-structured
problems using interviews, think-a-louds, and questionnaires. The quantitative
and qualitative data will be analyzed to determine similarities and differences
in the patterns of problem solving across engineering students, faculty, and
professionals. Comprehensive resources will be developed and disseminated for
engineering educators. Such resources will include a guidebook for engineering
faculty on the teaching and learning of ill-structured problems, as well as
instructional modules demonstrating ill-structured problem solving techniques
that can be used in engineering courses. This project has the potential to not
only inform future research studies in the area of complex problem solving in
engineering contexts, but also for research findings to be translated to
educational practice and implications to improve problem solving in
undergraduate classrooms.