* 1712794
* Alaska Alliance LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Brian Rasley, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 3,000,000.00

In Alaska, LSAMP has catalyzed the development of a comprehensive longitudinal
model that begins with middle school students, extends on through high school,
into the undergraduate years, on to graduate school and into the professions.
This model improves the quality of education while decreasing the cost. LSAMP is
the university undergraduate portion of the multi-stage model that started
twenty one years ago. The objective is to effect a systemic change in the hiring
patterns of Alaska Natives in the STEM professions. There are approximately
2,000 students in the pipeline. It is established that this multi-stage model
improves the preparation, increases the participation, and ensures the
contributions of minority students in the STEM enterprise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to: 1. build upon the work in
progress at the transitions between high school and college, and from
undergraduate to graduate school; 2. provide new LSAMP staff personnel on
Alliance campuses; 3. expand the capacity for undergraduate research and build
the capacity to conduct international research; 4. strengthen LSAMP presence on
the Alliance Community campuses. 5. Conduct internal and external research
studies assessing the longitudinal model
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal and external research studies are
helping to refine the model and assist LSAMP and the wider community of
stakeholders in learning about effective practices to broaden participation in
the scientific workforce.