* 1712540
* Immunity to Community: Can Quantifying Immune Traits Inform Reef Community Structure?
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Marilyn Brandt, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 01/31/2020
* USD 39,287.00

Coral diseases have increased significantly throughout the past 30 years.
Climate change and other detrimental environment factors are likely to blame.
Unhealthy coral reefs cannot support the fish and other life that make the reef
a vibrant and diverse ecosystem. Corals reefs in the Caribbean Sea are disease
hotspots and many reefs have experienced population collapses due to outbreaks
of disease. Importantly, coral species vary in their susceptible to disease, but
the reasons behind this variation are unknown. This project will quantify coral
susceptibility to disease by examining coral immunity using several novel
approaches and experiments. Seven species of coral that differ in disease
susceptibility, growth rates, growth form and reproductive strategies will be
used. Immune responses of each species of coral will be measured by exposing the
corals to bacterial immune stimulators. Susceptibility to white plague disease,
a prevalent disease affecting many species of corals, will also be measured by
exposing the corals to active white plague disease and calculating disease
transmission rates. The immune response and disease transmission data for each
coral species will be used to develop a predictive model to determine how
different coral communities will respond to disease threats under climate change
scenarios. This project will support graduate students at University of Texas,
Arlington (Hispanic-serving Institution) and University of Virgin Islands
(Historically Black University) and many undergraduate students at all three
institutions (Mote Marine Laboratory). This research will be highlighted at
outreach events at all three institutions which take place regularly and include
Earth Day Texas in Dallas, TX, Mote's Living Reef Exhibit and Aquarium in
Sarasota, FL and "Reef Fest" and Agricultural fairs in the U.S. Virgin Islands.

Environmental changes, such as ocean warming, have led to an increase in the
prevalence of coral diseases, causing region-wide population collapses in some
locations. However, not all coral species, or even populations within species,
are affected by disease equally. Some species are host to many different types
of diseases, but have limited mortality. Other species suffer significant
disease-related mortality. How and why disease susceptibility differs among
species and the effects of this differential susceptibility on reef community
structure and composition are currently unknown. This project will use immune-
challenge experiments that will quantify novel components of the innate immune
system of corals, coupled with the application of a trait-based model, to
fulfill three goals: 1) Determine variability of coral immune traits in seven
common coral species found on Caribbean reefs, 2) Determine the variability in
resistance to white plague disease transmission in the same coral species 3)
Develop a predictive model of coral community assemblage that incorporates
immune traits. Quantification of coral immunity will also incorporate unique
approaches, such as combining full transcriptome sequencing with protein
activity assays for a gene-to-phenotype analysis. Data will be mapped onto
immune pathways for comprehensive pathway evaluation between coral species and
these will serve as trait inputs into a "traitspace" model. These traits will
provide continuous data within the model, which will create a probability
density function (PDF) for the trait distributions of each species. These PDFs
will then be used to determine the probability of species under different
disease exposure scenarios. Model analyses will determine which traits influence
community structure and characterize how disease exposure and the immune
response will predict community assemblages through space and time. The
completion and application of a trait-base model that incorporates extensive
immunity parameters (none of which have been applied to trait models within
coral ecosystems) is a distinct product from this project.