* 1712554
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Inference Using Random Forests and Related Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Giles Hooker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2021
* USD 215,078.00

This project seeks to develop methods to quantify uncertainty in machine
learning algorithms and &lt;br/&gt;to incorporate machine learning and
statistical inference. Machine learning has been enormously
&lt;br/&gt;successful at using data to make predictions; it is used in an
extensive range of applications &lt;br/&gt;from handwriting recognition to high
frequency trading to driverless cars and personalized medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;However, while machine learning algorithms make good predictions,
they tell humans very little &lt;br/&gt;about how those predictions were arrived
at: What were the important factors? How did they affect &lt;br/&gt;the
prediction? They also don't distinguish predictions for which there is a lot of
information &lt;br/&gt;about the probability of different outcomes (even if that
covers a wide range) from those where &lt;br/&gt;very little information is
available. For example, a machine learning algorithm may very accurately
&lt;br/&gt;predict whether a person is likely to develop diabetes, but provides
little if any information &lt;br/&gt;regarding how that person might lower his
or her risk. This project will build on initial &lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory
to develop methods to explain how Random Forests arrive at their predictions
&lt;br/&gt;and how statistically confident those predictions are, and produce
ways to link machine learning &lt;br/&gt;methods to other statistical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop methods to quantify
uncertainty in machine learning algorithms &lt;br/&gt;and to incorporate machine
learning and statistical inference. The project will extend on a
&lt;br/&gt;theoretical framework representing Random Forests as U-statistics to
produce a practical &lt;br/&gt;implementation of statistical uncertainty
quantification in machine learning. In particular, &lt;br/&gt;it will improve on
methods to estimate sample variability in Random Forest predictions, develop
&lt;br/&gt;computationally efficient screening tools for covariate and
interaction selection, and incorporate &lt;br/&gt;ensemble methods as non-
parametric terms in partially-linear models while retaining statistical
&lt;br/&gt;inference via a modified boosting algorithm. These methods will be
demonstrated on a citizen &lt;br/&gt;science data base in ornithology and in
various biomedical applications.