* 1712724
* Virginia-North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, 2017-2022
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Holly Jackson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2023
* USD 5,000,000.00

The Virginia-North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(VA-NC Alliance) project includes Bennett College, Elizabeth City State
University, George Mason University, Johnson C. Smith University, Old Dominion
University, Piedmont Virginia Community College, St. Augustine's University,
Thomas Nelson Community College, Virginia Commonwealth University, Virginia
Tech, and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, with the University of
Virginia serving as the lead institution. The VA-NC Alliance's robust and
innovative recruitment, retention, graduate school preparation activities, and
data management practices support significantly increasing the following: the
number of under-represented minority (URM) students enrolled in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines; the number of URM
STEM students transferring from community colleges into four-year institutions;
the number of baccalaureate STEM degrees earned by URM students; and the number
of URM STEM students entering graduate school. The Alliance facilitates research
opportunities within many academic institutions, industries, government
agencies, and other organizations to prepare students for graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance-wide longitudinal research project will
examine the impact of STEM intervention programs on students' self-efficacy,
outcome expectations, science identity, and post-graduate decision-making, and
will share best practices. The research team will utilize mixed methods
including surveys and interviews with undergraduates. With a 156% increase in
URM STEM degrees over the previous two phases, the Alliance exceeded its goal
related to broadening participation of students. By tapping into a workforce
previously underrepresented, the Alliance will ensure diverse perspectives are
applied to complex and global problems, benefitting the region and the nation.