* 1712523
* Southern Nevada Northern Arizona LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Keith Rogers, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,627,877.00

The LSAMP Program priorities are to (a) increase individual student retention
and progression to baccalaureate degrees for underrepresented racial and ethnic
groups, (b) enable successful transfer of underrepresented students from 2-year
to 4-yearinstitutions in STEM programs (c) increase access to high quality
undergraduate research experiences, and (d) facilitate seamless transition of
underrepresented students into STEM graduate programs. Southern Nevada Northern
Arizona LSAMP (SNNA-LSAMP) is an alliance of higher education institutions that
includes research universities (University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and Northern
Arizona University) and community colleges (College of Southern Nevada and
Coconino Community College) in the Lower Colorado River Basin. SNNA-LSAMP's goal
is, within five years, to increase substantially the number of underrepresented
minority (URM) students who earn science, technology, engineering, and
technology (STEM) baccalaureate degrees at alliance
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SNNA-LSAMP will provide services and
activities that bolster the academic performance and persistence and graduation
rates of URM STEM students at alliance institutions. Specifically, SNNA-LSAMP
will provide these students with intensive, near-peer mentoring; out-of-class
STEM activities that enhance disciplinary socialization; undergraduate research
opportunities; internships; priority registration for enrollment in STEM
courses; and priority access to all academic support services provided on
alliance campuses. Furthermore, SNNA-LSAMP will facilitate the smooth
transitions for participants transferring from its community colleges to its
universities, as well as provide upper-division participants with step-by-step
guidance through the process of applying to graduate school. SNNA-LSAMP will
improve the STEM classroom experience for URM students by providing workshops
that enhance the multicultural competence of professors and instructors at
alliance institutions. Consequently, SNNA-LSAMP will be a vital component of
efforts to diversify and significantly expand the pool of highly qualified STEM
workers in southern Nevada and northern Arizona, accelerating the region's
ongoing transformation into fertile ground for STEM startups and will be an
attractive destination for established STEM-based businesses seeking to
relocate.