* 1712936
* EAGER: Challenging the broadcast allelopathy paradigm in toxigenic microbial eukaryotic ecology
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Karl Hambright, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 385,114.00

Harmful algal blooms in coastal marine and freshwater systems represent a
serious and growing concern for human and wildlife health, particularly when
these blooms of harmful algae that produce toxins. The invasive, bloom-forming
alga Prymnesium parvum (aka, golden algae) has spread to more than 20 states in
the last two decades, causing massive fish kills and threatening many inland
recreational and commercial fisheries. While a good deal is known about the
chemical nature and effects of golden algal toxins, less is understood with
respect to why these toxins are produced, the mechanisms by which they are
produced, or the means by which they are delivered to targeted organisms, such
as fish. Researchers have long thought that golden algal toxins are produced
during times of stress (as with a lack of sufficient nutrients) and released
into the surrounding water to kill potential competitors and prey, thus freeing
previously unavailable nutrients and alleviating the stress. In truth, however,
this hypothesis is poorly supported by theoretical considerations and
experimental data. This research challenges this long-standing paradigm of algal
toxicity and, with the novel combination of experimentation with genetic,
genomic, and analytical chemical approaches, aims to explicitly characterize how
these toxins are produced and regulated, and how golden algae expose other
organisms to these toxins. Expected results could transform the current toxicity
paradigm and lead to significant future advances in the understanding of harmful
algal blooms within the context of minimizing human and wildlife health risks
associated with exposure to algal toxins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broadcast
allelopathy, the prevailing paradigm in protistan toxicity, lacks convincing
theoretical or experimental support. The objective of this NSF-supported
research is to provide clear and meaningful analysis of toxin production and
delivery in the toxigenic haptophyte Prymnesium parvum. The experimental
approach is twofold, involving 1) novel analytical detection of toxins during
predator-prey interactions, and 2) a genome-guided genetic foundation for
toxigenesis and heterotrophic nutrient acquisition. The central hypothesis is
that toxigenic protists use direct cell-to-cell contact for delivery of toxins
and subsequent uptake and transport of prey cell constituents across the cell
membrane. The underlying rationale of this research is the recent experimental
demonstration that toxicity of P. parvum is mediated by direct prey contact, as
well as the theoretical consideration that delivery of exotoxins by diffusion is
unlikely, and not advantageous to the fitness of individual P. parvum cells.
This research is significant because it will elucidate a fundamental process
through which predation and heterotrophy are supported in toxigenic protists,
and will thereby potentially transform the current toxicity paradigm by
definitively identifying a mechanism for toxin delivery that would provide a
fitness advantage without the need for group selection arguments. Results of
this study will lead to future work focused on the mechanisms of protistan cell-
cell interactions, physiological and biochemical action of protistan toxins,
reassessment of the role of toxicity in bloom formation, and a model for
exploring other toxigenic protistan taxa and the multitude of harmful algal
toxins in aquatic systems.