* 1712287
* Collaborative Research: Data Integration in Undergraduate Mathematics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Carl Lutzer, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 253,052.00

This project will engage early-stage undergraduate students in the mathematical
study of real world problems by using computationally-focused modules that
infuse authentic data into the first two years of the undergraduate mathematics
curriculum. The project will focus on four courses: Calculus I, Calculus II,
Multivariate Calculus, and Linear Algebra at Rochester Institute of Technology
and Nazareth College of Rochester. The leadership team will study the: (i)
impact of computer-based modules on undergraduate students' mathematical
disposition and achievement and (ii) effectiveness of professional development
on undergraduate mathematics faculty. The project will contribute to the study
of data and technology integration in mathematics education at the collegiate
level, and will facilitate the uptake of new methods by developing high-quality
educational tools for educators to use in their classrooms. In this way, the
project will support the National Science Foundation's mission of promoting the
progress of science and advancing the national prosperity. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop in-class modules based on real-world data
so that students have authentic experiences that support and motivate the
investigation of mathematical concepts and techniques; will study the impact of
these modules on undergraduate students' disposition towards and achievement in
mathematics; and will study the effect of professional development on
undergraduate faculty members. Students will be given questionnaires and will
participate in focus groups, courses will be videotaped, and undergraduate
faculty members will be given questionnaires and asked to write reflective
journals. There will be roughly 50 professors trained internally and externally,
and the project will impact approximately 1,000 students distributed between
Rochester Institute of Technology (a technical university) and Nazareth College
of Rochester (a comprehensive college). This project will provide information
about the ways that encountering authentic data affects students' attitudes and
their willingness to engage with computers, and also undergraduate mathematics
faculty members' response to professional development activities. The Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship program will provide co-funding for this project in
recognition of its alignment with the broader teacher preparation goals of the
Noyce effort.