* 1712156
* Strategies for Effective Engagement (SEE)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mohammad Khan, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,953.00

The Departments of Mathematics and Aerospace Science Engineering at Tuskegee
University will jointly develop and implement "Strategies for Effective
Engagement (SEE)". This project will address the challenges of academic
achievement and retention of students enrolled in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) entry-level courses. Factors such as under-
preparation in math, being first generation college students, social challenges,
and an unfamiliar environment away from home have a negative effect on student
motivation, performance, and retention. The SEE project will address these
issues and enhance the students' learning and academic success by implementing a
flipped learning environment, integrating technology with instruction, and
implementing structured mentoring in the entry level math and engineering
courses. This serves the national interest by educating students for the
technical and scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of
SEE is to enhance students' self-efficacy, engagement, and motivation by
integrating active teaching strategies and techniques. The flipped classroom
will allow professors to use face-to-face class time more effectively and engage
students in hands-on active learning opportunities. Innovative teaching methods
that utilize technology and real-world problem solving will be implemented. The
classroom interactions will be supported by math and engineering software. A
consultant, whose expertise is in instructional design and authentic
assessments, will support the project team. Formative and summative assessments
of the pedagogical approach will be carried out through validated instruments of
motivation and self-regulated learning. The intellectual merit of the project
will address how active instruction that spans the disciplines of math and
engineering can foster deep and conceptual learning in a meaningful context.