* 1712206
* Collaborative Research: Geoscience Animation: Construction, Evaluation, and Modification of Plate Tectonic Concepts for Geosciences Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Jeffrey Ryan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2021
* USD 69,987.00

Undergraduate geoscience students learn better if provided with high-quality,
accurate animations of important Earth processes. This project will generate,
assess, and disseminate a set of new animations about fundamental tectonic
processes such as continental rifting, continental collision, transform
faulting, or planetary tectonics. The animations will be tested in classrooms at
the collaborating institutions and will be made available to major science media
outlets like Discovery Channel, National Geographic, and History Channel, in
order to aid them in generating better documentaries on fundamental Earth
processes. The final animations will be highly useful in many classrooms (high
school and undergraduate) since most introductory geoscience courses begin with
lectures on Plate Tectonics and could provide an important improvement in
student understanding of fundamental earth processes that often have a
significant impact on society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
scientifically-vetted and field-tested animations that will illustrate the
concept of 'Plate Tectonics' in the three-dimensional space that is required for
students to comprehend processes and interpret geologic history successfully.
The work is supported by literature on visual learning styles, and these
concepts are incorporated into the assessments. The evaluation methods will
capture misconceptions as part of the formative assessment, which is critical to
developing model animations for release to the general public, as well as
undergraduate students. The project involves a rich collaboration across
disciplines (art, geosciences and communications) and will systematically test
several learning hypotheses in classroom environments of three campuses
(University of Texas Dallas, Richland Community College, Richardson, TX and the
University of South Florida) that typically serve underrepresented communities.