* 1712296
* Creating Pathways for Data Proficiency in Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Suzanne Larson, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2022
* USD 265,853.00

The need for a workforce proficient in statistics, and more recently, data
science, continues to increase. In higher education nationally, statistics
courses are frequently taught in a variety of disciplines, such as mathematics,
biology, economics, engineering, political science, psychology, business, and
education. These courses tend to have discipline-specific motivations and
content emphases, as well as discipline-specific examples and exercises from
which students are expected to learn general concepts in statistics. Students
often are not well served by taking these courses since many of them do not
fulfill the prerequisite requirements for subsequent statistics or data science
courses offered by other departments. Furthermore, these courses are not
necessarily aligned with general recommendations from professional organizations
and standards of statistical practice. The Curriculum Guidelines for
Undergraduate Programs in Statistics, from the American Statistical Association
(ASA), recommends that courses should emphasize working with real data, working
with technology, and communicating ideas. A main goal of this proposal is to
research how to create pathways in which students can become data proficient.
Bringing together representatives from mathematics, biology, economics,
engineering, political science, psychology, business, and education at LMU, this
project will work toward building cohesion among the introductory statistics
courses with an emphasis on those three recommendations from the ASA
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on the needed institutional change to
create pathways, the project will examine the similarities and differences of
how the three themes are manifested in statistics courses across disciplines,
and study faculty and student engagement with the three themes in their teaching
and learning. Data sources will include faculty surveys, classroom observations,
collections of classroom materials and student work, and multi-disciplinary
faculty discourse discussing similarities and differences of statistics across
disciplines. By cross-validating the data sources, the project will address the
research questions: (1) What are common learning objectives, outcomes, and
experiences in introductory and advanced statistics courses across disciplines
and how do these align with ASA guidelines? and (2) To what extent does faculty
teaching and student work demonstrate engagement with the three themes of real
data, technology, and communication across disciplines?