* 1712323
* EAGER:  Environmental fate of double stranded RNA-based bionanocomposites
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Olga Tsyusko, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2020
* USD 149,945.00

Unrine, Jason&lt;br/&gt;1712323 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in RNA
interference technology have enable the introduction of double stranded RNA
(dsRNA)-based pesticides, which are currently being commercialized by the
agrochemical industry. This technology hypothetically enables the targeting of
pest species with only a very specific genetic sequence using silencing of genes
required for their survival, thereby potentially eliminating environmental
health and safety concerns associated with chemical pesticides. dsRNA has poor
stability in the environment and is not readily absorbed by many pest species.
Using nanoparticles to deliver dsRNA can help overcome problems with stability
and facilitate absorption by pests. However, limited information on the
persistence and long-term fate of these materials in soil is available and there
are little established techniques for detecting and characterizing these
materials in the environment. This project will develop techniques to track
these materials in soil and characterize their degradation. The tools developed
and insights gained by this project will enable the development of more benign
nanocomposite pesticides. This will aid in increasing global food security while
helping to avoid unwanted environmental impacts resulting from pesticide
application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project will be to
establish a set of methods to track the fate and transformations of dsRNA
nanocomposites in soil and in soil organisms, to do preliminary testing of their
stability in soil solutions, and to assess possible bio-uptake non-target
effects in soil organisms. It will focus on biopolymer polyplex dsRNA
nanocomposites and inorganic (calcium phosphate) core with a biopolymer/dsRNA
coating. The main hypothesis that will be tested is that binding of dsRNA to a
nanocomposite makes it more persistent in soil and in non-target organisms,
increasing the likelihood of adverse effects. The PI will synthesize
diethylaminoethyl dextran (DEAE), chitosan, poly-L-lysine and poly-L-histidine
coated calcium phosphate particles loaded with dsRNA complimentary to the green
fluorescent protein gene. This gene is present within a genetically modified
strain of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (PD4251) which the PI will use as
a model organism. Because the gene is only expressed within cells in the body
wall, silencing of this gene ensures that the dsRNA has been taken up and
internalized within the worm. Nanocomposites will then be aged in soil solutions
of varying composition for varying lengths of time to determine how
transformations in soil affect their bioactivity. The PI will track the fate of
the nanoparticles in soil solution and in organisms by isotopically labeling
calcium phosphate with the stable 44Ca isotope and fluorescently labelling the
dsRNA. The florescence label will be tracked using asymmetrical field flow
fractionation (AF4) coupled to fluorescence spectroscopy. The isotopically
labelled core will be detected using AF4 coupled to ICP-MS. Bio-uptake of the
materials will be assessed using laser confocal microscopy. The PI will
systematically characterize how soil chemistry and aging time affect
aggregation, disassembly, dsRNA degradation, bio-uptake, specific bioactivity
and non-target effects.