* 1712493
* Building Coherence in STEM Learning Opportunities for Pre-Service Elementary Teachers across Disciplinary Boundaries
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Aaron Bertram, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,976.00

This project will address a fundamental challenge in STEM teacher education.
While growing evidence shows that elementary teachers play a central role in
shaping their students' learning, interests, motivations, and persistence in
STEM fields, teachers face many challenges including underdeveloped content
knowledge, feelings of being underprepared and anxious about teaching STEM, and
a limited number of content and methods courses during their teacher preparation
program. Research on teacher education has repeatedly documented challenges with
a lack of coherence and fragmentation in teacher education programs that further
exacerbates these problems. In recent years, reforms in both mathematics and
science education (Common Core State Standards for Mathematics--CCSSM and the
Next Generation Science Standards--NGSS) have foregrounded and explicitly called
for coherence across STEM disciplines. This challenge is further compounded by
the fact that STEM coursework spans different disciplines and departments (e.g.,
education, science, and mathematics). Prior efforts to organize teacher
education around a common vision have typically focused on building coherence in
an entire program, in a single discipline, or at a large scale across
institutions. This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project in the
Engaged Student Learning track seeks to build intellectual coherence in STEM
learning opportunities for elementary pre-service teachers (PSTs) across a set
of eight redesigned mathematics and science content courses and mathematics,
science, and technology methods courses. This project will advance understanding
of how undergraduate elementary PSTs learn STEM content knowledge, instructional
practices for teaching STEM, and attention to equity and justice in a coherent
and connected approach. This project will involve a working group of faculty
from the College of Education and the College of Science at the University of
Utah, who will collaboratively redesign and implement all STEM content and
methods courses for elementary teachers with a goal of building coherence for
elementary PSTs. This project, with funding from the IUSE program and the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, will produce results that will contribute to
an opening up of the focus on disciplinary connections between STEM fields in a
coherent and rigorous model of elementary teacher preparation for providing
success for all elementary students in STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to deliberately leverage connections across STEM fields to build
coherent and rigorous preparation in content and methods courses across
disciplines and colleges. A focus on two key disciplinary connections
(representations and arguments) that are situated as central knowledge
generation opportunities in classrooms and align with current mathematics and
science reforms, will function as key pillars. This project will build STEM
disciplinary coherence in elementary teacher education to support the
development of ambitious instruction, which is intellectually ambitious with
respect to STEM learning goals for elementary children and socially ambitious
with respect to serving all students across ethnic, racial, socioeconomic
status, linguistic, and gender groups. Ambitious STEM instruction supports all
students in developing conceptual understanding of big ideas in mathematics and
science, solving complex problems, and engaging in authentic disciplinary
practices such as those set out in the CCSSM (e.g., making sense of problems and
persevering in solving them) and the NGSS (e.g., engaging in argument from
evidence). This design-based research project will test, refine, and improve
specific conjectures about the elementary PSTs' learning of content and
instruction in the context of eight redesigned and implemented courses, which
will impact approximately 200 elementary teachers and their subsequent K-12
students over the project's lifetime. Specifically, this project will address:
(1) how a coherent vision of ambitious STEM instruction through a focus on
representations and arguments affords productive STEM learning opportunities for
elementary PSTs, and (2) how experiencing and learning to enact a coherent
vision of ambitious STEM instruction through a focus on representations and
arguments influence elementary PSTs' (a) content knowledge for teaching STEM,
(b) skill with instructional practices for ambitious STEM teaching, and (c)
principles and dispositions around equity and justice in STEM instruction. The
results of this project will advance knowledge by contributing to: (1) the
growing literature on how to foster PSTs' learning of STEM content knowledge,
instructional practices for teaching STEM, and principles and dispositions
around equity and justice in STEM instruction; (2) opening up a focus on
disciplinary connections between STEM fields in a coherent and rigorous model of
elementary PST preparation in ways that may strengthen PST learning
opportunities around STEM content and teaching; and (3) a two-pronged roadmap
for how to build disciplinary coherence in STEM PST programs.