* 1712757
* An International Research Experience for LSAMP Undergraduate Students
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Elizabeth Losos, Organization for Tropical Studies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,140,683.00

For the last decade, the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) has offered
summer research experiences for LSAMP undergraduates at its Las Cruces Research
Station and La Selva Research Station in Costa Rica. The programs combine
research and career mentorship from researchers at the OTS field sites, along
with home mentors from the students' LSAMP institutions, to ensure the
integration of the experience into the student's academic career. OTS will
enhance the programs by 1) recruiting students from tribal, HBCUs, and other
small two-year LSAMP-affiliated institutions where application and participation
rates have been lowest, 2) establishing a cultural component to the program
through the addition of cultural mentors and other visiting scholars, 3)
initiating science communication and outreach training for students in both
programs, and 4) providing the opportunity for students to leverage their
research accomplishments through travel awards to attend scientific conferences.
Finally, OTS will disseminate the students' achievements through the sponsorship
of a symposium and the publication of an anthology. These efforts will showcase
the rich experiences and successes LSAMP students have shared as well as expand
the impact of the program by communicating strategies, successes, and best
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the OTS LSAMP program is
to provide hands-on, mentored-research experiences to undergraduate students
from groups most underrepresented in the sciences. Specifically, OTS will
continue to invite Native Americans, Pacific Islanders, Hispanic American, and
African American students to participate in Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) at the La Selva Research Station in Costa Rica's Caribbean
lowland rainforest or the Las Cruces Research Station in southern Costa Rica
(students self-select their preferred site). The scientific objectives of the
LSAMP REU programs at Las Cruces and La Selva are to: 1) stimulate LSAMP
students to pursue careers in biology and the environmental sciences; 2)
establish a clear understanding of the scientific method; 3) clarify the
importance of biological ecosystems, ecology as a science, and the role of
science in conservation; and 4) increase student awareness of the ethical
context of research in a local, regional as well as international setting. The
Las Cruces and La Selva programs are eight-weeks in length and have evolved to
provide LSAMP students with an ideal nurturing environment and scientific
community for field research in tropical ecology. Both programs foster daily
interactions among students and their researcher mentors. Both empower the
students with ownership of their research projects and the confidence to live
and work as scientists. In addition, through interactions with Costa Rican
researchers, indigenous leaders, and community members, LSAMP students are
exposed to different cultural and societal customs and norms as well as
international perspectives. Most importantly, these programs require careful
assembly of the students' on-campus mentors/faculty advisors who participate in
the program and work with the students long after the summer program is over.
Frequently, home mentors encourage the students to continue to present their
work and even improve upon it during the school year. The active interaction of
both research and on-campus mentors on the students' educational and career
pathways can be significant and often have been transformational. An alumni
survey of the decade-long program conducted in 2015 revealed that, as a direct
result of the students' summer experience, 72% of the students gave an oral or
poster presentation at a scientific conference, 19% co-authored a paper
submitted to a scientific journal, and 13% co-authored a paper that was
published in a scientific journal. The survey further documented that 24% had
completed a two-year Associate's degree, 67% had completed a four-year a
Bachelor's degree, 16% had completed a Master's degree, and 2% had completed a
PhD., while two-thirds of alumni were still pursuing degrees in the life
sciences or geosciences at the bachelor's level (24%), master's level (24%) or
doctoral level (20%). Through the continuation of the OTS program, most-at-risk
LSAMP students are receiving the knowledge, skills, confidence, desire, and
understanding to build their aspirations into baccalaureate degrees in a STEM
field, obtain graduate-level STEM degrees, and/or establish their careers in the
biological or environmental sciences.