* 1712312
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Student Learning and Sense-Making from Instructional Calculus Videos
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Aaron Weinberg, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2022
* USD 220,906.00

Calculus is a cornerstone and integral part of college-level science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs, yet less than half of
all college students who intend to pursue a major in STEM fields succeed in
doing so. Educational researchers have found that calculus presents a
significant hurdle for these students. To help counter this, over the past few
decades, instructors have become increasingly willing to experiment with
innovative teaching formats, such as providing students with instructional
videos outside of class to promote a more active and engaging learning
environment. Despite this increasing popularity, relatively little is known
about how students watch and learn from these instructional videos. To help
instructors design videos to better promote student learning of mathematics,
this project will collect data about how students use, engage with, and learn
from calculus videos. Furthermore, this project will investigate the impact that
various ways of structuring the video-watching experience has on student
learning. In doing so, this project will generate new knowledge about the
effectiveness of various implementation methods for instructional videos in
supporting students' productive ways of understanding foundational calculus
concepts and real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the understanding of how students make sense of and learn calculus
from supplementary instructional videos. Project team members will adapt ideas
from the fields of information systems and organizational studies to
investigate: (1) the ways students interact with video lectures, including how
they pause, skip, and re-watch portions of the videos; (2) the aspects of the
videos students attend to - and report attending to - as they watch; (3) the
ways students make sense of and learn from these videos, and how this relates
the other aspects described above; and (4) how various ways of structuring the
video-watching experience, such as providing an outline or pre-watching
questions, can influence each of these aspects. Data will be obtained from
multiple sources, including student responses to mathematical content questions
before and after watching videos, timestamps of students' interactions with
videos (i.e., playing, pausing, and time-shifting videos), student responses to
interview questions as they watch videos, and eye-tracking data collected as
students watch videos. The mixed-methods analysis will yield knowledge about the
ways students interact with and learn from instructional videos. This
investigation into various methods of structuring the video-watching experience
will contribute to the field's understanding of how to create and use videos as
effective curricular resources and learning tools. In addition, the project will
produce research-based guidelines for creating and effectively using
instructional calculus videos. By achieving these goals, the research project
has the potential to improve the quality of STEM education and, ultimately,
contribute to the development of a globally competitive STEM workforce.