* 1712436
* What Do Physicists From Majority Groups Know and Believe about Race and Gender?
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Melissa Dancy, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,209.00

This project will address the significant need to increase diversity in physics
by developing a robust understanding of the majority population's beliefs,
knowledge, and attitudes toward the marginalization of white women and people of
color. Most physicists in the United States are white men, which is a result of
many factors, including unnecessary barriers that unfairly impede the success of
white women and people of color. Increasing diversity in physics both improves
the quality of physics research and is a matter of justice. This project is
significant in its departure from previous work (which has generally focused on
those from underrepresented minority groups) by focusing on white men, who
constitute an overrepresented majority of physicists. Through interviews with
120 white male physics students and professors, this project will describe the
majority group's understanding of race- and gender-based marginalization in
physics. This information will be important for designing programs that
productively involve both minority and majority populations in efforts to
diversify physics. The three goals of the project are to (1) document and
understand the majority population's knowledge of, beliefs about, and experience
with race- and gender-based inequities in physics; (2) develop theories about
the logic that underlies the majority population's understanding of race,
gender, and marginalization in physics; and (3) use these theories to identify
avenues for change. To achieve these goals, 120 self-identified white male
physics students and faculty at five research universities will be interviewed
about race and gender in physics. Interview data will be analyzed using a
framework that describes marginalization along four dimensions: ideological,
institutional, interpersonal, and internalized. By filling the gap in knowledge
about the majority group's views about race and gender, this project will
advance the understanding of barriers to success faced by people from minority
groups in physics.