* 1712039
* Workshop on the Nature and Practices of Science to Support Educator Guides for *Science* in the Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 297,491.00

This project will offer a workshop that will enhance the impact of the ongoing
"*Science* in the Classroom (SitC)" project (NSF Awards DUE-1043998,
DUE-1224661, and DUE-1525596). SitC is developing a collection of new
educational resources -- richly annotated versions of research articles from the
journal *Science* -- along with methods and guides to help undergraduate STEM
educators use these resources effectively in their classrooms. This approach
uses leading-edge research both to teach STEM concepts and to excite students
about the frontiers of science. Through the workshop, the SitC project team will
provide a foundation for teaching the nature and practices of science, in the
context of SitC resources, to college and university faculty, pre-service
teachers, graduate students, postdocs, and other STEM professionals, and the
workshop will allow the SitC project to leverage the expertise of the
participants to develop educator guides for SitC resources. The workshop will
have three primary benefits: (1) Participants will learn how to develop high-
quality educator guides focusing on the nature of science and scientific
practices, a skill that is useful for STEM education but is also transferable to
a wide variety of STEM careers. (2) Through the new educator guides, which will
be freely available on the Web, the workshop will increase the accessibility of
annotated primary literature resources that have been vetted by educational
experts. (3) Focusing on the nature and practices of science in a teaching
context has been shown to contribute to the improvement of essential research
skills. Therefore, participants in the workshop may improve their own research
skills and become better scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
encourage adoption of education research in the practice of teaching in the STEM
disciplines. This adoption will take place at two levels. First, members of the
undergraduate STEM education community will be provided a professional
development opportunity in using primary literature to teach the nature and
practices of science. Successful completion of the workshop should result in
greater understanding of the benefits of teaching the nature and practices of
science. Recent research has shown that when teaching in the context of inquiry-
based thinking rooted in the nature of science, graduate students and postdocs
reinforced their own learning and, by extension, became better researchers.
Therefore, providing the undergraduate STEM education community with a
foundation for teaching the nature and practices of science will also improve
the quality of the research training and science careers participants are
involved in. The second level of adoption will result from the educator guides
that participants will produce as part of the workshop. These guides will
accompany SitC resources and will be freely available to STEM educators via the
Web.