* 1713943
* EAPSI: Making Sense of Exceptional Diversity: Coexistence of Many Species in the Mammal Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jonathan Nations, Nations                 Jonathan
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Life on the planet is not evenly distributed. Though species richness often
peaks in the tropics, biological diversity is remarkably wide-ranging at both
global and local scales. The tropical oceanic island of Sulawesi, Indonesia
contains exceptionally high biodiversity, but the murine rodent (rats and mice)
fauna is especially remarkable. Some montane communities containing up to 23 co-
occurring murine species, making these the richest communities of closely
related mammals on the planet. However, despite indistinguishable habitats, some
montane communities contain as few as 10 species. The theory of adaptive
radiation predicts that, in order to coexist, species in a community must not
rely on the same resource, but instead partition resources through variation in
diet, habitat, or both. To understand how resources are partitioned, this
collaborative project will generate high-resolution morphological and dietary
data from museum specimens in the lab of Dr. Kevin Rowe, Curator of Mammals at
Museum Victoria. With these data, this project will test the prediction that
members of the most species rich communities are existing on a greater diversity
of resources from a wider variety of habitats than the less species rich
communities. This project represents an exceptional opportunity for
international collaboration while providing evidence that will illuminate how
some communities are so diverse, an issue that has puzzled biologists since the
earliest days of evolutionary thought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
adaptive radiation predicts that adequate ecological space must exist for
closely related species to co-occur. Calculating the ecological volume occupied
in a community can explain how resources are partitioned. The murine rodent
(rats and mice) fauna of Sulawesi is remarkable, with some montane communities
containing up to 23 co-occurring species. However, this diversity is not
distributed equally across the island, and some montane communities contain as
few as 10 species. This variation provides a natural experiment in community
assembly with the potential to illuminate how these hyperdiverse communities
originate and are maintained. This collaborative research will use natural
history collections at Museum Victoria to determine the ecological niche volume
filled by montane communities across Sulawesi, testing the prediction that local
community niche volume will be positively correlated with species richness.
Niche volume will be quantified using a novel combination of high resolution
skeletal imaging (uCT scans), isotopic analyses of diet, and the structure of
digestive tracts, providing an integrated view of how Sulawesi rodents exploit
available resources. This collaborative project will determine whether rich
communities pack more species into the same ecological volume, or expand total
volume, potentially resolving a long-standing, general question in evolutionary
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.