* 1713387
* The Quantum Atlas: A Visual Guide to an Unseen World
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Emily Edwards, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2022
* USD 638,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The goal of this project is to make 21st century quantum science comprehensible
and engaging to non-expert informal adult learners. This project has strong
potential to add new knowledge about the public's perception and understanding
of quantum physics. This scientific content is often difficult for informal
audiences to grasp, and there are relatively few accessible learning resources
for a non- professional audience. The development of this online, interactive
resource with short animations, graphics, and simulations has strong potential
to fill this gap. It will develop a visually driven online resource to engage
non-expert audiences in understanding the basics of quantum physics. The web
design will be modular, incorporating many multimedia elements and the structure
will be flexible allowing for future expansion. All content would be freely
available for educational use. There is potential for extensive reach and use of
the resources by informal adult learners online as well as learners in museums,
science centers, and schools. Project partners are the Joint Quantum Institute
at the University of Maryland and the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, College Park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An independent evaluation of the
project will add new knowledge about informal learners' perceptions and/or
knowledge about quantum science and technology. An initial needs assessment via
focus groups with the general public will be designed to find out more about
what they already know about quantum physics topics and terminology, as well as
what they want to know and what formats they prefer (games, simulations,
podcasts, etc.). In person user testing will be used with early versions of the
project online resource using a structured think-aloud protocol. Later in year 1
and 2, online focus groups with the general public will be conducted to learn
what they find engaging and what they learned from the content. Iterative
feedback from participants during the formative stage will guide the development
of the content and format of the online resources. The Summative Evaluation will
gather data using a retrospective post-survey embedded with a pop-up link on the
Atlas followed by interviews with a subset of online users. Google Analytics
will be used to determine the breadth and depth of their online navigation, what
resources they download, and what websites they visit afterward. A post-only
survey of undergraduate and graduate students who participated in resource
development will focus on changes in students' confidence around their science
communication skills and level of quantum physics understanding.