* 1713998
* EAPSI: Microbial Controls on Arctic Lake Sediment Methane Cycling
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Tamara Marcus, Marcus                  Tamara         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400.00

Large amounts of organic matter are stored in permafrost, or permanently frozen
northern regions. This organic matter warms and becomes available for microbial
communities to turn carbon (C) into the greenhouse gases methane and carbon
dioxide via metabolic processes. Microbial communities play a large role in the
ultimate fate of this C but have been relatively unstudied in lake sediments in
these regions. Therefore, little is known about the dominant lineages present
and which microbes are responsible for fueling carbon cycling in these systems.
Working with leading scientists in the field of ecosystem genomics at the
Australian Center for Ecogenomics, microbial communities present in these
systems will be identified, allowing us to determine relationships between
species and metabolism of C and contribute to our understanding of ecosystems
here in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Due to a lack of empirical
data recording interactions between microbial communities and their impacts on
the metabolism of carbon (C), accurate modeling of carbon dynamics and the
ultimate fate of C has been difficult. Old carbon (C) decomposes to carbon
dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) from thawing permafrost, which can flow into
lakes and drive additional CH4 emission. Our study will address the questions:
how do microbial communities interact and affect carbon cycling, which microbial
lineages are dominant in lake sediments from within a thawing arctic permafrost
system, and contribute to understanding of the broader question: how will
climate change effect these microbial communities? DNA extractions will be taken
from sediment core samples collected from Stordalen mire peatland complex in
northern Sweden. The cores were previously analyzed for geochemical parameters
and will be sequenced using the 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing method.
Relationships between sequence data and geochemical measurements will be
identified at both a species specific and community level, allowing us to
characterize dominant lineages and record shifts in microbial communities as a
function of thaw. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institute program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate
student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.