* 1713494
* Ruff Family Science: Researching factors that support intergenerational science learning in adult education contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mary Haggerty, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2019
* USD 996,905.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will develop and test intergenerational science media resources for
parents that are participating in adult education programs and their young
children. The materials will build on the research-based and successful
children's television program, Fetch with Ruff Ruffman. The target audience
includes parents enrolled in adult education programs who lack a high school
diploma or are in English as a Second Language classes. These resources will
support parents' engagement in science activities with their children both in
the adult education settings as well as at home. Adult and family educators will
receive professional development resources and training to support their
integration of the parent/child activities. Project partners include the
National Center for Families Learning, Kentucky Educational Television, and
Alabama Public Television,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Ruff Family
Science project are to: (1) investigate adult education settings that feature an
intergenerational learning model, in order to learn about the unique
characteristics of adults and families who are enrolled in these programs; (2)
examine the institutional circumstances and educator practices that support
joint parent/child engagement in science; (3) iteratively develop new prototype
resources meet the priorities and needs of families and educators involved in
intergenerational education settings; and (4) develop the knowledge needed to
create a fuller set of materials in the future that will motivate and support
diverse, low-income parents to investigate science with their children. The
research strategy is comprised of three main components: Phase 1: Needs
Assessment: Determine key motivations and behaviors common to adult education
students who are also parents; surface obstacles and assets inherent in these
parents' current practices; and examine the needs and available resources for
supplementing parents' current engagement in family science learning. Phase 2:
Prototype Development: Iteratively develop two prototype Activity Sets, along
with related educator supports and training materials, designed to promote joint
parent-child engagement with English and Spanish-speaking families around
physical science concepts. Phase 3: Prototype Field Test: Test how the two
refined prototype Activity Sets work in different educational settings (adult
education, parent education, and parent and child together time). Explore
factors that support or impede effective implementation. Sources of data for the
study include observations of adult and parent education classes using an expert
interview protocol, focus groups, adult and family educator interviews, and
parent surveys.