* 1713327
* EAPSI: Optimizing the Performance of Perovskite-Silicon Tandem Solar Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Giovanni DeLuca, DeLuca                  Giovanni
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The objective of this work is to integrate next generation perovskite thin-film
photovoltaics and commercially available silicon photovoltaics with a modified
tunnel junction. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Udo
Bach at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia. Bach's expertise with
perovskite materials, specifically for transparent, tandem devices, will allow
the PI to evolve the PV device enormously with this 8-week program. Low-cost,
ubiquitous, environmentally sustainable solar cells with high efficiencies could
transform the world in which we live. In addition to providing access to high-
efficiency, sustainable energy devices, the award provides opportunities for the
integration of research and education in technologies of societal
significance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The synergy between the PI's knowledge and
background on perovskite photovoltaics and the Bach Group's knowledge and
expertise on tandem devices increases the likelihood that a high efficiency
device will be developed in a timely manner. This work will continue after the
East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program with the PI optimizing the
tunnel junction with his thesis project, and the Bach group optimizing the
transparent perovskite layer. The silicon component will be provided by Dr.
Ajeet Rohatgi, CTO of SunivaÂ®, Inc. Dr. Rohatgi has positioned Suniva as a U.S.
leader in the research, development, and manufacturing of high-efficiency, low-
cost crystalline silicon cells using unique technology that spawned from his
work at the University Center of Excellence for Photovoltaic Research and
Education. The advanced electrical interconnecting layer between the top and
bottom subcells will be deposited in Georgia Tech?s Institute for Electronics
and Nanotechnology Cleanroom. Followed by the perovskite photovoltaic component,
which will be fabricated using techniques developed by the Bach Group. The use
of theoretical models to predict optimized efficiencies for various device
architectures and materials to attain even higher overall efficiencies is
currently underway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate
student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.