* 1713696
* Theory of Polymer Crystallization and Melting
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Murugappan Muthukumar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 381,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on how long chain-like molecules or
polymers, crystallize. Consider a collection of tangled wires and think about
organizing them into well-ordered crystals. Such a seemingly difficult task,
however, occurs naturally and readily in the real world even for the simplest
polymers such as polyethylenes. In fact, most of the materials today are made
from such semicrystalline polymers, which constitute a multi-billion-dollar
industry. An understanding of the crystallization process of polymers is one of
the longstanding research challenges in the materials world, primarily due to
the haphazard and random configurations of the polymer molecules before they
organize into crystals. As a result, the phenomenon of polymer crystallization
is challenging with few unifying conceptual themes. This research program is
geared towards development of fundamental concepts to understand how polymers
crystallize and melt, using theory and modelling. A fundamental understanding of
the behaviours of this important class of materials will help to design and
process novel polymeric materials with enhanced benefits to our society. This
project includes training graduate students in this challenging research area of
tremendous societal value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on how polymers crystallize. Crystallization of polymers
from solutions and melts is one of the longstanding research areas in polymer
science with tremendous industrial value, full of intrigue without unifying
conceptual themes. A fundamental understanding of how polymer chains organize
into hierarchical crystalline structures remains elusive. The most significant
endowment of flexible polymer molecules is their conformational entropy. This
attribute sets the crystallization and melting behaviours of polymers to be
distinct from other ordering phenomena of small molecular systems. This research
project is aimed to develop fundamental concepts behind polymer crystallization
and melting, by accounting for conformation entropy of polymer chains and
topological defects under non-equilibrium conditions. The principal investigator
will employ statistical mechanics, field theory, and various simulation
techniques in the development of new theories of polymer crystallization and
melting. More specifically, the research project will address (a) single crystal
morphology - topological defects driving sectorization in lamellae and relative
stabilities of flat lamellae, hollow pyramids, scrolls, and twisted lamellae,
(b) kinetics of melting and recrystallization of polymer crystals, and (c)
macromolecular origin of melt-memory in polymer
crystallization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the research program may
have impact in the multi-billion-dollar industry of polyolefins and also in
numerous applied areas such as polymer processing, and fabrication of polymeric
nanomaterials. Training graduate students in this challenging research area is a
strong educational component of the research program.