* 1713379
* EAPSI: Using Drone Technology to Address Key Knowledge Gaps in the Life Histories of Sea Turtles
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Elizabeth Bevan, Bevan                   Elizabeth      M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project uses drones to study the abundance and activities of sea turtles on
nesting beaches, and nearshore habitats of Australia. Collaborators include Mark
Hamann and Karen Joyce (James Cook University), Mick Guinea (Charles Darwin
University), Scott Whiting and Tony Tucker (Department of Parks and Wildlife),
Amanda Hodgson (Murdoch University Cetacean Research Unit), and indigenous
communities throughout Australia. Australia boasts some of the most ecologically
diverse and well-studied sea turtle habitats in the world. Collaboration with
sea turtle and remote sensing experts will provide access to expertise, advanced
drone technology, and multiple species of sea turtles and habitats, that were
previously inaccessible to the PI. Optimal drone-based methods will be developed
to study sea turtles at nesting beaches and in nearshore waters. These
methodologies will be available to enhance sea turtle conservation programs
worldwide and promote a deeper understanding, awareness and conservation of the
marine environment in the next generation of environmental stewards.

This project evaluates the use of drones for studying sea turtles on nesting
beaches, and in nearshore foraging, mating, and developmental habitats of
Australia. The research involves collaborations with multiple researchers,
institutions, and indigenous communities throughout Australia. Australia boasts
some of the most ecologically diverse and well-studied habitats in the world for
several species of sea turtles. Direct interaction with experts in sea turtle
biology and remote sensing provides access to more advanced drone technology,
methodologies, and multiple sea turtle species and habitats. Optimal drone-based
methodologies will be developed to study the demographics and behavior of sea
turtles in multiple life stages at nesting beaches and adjacent critical
habitat. This opportunity will enhance the applicant?s expertise in the use of
drones in marine field ecology while generating methodologies that will be
available to enhance sea turtle conservation programs worldwide. The
collaborative nature of this project will promote a deeper understanding,
awareness and conservation of the marine environment among the next
environmental stewards.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.