* 1713949
* On the Formation and Destruction of Giant Molecular Clouds in Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Eve Ostriker, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2021
* USD 384,707.00

If we are to understand how the Sun and Earth formed, we must first understand
how the Galaxy itself was formed and how it changes over time. Astronomers know
that the Milky Way Galaxy contains huge clouds of gas and dust. It is from these
"Giant Molecular Clouds" (GMCs) that all stars are born. The goal of this
project is to understand how these giant clouds are formed and how they change
over millions of years. Using computer models developed over a number of years,
the awardee will investigate how the explosions of very large stars affect the
clouds. The models include many of the things known to affect the gas in the
Milky Way: the temperature and density of the gas, the rotation of the Milky
Way, the light from the billions of stars in the galaxy, and even the chemistry
of the atoms and molecules in the clouds. Much of the work will be done by a
postdoctoral researcher, guided by the Principal Investigator (PI) who is a
world-renown expert in Milky Way astronomy and the birth of stars. Graduate and
undergraduate students will also be involved in the research, and female high-
school students will be invited to the PI's institute to shadow graduates and
early-career scientists. In this way the PI hopes to inspire a new generation of
young, female researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to continue
numerical modeling of star formation on very large spatial scales (GMCs and
above). The new models will include ionizing and non-ionizing UV radiation,
supernova feedback, turbulence, magnetic fields, chemistry, and galactic shear.
Many of these effects have been excluded from past models or used individually
rather than in combination. This project will use advanced computational methods
to simulate GMC formation and destruction, providing the first fully self-
consistent magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) and radiation MHD models at high resolution
and with comprehensive treatment of physics and chemistry. Such modeling is
useful not only in synthesizing star formation and GMC evolution in the Milky
Way Galaxy but may also be used to interpret new ALMA observations of other,
nearby galaxies.