* 1713854
* EAPSI: Plant-herbivore Interactions and Host Race Formation: Reconstructing the Evolution of Chrysochus-Apocynaceae Associations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Elizabeth McHone, McHone                  Elizabeth      E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The relationships between intercontinental dispersals and the evolution of host
plant-herbivore interactions are not well understood, but may offer insight into
invasive species ineractions. Two species of dogbane leaf beetles (Chrysochus,
Chrysomelidae) possess an adaptation allowing them to feed on the toxic dogbane
plants (Apocynum, Apocynaceae) in North America. Eight Chrysochus species live
in Asia alongside Apocynum, but the nature of their interactions there, and when
and how the association in North America evolved, is unknown. This project will
investigate the evolution of the association between Chrysochus and Apocynaceae,
focusing on the interactions between the widespread C. chinensis and its
multiple hosts. Specimens of Chrysochus and their host plants will be collected
in China to identify previously unknown host associations and create an
evolutionary tree. Feeding experiments will be conducted on C. chinensis to
determine whether separate populations eat different hosts, often an early step
toward speciation. Experiments will be supervised by Dr. Huai-Jun Xue, associate
professor at the Institute of Zoology (IOZ) in Beijing and expert on the
evolution of insect-host plant specialization. Situated within the ranges of
several Chrysochus species, the IOZ holds the largest collection of the beetles
in Asia, making it the ideal location to investigate their evolution.

The award will be used to collect specimens of ten Chrysochus and Platycorynus
(a closely related genus) species in five provinces in China. Host plants, other
plants in the Apocynaceae, and observations of feeding behavior will be
collected in those areas. This work will expand the host association information
for the group, and DNA from field-collected and museum specimens will later be
sequenced with high-throughput Illumina sequencing to construct the first
molecular phylogeny of Chrysochus with complete sampling of species. C.
chinensis individuals will be collected in Beijing and fed on several potential
host plants in host acceptance and oviposition experiments. Their preference
for, and fitness on, the potential hosts will be assessed by proxies such as
growth and oviposition rates to determine whether there is evidence for the
evolution of host races. This project will contribute to the field of plant-
insect interactions, the natural history of an understudied group of organisms,
and encourage future cooperation between the Academy of Natural Sciences of
Drexel University and the IOZ.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.