* 1713389
* SHF: Small: RUI: New Foundations for Indexed Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Patricia Johann, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2021
* USD 463,504.00

Testing of programs has dominated the last 50 years of software development, but
the next 50 will see an increased demand for provably correct software. This is
partly because modern applications are increasingly safety critical, partly
because testing is by its very nature only a partial correctness guarantee, and
partly because programming language technology has now advanced to the stage
where it is feasible to formally verify critical programs. Language-based
verification uses a language's type system to guarantee program correctness, so
that type-checking a program becomes tantamount to verifying its correctness.
Thus, the more program properties a type system can express, the more the
compiler can automatically verify. Indexed programming is a key technique for
using a language's type system to express more and more sophisticated properties
of programs. Indexed programming uses the extra information present in type
indices to help close the so-called "semantic gap" between what programmers know
about their programs and what type systems can express about them. The
intellectual merits of this project lie in providing a principled methodology
for transferring knowledge about effective programming and proving between
languages supporting type-indexing of types and those supporting term-indexing
of types, developing a semantic framework that enhances researchers' and
practitioners' understanding of the nature of indexed types in general, and
opening the way for new forms of indexing that can enforce even greater
correctness guarantees. The broader impact of this project is to use indexed
types to develop better and more widely applicable formal program verification
methods, and, thereby, to help ensure that even large and sophisticated software
systems are safe and reliable. Because it will lead to provably correct and
secure software, this project has the potential to impact any application area,
and thus any sector of the economy, for which such software is
paramount.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the algebraic structure of
indexing to guide the way programmers program with indexed types. Specifically,
it will advance the state-of-the-art by providing an axiomatic framework for
indexed programming that is principled, conceptually simple, comprehensive,
uniform, and predictive. It will use the categorical notion of a fibration to
ensure that the framework is general enough both to describe traditional type-
and term-indexing of types, and to prescribe approaches to indexed programming
when indices have more sophisticated and computationally useful algebraic
structure. To this end, it will develop analogues of the adjoint structure
present in the fibrations underlying traditional type- and term-indexing for
more general fibrations interpreting programs, their types, and their
properties. Because fibrations can uniformly model very general notions of
"index" and "program property" in very general computational settings, they are
indeed a promising foundation for the new framework. The development of the
framework will drive both theory and practice forward by transferring knowledge
between the traditional type- and term-indexed settings, solving state-of-the-
art problems in each of these settings, and providing an understanding of the
conceptual essence of indexed programming that allows problem solutions from
these traditional settings to be extended to new ones.