* 1713276
* Collaborative Research: Advancing professional development and broadening participation in informal science learning via the integration of the science and art of color
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Carrie Tzou, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,251,726.00

The intent of this five-year project is to design, deliver, and study
professional development for Informal Science Learning (ISL) educators in the
arena of equity-focused STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, and
Mathematics) teaching and learning. While the strategy of integrating art and
science to promote interest, identity, and other STEM-related learning has grown
in recent years, this domain is still nascent with respect to a guiding set of
best practices. Through prior work, the team has developed and implemented a set
of design principles that incorporate effective practices for broadening
participation of girls in science via science-art integration on the topic of
the biology, chemistry and optics of "Colors in Nature." The continued
initiative would impact the ISL field by providing a mechanism for ISL educators
in museums, libraries and after-school programs to adopt and implement these
STEAM design principles into their work. The team will lead long-term (12-18
months) professional development activities for ISL educators, including: 1) in-
person workshops that leverage their four previously developed kits; 2) online,
asynchronous learning activities featuring interactive instructional videos
around their STEAM design principles; 3) synchronous sessions to debrief content
and foster communities of practice; and 4) guided design work around the
development or redesign of STEAM activities. In the first four years of the
project, the team will work with four core institutional partners (Sitka Sound
Science Center, Sno-Isle Libraries, the Fairbanks North Star Borough School
District after-school program, and the Pima County Public Library system) across
three states (Alaska, Washington, and Arizona). In the project's later stages,
they will disseminate their learning tools to a broad, national audience. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main
goals: (1) To support ISL educators in offering meaningful STEAM activities, (2)
To create institutional change among the partner organizations, and (3) To
advance the ISL field with respect to professional development and designing for
STEAM Programming. The research questions associated with the professional
development activities address the ways in which change occurs and focus on all
three levels: individual, institutional, and the ISL field. The methods are
qualitative and quantitative, including videotaped observations, pre and post
interviews, surveys and analysis of online and offline artifacts. In addition,
the project evaluation will assess the implementation of the project's
professional development model for effectiveness. Methods will include
observations, interviews, surveys and Website analytics and program data.