* 1713713
* EAPSI: The Effect of Sea Temperature and Sediment Load on Respiration and Grazing on Kelp by Sea Urchins
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Sarah Traiger, Traiger                 Sarah          B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Kelp forests are stands of large seaweeds that provide important ecosystem
services, such as providing habitat for fished species, contributing primary
productivity to other habitats, and protecting coastal communities from waves
and erosion. The persistence of kelp forests depends on the balance between kelp
production and consumption by herbivores. Overgrazing by herbivores such as sea
urchins can lead to deforestation and loss of kelp forest associated organisms.
Ecklonia radiata is the main canopy-forming kelp in northeastern New Zealand and
supports fisheries species such as spiny lobster. Sea temperature is predicted
to increase over the 21st century both globally and in New Zealand waters.
Previous research has shown that rate of food consumption by many marine
invertebrates increases at elevated temperature due to increased metabolism.
However, the effects of increased temperature on consumption rate may be
affected by sedimentation, which is also predicted to change in the future.
Sediment load to New Zealand waters has increased due to human activities, and
weather changes and coastal erosion are predicted to increase sediment load in
the future. This project will investigate the effects of future predicted
temperature and sediment load on the grazing and respiration rate of the New
Zealand sea urchin (Evechinus chloroticus). Grazing and respiration rates will
be measured under current ambient conditions and predicted future elevated
temperature and sediment load, separately and in combination, in a lab
experiment conducted in collaboration with Dr. Nick Shears at the University of
Auckland?s Leigh Marine Laboratory. Understanding the effects of environmental
changes on this important member of the kelp forest community will help
determine the future stability of kelp forests in New Zealand.

Future changes in climate and coastal development could lead to high sediment
conditions spreading into locations currently unaffected, with effects on
trophic dynamics of those systems. The global stressor of increased sea
temperature may interact with local stressors and alter top-down effects in kelp
forest systems in ways that cannot be predicted by studying the effects of
global or local stressors alone. In areas of low sedimentation, increased
temperature could result in increased kelp consumption by urchins and reduced
kelp biomass, or even shifts to urchin barrens. High sedimentation may increase
urchin energetic costs by reducing grazing efficiency or causing urchins to
increase movement. Temperature and sedimentation may have synergist negative
effects on urchins, if grazing rates cannot increase to meet metabolic needs in
the presence of sediment. This project will investigate the effects of increased
temperature and sedimentation, separately and combined, on respiration and
grazing rates of E. chloroticus on kelp (Ecklonia radiata) in a factorial lab
experiment. The control treatment will be kept at ambient temperature (14°C) and
sediment will be added to reflect the low concentrations that currently occur in
New Zealand kelp forests (5 mg/cm2). The future temperature treatments will be
2°C above ambient, which is predicted to occur in the 21st century. High
sediment treatments will reflect concentrations observed near Auckland where
there is currently high terrestrial runoff (35 mg/cm2). The combined effects of
temperature and sedimentation on respiration and grazing rates have not
previously been tested, but may have critical consequences for trophic dynamics
within kelp forests. The interaction between grazers and kelp is fundamental to
the persistence of kelp forests, and the results of this experiment will help
make predictions about future changes to kelp forests with climate change.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.