* 1713797
* Remote sensing technology as a window into primate movement, habitat, and conservation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Kevin McLean, McLean                  Kevin          A
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. In tropical forests, the majority of
mammals seek food and shelter in the canopy, the uppermost layer of the forest
where dense networks of branches, vines, and vegetation meet to form a complex,
three-dimensional habitat. Repeated use of pathways through the treetops has
been described in many primate species, suggesting that their movement decisions
are based on careful selection, but exactly how these decisions are made has
been difficult to study because we lack sufficient information about canopy
habitat itself. Laser scanning technology has revolutionized the way we can
analyze forest habitat, providing three-dimensional maps of forest structure.
When combined with tracking data from primates fitted with GPS collars,
researchers can get an animal-eye view of their movements and begin to
understand how and why they determine their paths through the trees. The ways in
which primates plan and recall their routes is particularly interesting to
biological anthropologists, as this helps to understand how they perceive space
and how human perception of space evolved. In addition, because many primates
contribute important roles to forest ecosystems, ecologists are similarly
interested in primate movement, as it improves our knowledge of how they use and
influence their habitat across the landscape, as well as how to define high-
quality habitat for conservation planning. This project will provide a unique
opportunity for a postdoctoral scientist to receive training and gain experience
across the boundaries of different scientific fields of study, where many of the
most interesting research questions lie. The project will also provide ample
opportunity to engage with public science communication and education. Real data
and 360-degree video will be used to create Virtual Reality short film that
introduces concepts of animal habitat and movement. Design of elementary school
curricula adapted for bilingual classrooms will provide university students from
traditionally underrepresented groups with practical experience in science
research, communication, and outreach, and will introduce elementary school
students from similarly underrepresented backgrounds to topics in behavioral and
environmental sciences through a citizen science initiative using camera traps.
This activity will allow students to not only learn about, but also actively
participate in scientific research.

This project will provide previously inaccessible insight into the processes
that drive movement behavior in arboreal primates using cutting-edge remote
sensing and animal tracking technology. The role of spatial memory in the
development of efficient foraging strategies for high-quality resources is
considered a critical evolutionary adaptation in arboreal primates. This
research will use tracking data from two arboreal primate species that rely
heavily on fruit, as well as three additional frugivorous mammals that exhibit
arboreal, terrestrial, and scansorial (both arboreal and terrestrial) habitat
use. Remote sensing data and GPS tracking data at high spatial and temporal
resolutions will be used to design descriptive movement models using step
selection functions and corridor analysis. These descriptive models will be used
to parameterize predictive, agent-based models that will allow for assessment of
arboreal mammal performance under varying forest fragmentation and land use
scenarios. Imaging of complex forest structure using high-resolution Light
Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) enables us for the first time to characterize
arboreal habitat in fine detail across the vast spatial scales at which animal
behavior occurs. Thus, this project represents a transformative advance in our
understanding of primate movement and arboreal habitat itself. Habitat loss is a
primary conservation concern for primates and other arboreal mammals.
Characterizing arboreal movement and developing predictive movement models based
on the underlying mechanisms driving movement behavior may provide an indication
of animals' ability to preserve the necessary foraging efficiency to maintain
fitness across increasingly fragmented landscapes.