* 1713681
* CSHL Advanced Bacterial Genetics Course
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory's three-week summer course in
Advanced Bacterial Genetics prepares students for modern scientific research in
molecular genetics. Students gain hands-on training in the theoretical knowledge
and practical skills needed to analyze and manipulate bacterial genes and
genomes both in vivo and in vitro. The course provides training in classical
bacterial genetics and also exposes the students to modern molecular
technologies, including high-throughput approaches, methods for genome
engineering, and production of large-scale data sets. In addition, the students
receive bioinformatics training that is necessary for modern molecular genetics
including PCR and oligonucleotide design and DNA sequence analysis including
genome assembly and annotation. The course is taught by instructors, who are
chosen based on their expertise and contributions to the field of bacterial
genetics and molecular biology. The instructors invite guest lecturers to give
up-to-the-minute reports on current research on diverse topics, while
emphasizing the genetic methodologies they used to study these topics. The
format, which includes lectures, laboratory work and many opportunities for
informal discussions with instructors and students, fully immerses the students
in laboratory-based coursework. Course participants are chosen from a pool of
highly qualified applicants ranging from early career scientists to senior
investigators and coming from diverse research backgrounds, including biology,
chemistry, engineering, physics, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The course
provides a collaborative environment for intense training in modern microbial
genetics. For students working in fields such as synthetic biology,
biotechnology, systems biology, or modeling, the course provides them with a
strong foundation to understand and apply genetic methodologies. It also
provides microbiology students, working with a diverse array of microbes, with
an understanding of how to develop genetic methods needed to study non-model
microorganisms. The course trains an ethnically, racially and scientifically
diverse group and stimulates interaction among all participants of the course
and provides mentorship towards research in modern microbiology.