* 1713617
* EAPSI: Determining the Response of Migratory Fish to Environmental and Climatic Variability
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Heidi Ballew, Ballew                  Heidi          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research will be completed in collaboration with leading fish migration
expert, Dr. Gerard Closs at the University of Otago, and will identify factors
and conditions influential to the success of migration in fishes. The
implications of this study can be drawn broadly to understand the factors that
influence migratory species under rapidly changing environmental and climatic
conditions which will be foundational in determining future population dynamics
of, often threatened, migratory fishes and will provide information for
conservation and management of these threatened populations. Climate variability
can influence the nutrients available in freshwater and marine aquatic systems
which can subsequently affect the success of migratory organisms to move between
those two environments, called diadromy. Additionally, stream flow can be
influenced by climatic/environmental variability directly influencing the
success of migratory individuals. In this study, we will evaluate how climatic
processes, like El Niño, affect stream flow and marine and freshwater nutrient
availability to determine if migration success is influenced in two migratory
fish species, Gobiomorphus cotidianus and Galaxias argentius. This study will
evaluate samples collected from streams representative of varying stream flow
and nutrient productivity and will use MODIS satellite images to determine how
changes in nutrient availability in the marine environment might influence
migration success.

Climate variability can affect the productivity of freshwater and marine systems
influencing the success of aquatic migrants between those systems (i.e.,
diadromy). Migratory success can fluctuate in response to variable environmental
conditions such as stream flow or productivity. The primary hypothesis of this
study is that climate variation (i.e., El Niño) alters the success of migrants
and residents by affecting stream flow regimes and marine and freshwater
productivity by sampling two diadromous species, Gobiomorphus cotidianus and
Galaxias argentius along stream flow and productivity gradients. Otolith
microstructure and microchemistry analysis will be used to determine the rate at
which individuals migrate from freshwater streams to marine environments under
different climatic conditions (ENSO index). MODIS satellite images will be used
to analyze the influence of coastal productivity on migration propensity across
a nutrient/productivity gradient while land use/land change satellite imagery
will be used as proxy for stream productivity to determine migration rate
dynamics across a terrestrial nutrient gradient.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.