* 1713078
* Functional Copula Model for Nonlinear and Non-Gaussian Functional Data Analysis: Graphical Models, Dimension Reduction, and Variable Selection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Bing Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Multivariate functional data have become increasingly prevalent with the rise of
big data. For example, EEG (Electroencephalography) and fMRI data, GPS tracking
data collected by mobile phones, health data collected by smart wearables, some
global economic data, and data collected from electric power networks, are all
of this type. The key issue in analyzing such data is to discover interrelations
among the different random functions describing them. Currently, this is
typically done under the statistical assumption of normal (Gaussian)
distributions as this leads to computationally simple and highly interpretable
estimation procedures in many applications. The Gaussian assumption, however, is
quite strong and is not satisfied in many applications. The main goal of this
project is to relax the Gaussian assumption while retaining its computational
simplicity and high interpretability. This is done by developing a notion of a
copula Gaussian model -- a way in which multivariate functional data can be
transformed to Gaussian distributed data. Such copula tactics have been
extremely versatile in classical low-dimensional settings, combining parsimony
aspects of multivariate Gaussian models with the flexibility of nonparametric
models. Extending copula-based ideas to multivariate functional data will
benefit statistical graphical models, statistical models for causal relations,
nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction, and variable selection, bringing fresh
insights and research opportunities to a young and dynamic field.

This project proposes a novel functional copula model for non-Gaussian and
nonlinear multivariate functional data analysis. The idea is to apply rank and
quantile transformations to the coefficients of the Karhunen-Loeve expansions of
the random functions. The functional Gaussian copula model greatly simplifies
conditional dependence among different random functions in the expansion, as the
conditional distribution is completely determined by the covariance operator
among random functions. In particular, smoothing over functional spaces is not
needed. At the same time, the model does not require Gaussian assumptions, which
can be easily violated by functional data. These properties are very useful for
constructing graphical models. The functional elliptical distribution copula
model is useful for sufficient dimension reduction, because it is a convenient
way to meet linearity requirements posed by many commonly used dimension
reduction methods. Equipped with this parsimonious but flexible framework, the
work plans to develop new methodologies for four areas of multivariate
functional data analysis: (i) functional graphical models for undirected graphs;
(ii) functional graphical models for causal graphs; (iii) functional sufficient
dimension reduction; and (iv) variable selection for function on function
regression. The work will study asymptotic properties of these new estimators
under both the fixed and high dimensional setting, statistical inference
procedures, order determination methods, and efficient algorithms to implement
these methods.