* 1713230
* EAPSI: Understanding the Composition of the Earth by Charactering the Radioactivity of Rocks
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Scott Wipperfurth, Wipperfurth             Scott          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The KamLAND detector in central Japan is the longest running and largest
detector measuring neutrinos emitted from the Earth. Neutrinos, or geoneutrinos
when from the Earth, are incredibly small, chargeless particles emitted from
natural radioactivity within rocks. These particles have a very small chance of
hitting anything, and can thus travel easily from anywhere inside the Earth to
the surface. Counting the number of geoneutrinos passing through the KamLAND
detector allows us to know the supply of radioactivity within the Earth, even
though we cannot access rocks from the deep Earth. This project aims to
investigate the rocks closest to the detector, as the geoneutrinos emitted by
these rocks have a larger effect on the measured signal vs those farther away.
The estimated signal from Japanese rocks in this study will be subtracted from
the measurement by KamLAND, leaving only the signal from the inaccessible deep
Earth. The final signal is indicative of the amount of radioactivity within the
Earth. This work is being conducted in conjunction with Professor Kunio Inoue at
Tohoku University, who is the Director of the Research Center of Neutrino
Sciences at Tohoku University and principal investigator of KamLAND.

The radiogenic power of the Earth is not well constrained, with estimates
ranging from low (10 TW) to high (30 TW) heat production. Measurement of the
flux of geoneutrinos from the Earth thus acts as a proxy for the heat production
within the Earth. KamLAND (Japan) and Borexino (Italy) are the only two
operating detectors. Determining the mantle signal, an important objective,
requires subtraction of the crustal flux from the measured flux at these
detectors. Unfortunately, discrepancy exists between model estimates of the
crustal flux at KamLAND. This project will create a high-resolution, 3D model of
the nearest 300 km of crust surrounding KamLAND (est. ~ 50% of total signal).
All available geochemical (U and Th) and geophysical (seismic, cross-sections,
borehole, heat flow, and gravity) data will be integrated into a single coherent
and self-consistent model. Consolidation of units defined on a geologic map of
Japan will provide simplified reservoirs, which can be defined 3-dimensionally
by the assembled geophysical data in Central Japan. To these reservoirs we will
characterized the U and Th concentrations, and their uncertainties, from the
assembled geochemical data. This 3D model, with defined physical structure and
radioactive element concentration, will be used to calculate a new near-field,
crustal geoneutrino signal at KamLAND.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.