* 1713784
* The Computational Microscope
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Juan Perilla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Cells are the building blocks of life, yet they are themselves a collection of
proteins, small molecules, and solvent, none of which, when taken in isolation,
would be considered alive. How living things can arise from the "behavior" of
molecules, which are simply obeying the laws of physics, is the essential
conundrum of modern biology. The rise of scientific supercomputing has offered
the chance to study living systems at the level of atoms, cells, and all levels
in between. Now, in the era of petascale computing, with computational resources
like Blue Waters, it is becoming possible to take the most critical step from
inanimate to animate matter by describing assembly and cooperation of thousands
of macromolecules made of billions of atoms.

The projects in this proposal will use Blue Waters to study the chemo-mechanical
properties of motor proteins, and the structure and function of the
macromolecular complexes central to bacterial chemotaxis and plant fiber
metabolism. Notably, all the projects build on extensive previous work. The
first project will study the mechanisms of two motor systems: protein unfolding
by ClpX unfoldase and cytoskeletal cargo transport by cytoplasmic dynein. The
chemosensory array project seeks to answer how input from many chemical sensors
on the bacterial surface are transduced across hundreds of nanometers in the
array, leading the cell to decide if it should continue swimming or change
direction, to adapt to changing environments. The cellulosome project aims to
answer why human gut bacteria produces such an elaborate cellulosome when
compared to the cellulosomes produced by other bacteria. All the projects will
leverage computational methods to combine structural data from multiple sources
of differing resolutions (X-ray crystallography of individual proteins, medium-
resolution cryo-EM of multi-protein systems, and low-resolution cryo-EM
tomography of subcellular organelles) yielding atomic-resolution structural
models of structures on the order of 100 nm in size, containing 10-100 million
atoms.

The broader impacts of the project is the ongoing development of the hugely
popular (over 300,000 registered users) NAMD and VMD software, which, combined
with the longstanding training efforts of the PIs, will enable researchers
worldwide to address key health and energy needs of mankind.