* 1713799
* EAPSI: Monitoring High Resolution Broadband Fluorescence of the Green Fluorescent Protein Model Chromophore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Miles Taylor, Taylor                  Miles          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The discovery of the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) has defined the way to
visualize cellular events and life processes. By using GFP as a genetically
encodable fluorescence reagent in super-resolution microscopy, non-invasive live
cell imaging has powered numerous advances in life sciences. A mechanistic
understanding of how the GFP chromophore works in the protein pocket, and why
its fluorescence vanishes in solution, remains unclear. This knowledge gap
hinders our understanding of important factors which lead to efficient emission.
In collaboration with Dr. Justin Hodgkiss, an expert on the newly developed
Transient Grating Photoluminescence Spectroscopy (TGPLS), research will be
conducted at Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. This unique
opportunity will allow the study of the broadband fluorescence signal of the GFP
chromophore in solution on the intrinsic molecular timescale and will further
help to characterize the fluorescent state of the chromophore within the
protein.

To design improved fluorescent proteins for high-resolution microscopy, a
fundamental understanding of the hydrogen bonding network around a dynamic GFP
chromophore is critical. Within the protein, the locked Ser-Tyr-Gly chromophore
cannot isomerize and is inevitably forced to release energy through
fluorescence. Outside the protein matrix, the interplay between fluorescence and
isomerization drops the quantum yield from ~0.8 to ~2x10-4. This striking change
of fluorescence indicates that the excited state population of
4-hydroxybenzylidene-1,2-dimethylimidazolinone (HBDI) travels through a conical
intersection from S1 to S0, while the rest proceeds through fluorescence.
Because of both the spatial and temporal resolution of TGPLS, it is a prime tool
to study the time-resolved fluorescence profile of HBDI and gain further
insights into the electronic excited state intermediates after photoexcitation.
Collaboration with Dr. Hodgkiss will help delineate how fluorescence occurs from
a small portion of the HBDI excited state and allow us to better understand the
role the protein matrix plays in fluorescence.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.