* 1713829
* EAPSI: Exploring Connections between Lichen Distribution and Forest Biodiversity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Gladys Benitez, Benitez                 Gladys         N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research seeks to explore the connections between lichen distribution and
ecosystem parameters and forest biodiversity. It will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Glenn Aguilar in UNITEC Institute of Technology, whose
knowledge in modelling distribution will be crucial to incorporate different
factors affecting lichens growth for the publication of the results. New Zealand
is particularly rich in lichen species with 1799 species currently recognized.
If these species disappear there will be ecological consequences. Lichens play
an important ecological role in the ecosystem; especially since they act as bio
indicators of pollutants and help monitor air quality. They are sensitive to
land use and habitat changes.

This project will utilize existing plant monitoring plots across the Auckland
Region to establish characteristics of lichen distribution defining
relationships between abundance and environmental parameters to provide a
correlation with lichen cover, location, temperature, anthropogenic impact and
height among others. A field experiment will be carried out using two lichens
associated with the trees species in the Auckland region. The currently
identified lichens in New Zealand lack essential information as distribution,
population size and ecological requirements to determine the baseline data of
the lichen distribution and diversity. Lichens are a key component of forest
biodiversity. Their relationship with their substrate can provide data on
threatened species in order to understand the significance of lichens in these
ecosystems.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.