* 1713792
* Improving Earthquake Forecasting and Seismic Hazard Analysis Through Extreme-Scale Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* John Vidale, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2019
* USD 40,000.00

Earthquakes emerge from complex, multiscale interactions across time scales that
range from milliseconds to millions of years within active faults systems that
are incredibly difficult to observe. Large-scale physics-based earthquake
simulations are essential scientific tools that can be used to better understand
these hazardous natural phenomena. This project will develop physics-based codes
for simulating earthquakes on Blue Waters and apply these simulation
capabilities to improve existing hazard analysis methods. The very large scale
computing and data management capabilities of the Blue Waters system will allow
the project to develop and test earthquake models that capture physics in a more
realistic manner, and to run simulations at finer resolutions and higher
frequencies. The results will better quantify seismic hazards and their
uncertainties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance physics-based
probabilistic seismic hazard analysis (PSHA) methods using numerical
experimentation and large-scale simulations to increase the scale range in
current representations of source physics, anelasticity, and geologic
heterogeneity. Specifically, the research project will work towards seven
computational objectives defined to improve our understanding of earthquake
processes and advance physics-based PSHA: (1) Develop an empirically-calibrated
physics-based earthquake forecast. (2) Develop a statistically sufficient, but
reduced, rupture set representative of the new Unified California Earthquake
Rupture Forecast. (3) Implement a new dynamic-rupture based kinematic source
model to compute ground motions up to 8 cycles per second. (4) Evaluate the
basin connectivity phenomenon observed in previous simulations to establish the
importance of waveguide modeling at low seismic frequencies. (5) Investigate and
characterize the influence of material and source models on the accuracy of
ground motion simulations. (6) Validate and calibrate the rheological models
used in simulations. (7) Test the physics-based hazard capabilities on a
vulnerable embankment dam. The goal of this research is to improve the physical
representations of earthquake processes and the deterministic codes for
simulating earthquakes, which will improve PSHA practice in the United States
and benefit earthquake system science worldwide.