* 1713894
* RUI:  Construction, Testing, Installation, and Commissioning of the ALICE Fast Interaction Trigger T0+ detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Klay, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 209,997.00

This award supports the PI and her students in their collaboration on the ALICE
experiment to investigate the behavior of the hot dense plasma of quarks and
gluons created in the collisions of nuclei at the CERN Large Hadron Collider.
This plasma of nuclear matter constituents mimics the conditions in the early
Universe shortly after the Big Bang and allows scientists to study its
properties and evolution via the detection of thousands of subatomic particles
emitted as the plasma expands and cools. Over the next several years, as the LHC
accelerator is upgraded, the group will analyze data from those heavy ion
collisions and build new instrumentation for ALICE &lt;br/&gt;to take advantage
of the substantial increase in collision rates. This will enable ALICE to make
more precise and comprehensive measurements of the interactions, governed by the
strong nuclear force, that occur in these collisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students at the PI's institution will help
design, build, test, install, and commission the T0+ component of the ALICE Fast
Interaction Trigger detector. This detector is crucial to accomplishing the
goals of the ALICE, as it provides the minimum bias trigger, multiplicity
trigger, beam-gas event rejection, collision start time, offline multiplicity,
and event plane determination upon which all ALICE measurements depend. The
students will be trained in the state of the art of advanced photon-sensor
detector technology and take part in the process of scientific discovery with an
international collaboration of scientists and engineers. They will graduate from
the PI's institution better prepared to confront challenging problems in a broad
array of fields, including education, fundamental research, and technology
development. This partnership with ALICE will allow the group to continue to
recruit and retain students who will become tomorrow's leaders and innovators.
This award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.