* 1713664
* EAPSI: Comparing Tibetan Macaque (Macaca Thibetana) Daytime and Nighttime Social Behaviors
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kyle Runzel, Runzel                  Kyle
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project will examine and compare the daytime and nighttime social dynamics
of a group of free-ranging, provisioned Tibetan macaques (Macaca thibetana) at
the Valley of the Wild Monkeys, Mt. Huangshan, Anhui, China. Ongoing research on
these wild, but habituated (used to human presence), macaques has been conducted
since 1986. The macaques' social behaviors will be observed and recorded at
their nightly sleeping sites using camera traps and at their daily feeding sites
using standard behavioral observation procedures. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Jin-Hua Li and Dr. Dongpo Xia of Anhui
University who are experts on the Tibetan macaques at Mt. Huangshan. This
project will help fill a substantial gap in the primatological literature: the
vast majority focuses on daytime behaviors and neglects nighttime behaviors,
which include half of a primate's lifespan. Understanding how daily cycles
influence macaque social behavior may improve our understanding of our own
social tendencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding nighttime behaviors of
diurnal primates provide crucial information on the full spectrum of sociality
and adaptations to group living. For the first time, this project will compare
the day and nighttime social behaviors of a group of free-ranging, provisioned,
Tibetan macaques (Macaca thibetana) at the Valley of the Wild Monkeys, Mt.
Huangshan, Anhui, China. Behavioral data will be collected using scan sampling
at the daytime provisioning site and camera traps at the sleeping sites. After
collection, a comparative analysis of social behaviors at the feeding and
sleeping sites will provide a comprehensive depiction of this species social
dynamics. Documenting behaviors at and around sleeping sites is essential for
understanding the full behavioral repertoire of Tibetan macaques. This project
will be the first to document the nighttime activity pattern of macaques and
will influence how future studies consider primate
sociality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.