* 1713897
* EAPSI: Investigating the Convergence between Engagement Patterns, User Perceptions, and Course Outcomes in Science Massive Open Online Courses
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Bianca Cung, Cung                    Bianca
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) open up an opportunity to extend educational
access to a diverse range of people. However, the opportunity presented by MOOCs
may also exacerbate currently existing educational gaps by engaging only
motivated students whose goals align with the course design. With digital
instruction becoming increasingly popular, there is an increasing need to
understand both instructors' and students' interpretation of the online learning
environment. This study aims to uncover ways to better support learners in
digital environments through an investigation of how learners use and perceive
MOOCs. The investigation will be informed by usage data and interviews with
Japanese students. Given that most studies on MOOCs have been conducted in North
America, this study will address the need for more evidence overseas in order to
highlight the extent that MOOCs are interpreted in the same manner beyond the
borders of the institution delivering the course.

This study will look specifically at single-platform MOOCs, which more closely
resemble traditional approaches to education rather than multi-platform
connectivist experiences. This study will use both cluster analysis and
sequential pattern mining to find usage patterns that characterize the work of
strong and weak students, as defined by the quality of written work in forum and
assignment participation. The researcher will be engaged in ongoing discussions
with each course instructor to ensure that ratings of students' work align with
instructor categorizations of quality (high, moderate, or low). Semi-structured
interviews with both the instructors and the students will inform the whether
the emergent categories of usage patterns after consistent between both
instructor expectations and student perceptions. From the emerging patterns and
interviews, this study will draw a cross-cultural comparison to existing
empirical results on North American MOOCs. If the same usage patterns are found,
then this study suggests a consistent theme for MOOCs. If this study yields
different results, then the findings suggest alternative approaches to MOOCs and
online courses.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.