* 1713945
* EAPSI: Modular Vertex Operator Algebras Associated with the Virasoro  Algebra
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Danquynh Nguyen, Nguyen                  Danquynh       T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The theory of vertex operator algebras is a mathematical framework whose
importance reaches well outside of mathematics. It is prevalent in theoretical
physics, in particular, conformal field theory and string theory, which attempt
to provide a unified description of all the forces of nature. While a vertex
operator algebra is most often considered over the field of complex numbers or
fields of characteristic zero, little is known about those over a field of prime
characteristic p. A better understanding of vertex operator algebras over fields
of prime characteristic plays an important role in the study of modular
representations of finite groups, rational vertex operator algebras, and
rational conformal field theory. This project will be conducted at the Graduate
School of Information Science and Technology at Osaka University under the
mentorship of Prof. Kiyokazu Nagatomo, who specializes in the theory of vertex
operator algebras which correspond to conformal field theory in physics.

In vertex operator algebra theory, rationality is considered to be among the
most important concepts. The primary interest of this project is to investigate
the rationality of modular vertex operator algebras associated with the minimal
series of the Virasoro algebra. The goal is to extend some existing results from
the fields of characteristic zero to fields whose characteristic satisfies a
certain conjectured relation. The plan is to investigate the singular vectors of
the Verma modules over such fields.

This NSF EAPSI award provides an international research opportunity to a U.S.
graduate student and is funded in collaboration with the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS).