* 1713083
* Collaborative Research: Inference for Network Models with Covariates: Leveraging Local Information for Statistically and Computationally Efficient Estimation of Global Parameters
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Peter Bickel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 240,000.00

Large datasets, which are naturally modeled as a network or graph, arise in
almost every field of human endeavor. For example, Facebook is a social network,
where nodes are users, with edges corresponding to friendships. In gene
networks, nodes represent genes with connections corresponding to their co-
expression. In ecological networks, the nodes are animal species, with edges
determined according to who eats whom. A major focus of research for network or
graph data has been on identifying community membership of the nodes. However,
what is often more important for scientific purposes is examining the nature and
evolution of edge and membership probabilities, for instance changes in gene
features of individuals as a function of some unknown factor, like a disease.
The focus on using other measured features of nodes and edges could add, in
decisive ways, to the information available from observed edges or interactions
between nodes. These could be disease symptoms or test results, or demographic
information of users in social networks. Statistical inference in such models,
despite its importance, has only just begun to be studied. There are both
theoretical and computational challenges, due both to the complexity of models
fitted, and the size of data sets. The research will lead to the development of
algorithms for fitting models and statistical measures of confidence, with
potential applications to many fields.

The research is focused on block models for graphs, when node or edge covariates
are present. When formulated, these models are no longer block models, but
models whose membership probabilities depend upon covariates and whose
connection probabilities depend both on block membership and individual
covariates. Fitting algorithms involve alternating between fitting block and
covariate parameters. Variational (mean field) approaches which effectively lead
to semi-parametric model fitting with nK membership "nuisance" parameters, with
n representing the number of nodes and K the number of communities, are
examined. As these approaches have been found by the PIs to be unstable for
large n, the PIs have already begun to investigate the theoretical and practical
aspects of divide and conquer algorithms where many subgraphs are independently
fit. The PIs will study the statistical properties, both asymptotically and
through simulations, and develop practicable and computationally stable methods
for large, relatively sparse graphs.