* 1713913
* EAPSI: Impacts of Human Activity on Squid Population in the Coral Reefs
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Naomi Lewandowski, Lewandowski             Naomi          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The researcher will study the effects of human populations on the health of
coral reefs and also on the reproductive behaviors of the oval squid, a common
fisheries species. Squid are an ideal behavioral study organism due to their
complex mating displays and behaviors. Populations of squid are directly
affected by changes in the environmental factors that support reproduction,
including coral bleaching and river runoff. The study will be conducted with Dr.
Yuzuru Ikeda at the University of the Ryukyus and will benefit from his
expertise in laboratory and field-based cephalopod behavior research. Nearby
reefs and sophisticated university facilities will allow completion of two
complementary projects. Project 1: field surveys of oval squid population sizes
in native reef habitats adjacent to human populations of different size; Project
2: a laboratory study of ideal reproductive habitats for oval squids. Results
from these projects can inform future conservation efforts by bolstering
understanding of human effects on common fishery species.

The field and laboratory experiments will examine the impact of urbanization on
the reproductive behavior and population size of oval squid (Sepioteuthis
lessoniana). Project 1: observational studies will be conducted in the reefs
near urbanized Okinawa Island and the remote reefs of the Yaeyama Islands to
document oval squid egg clusters, sub-adults, adults, and coral species
abundances. Project 2: the researcher will perform behavioral studies of squids
in artificial reef environments. Groups of 8-10 adult oval squid will experience
four habitat conditions ranging between "poor" (empty) and "enriched"
(artificial seaweed and corals). Each will be observed daily for mating and
spawning behaviors, including courtship signaling, spermatophore transfer,
number of eggs, and egg condition. Squid communities are expected to be smaller
in urbanized areas, while squid in "poor" tank conditions will show a smaller
number of mating behaviors and egg clusters. This project will elucidate the
effects of human activity on squid reproduction and inform conservation measures
that could be applicable to many reef ecosystems.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.