* 1713959
* EAPSI: Exploring the Unique Movement Strategy of Brittle Stars via Robotic Modeling
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Elizabeth Clark, Clark                   Elizabeth      G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Brittle stars, close relatives of sea stars, are the ideal model animal for
biologically inspired mobile robot design. By coordinating hundreds of moving
parts, their five arms work together to permit rapid motion across the complex
terrain of the sea floor. They lack a front and back, allowing them to move in
every direction equally without the need to turn. When one or several arms
become damaged or lost, they readjust their locomotion to compensate without any
loss of movement capability. These characteristics alone make brittle stars
ideal candidates for robotic imitation, yet their most striking feature is that
they intercept external stimuli, make decisions, and coordinate multiple moving
parts, all without a brain! Many mobile robots similarly do not rely on a single
control center, although those in robots are far less complex and resilient than
the biological machinery employed by brittle stars. This investigation will
analyze how the brittle star nervous system controls its locomotion and engineer
a robot to test the results. Thus the two major goals of the project are: 1. To
determine how the brittle star nervous system works and 2. To work out how to
integrate this setup into a multifaceted robotic device.

Professor Akio Ishiguro and his research group at Tohoku University have
engineered a variety of robots with coordinated behavior operating under
decentralized control. They observe live brittle stars in the lab and
incorporate their capabilities into robotic design. Through the EAPSI program
and the Ishiguro Lab, this project will use this novel approach to determine how
locomotion is controlled by the decentralized brittle star nervous system. This
investigation will test hypotheses of sensory processing, action determination,
and task delegation with a combination of experiments on live ophiuroids and
mathematical and robotic modeling. This will result in a mathematical model
describing the brittle star system that can be integrated into a robotic device
to evaluate its accuracy and improve coordination in complex robots.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.