* 1713832
* EAPSI: Membrane Steroid Hormone Receptor Activity of Fathead Minnow when Exposed to a Contaminants of Emerging Concern Mixture
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Lina Wang, Wang                    Lina           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

In the aquatic ecosystem, fish are exposed throughout life to complex mixtures
of chemicals. Some of these chemicals mimic hormones in organisms. These
hormone-like chemicals may in turn alter fish behavior, from decreased the vigor
of male nest defense to swimming performance in larval fathead minnows
(Pimephales promelas). In severe cases of chemical exposure, the entire fish
population can collapse. This mixture of chemicals of emerging concern (CECs),
are a common source of hormone-like compounds in aquatic ecosystems. Over the
past few years, CEC use has increased alongside the growth in human population.
Though the effects of single CECs have been explored in fishes, the effects of
an entire mixture of CECs has not. The award research will shed light on the
pathway chemicals take when present in a complex mixture by cloning and
characterizing membrane steroid hormone receptors, including the estrogen
receptors, to determine if a molecular difference is related to changes in
behavioral endpoints. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Yoshinao Katsu, a noted expert in endocrine disruption and developmental effects
of estrogen-like chemicals, at Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan.

CECs have been found to affect fecundity, foraging ability, and other apical
endpoints. This project will focus on the membrane receptors (i.e. GPR30 and
membrane progesterone receptor) activation by an environmentally derived urban
CEC mixture in P. promelas. Most membrane steroid hormone receptors are G
protein-coupled receptors, thus a second messenger analysis will be conducted to
understand the membrane steroid receptors mechanisms and determine if it is
linked to CEC-exposure and/or behavioral endpoints. The objectives of this
projects are: (1) To clone and characterize membrane steroid hormone receptors
in P. promelas; (2) To examine the interaction of the membrane receptor activity
with behavioral endpoints under CEC-exposure. This project will support a larger
project seeking to characterize and evaluate how environmentally derived CECs
mixture from urban sources affect fathead minnow populations in the Laurentian
Great Lake Basin.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.