* 1713726
* EAPSI: Demystifying the Observed Gamma Ray Burst Tracking Between the Peak Energy and Luminosity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Tyler Parsotan, Parsotan                Tyler          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) are some of the most energetic events in the universe.
However, much is unknown about these objects such as critical information about
the structure of their collimated outflow or jet. This information is hard to
deduce due to the fact that GRB observatories are unable to provide information
related to the orientation of the GRB in relation to the detector. This project
will investigate a means to determining the elusive information of GRB
geometrical orientation by exploring the origin of the observed tracking between
the time resolved spectral peak energy and the light curve of a GRB detection.
Running simulations of GRB radiation will allow us to identify a correlation
between the tracking relation and the viewing angle for a given GRB. This
project will be conducted at RIKEN with Dr. Shigehiro Nagataki. This
collaboration will build upon previous studies conducted by the group on jet
structure as well as allow for the use of magnetohydrodynamic simulations of
GRBs which will allow us to fully explore the relation between the peak energy
and the luminosity.

The simulations of GRB radiation transfer will be conducted with post-processing
Monte Carlo Radiation Transfer codes. These codes individually scatter each
photon in an outflow until it freely escapes. This allows for light curves and
spectra to be calculated at various viewing angles of the simulated GRB with
minimal assumptions being made. A quantitative way to measure the tracking
between the peak energy and the light curve intensity will be developed. This
will aid in determining how the characteristics of tracking behavior changes as
a function of viewing angle.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.