* 1713711
* Simulating Faintest Galaxies in the JWST Era
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Nickolay Gnedin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 05/31/2020
* USD 16,368.00

The study of cosmic reionization -- the process of ionization of the bulk of
cosmic gas by high energy radiation from early galaxies -- is one of the most
promising areas of astrophysical research in the current decade. The end of this
decade will see an amazing increase in observational capabilities for the epoch
of reionization. The breakthrough is spearheaded by the James Webb Space
Telescope (JWST), the flagship NASA mission for this and next decade, as well as
several other observational developments to follow. All there observational
probes will flood the field with high quality observational data, whose reach
will be limited unless the observational progress can be met with equivalent
advances in theory, of which numerical modeling is a primary
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the JWST primary science goals is to push the
detection limit of high redshift galaxies to sufficiently faint levels, where
the luminosity function is expected to "turn over". The primary scientific goal
of this project is to use the petascale capabilities of Blue Waters to explore
the physical mechanisms for the turnover at the faint end of the galaxy UV
luminosity function. Since the JWST reach is sufficient to detect the expected
turnover in cluster-lensed "Frontier Fields", theory must be ready to confront
such observations with adequate interpretive tools. This project is part of the
Cosmic Reionization On Computers (CROC) project. The ultimate goal of the
project is to develop simulation technology to be able to model fully all
relevant physics, from radiative transfer to gas dynamics and star formation, in
simulation volumes of over 100 comoving Mpc and with spatial resolution
approaching 100 pc in physical units, thus covering the full range of spatial,
temporal, and mass scales relevant to modeling
reionization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this project
will serve as a vehicle for professional training of graduate students in high
performance computing. In addition, this project has substantial outreach
potential via a strong connection between the University of Chicago and Adler
Planetarium.