* 1713855
* Collaborative Research: NSF/MCB: Kinetic Control of the Transcription Cycle Revealed by Synthetic Enhancers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Ahmad Khalil, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Genes encode molecular tools in the form of RNA and protein. To use these tools
to respond to signals and execute different behaviors, cells carefully control
when, where and how much genes are turned on. This is called 'gene regulation'.
A major goal of synthetic biology is to engineer cells to perform specific
useful tasks. To accomplish this goal, researchers must learn how gene
regulation works well enough to predict and build genes that will be turned on
in exactly the right place, at the right time and to the right level. This
project explores the idea that gene regulation is a multi-step cycle that is
regulated at specific points, like driving a car. A car contains many small
interacting parts that have to act in a specific order to produce force and
move, but to drive it, one only need to operate the ignition, the gas, the
steering wheel and the brakes. The investigators in the project are trying to
identify which steps are regulated, and which molecules regulate them. The work
will contribute to development of new tools that will advance biomanufacturing,
enable the design of new drugs to treat disease, and will provide new methods
for enhancing crop yield, and other applications that will benefit from the
ability to precisely control biology and biotechnology.

For decades, transcription research has been driven by a model that is
conceptually simple: proteins bind to regulatory DNA at equilibrium to regulate
recruitment of RNA polymerase (RNAP). This has led to a focus on cooperative and
competitive physical interactions between transcription factors (TFs), cofactors
and the basal transcriptional machinery, and underlies the search for the still
hypothetical 'cis-regulatory code' of TF binding sites. This project challenges
this dominant paradigm of transcriptional control by addressing how kinetic
processes could combinatorially regulate transcription. Because promoters
dictate rate limiting steps for transcription, we will measure the number of
slow rates at multiple promoters using high resolution imaging, and test whether
this rate spectrum is sensitive to cell type (Aim 1). TFs accelerate or retard
different parts of this complex, dynamic cycle through their distinct
biochemical activities. This project will use functional genomics and knock-down
to characterize TF function at endogenous genes and at synthetic enhancers (Aim
2). The long-term goal is to predict and build synthetic gene regulatory systems
that will both illuminate fundamental biology and perform useful functions, by
performing quantitative experiments that are contextualized with theory based in
biophysics.