* 1713887
* EAPSI: Radiocesium Soil-to-Plant Transfers in Fukushima Forests
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Daniel Workman, Workman                 Daniel
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project aims to increase understanding of the transport of radioactive
contaminants in the forests surrounding the Fukushima Prefecture of Japan.
Radioactive forms of cesium were deposited in the surrounding forests and
environment following the accident at the Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Power Plant
on March 11, 2011. This research will be conducted at the Institute of
Environmental Radioactivity (IER), which is hosted at Fukushima University,
Fukushima City. Gaining a deeper understanding of the ongoing effects of the
disaster is key for the study and development of environmental policies in both
the US and Japan. Studies will be performed in collaboration with Dr. Vasyl
Ioshchenko, an expert on environmental radiocesium with extensive experience
studying radioactivity in the environment surrounding the Chernobyl accident
site. As radiocesium can remain in the environment for many years this study
will also contribute to the cleanup efforts in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
will be developed by sampling soil and vegetation in five different experimental
plots within Fukushima prefecture and within the exclusion zone. The plots will
represent a range of radiocesium soil concentrations. Three understory plant
species will be sampled and the vertical distribution of the roots in the soil
profile will be measured within each plot. Soil samples will be collected to
determine vertical distribution of bioavailable radiocesium within the root
profile of a sampled plant species. Following sequential extraction to separate
bioavailable forms of radiocesium, the samples of soil and vegetation will be
analyzed for radiocesium content by gamma spectroscopy. The resulting
radiocesium concentration and distribution data will be the basis for a
mechanistic interpretation of the soil-to-plant transfer factors for the sampled
species. Understanding radiocesium behavior in the forest ecosystem is essential
for the development of long-term forest management strategy and the
clarification of long-term radiation risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award,
under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports summer
research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.