* 1713981
* EAPSI: Investigation of Cryptic Dextral Faulting and Implications for Seismic Hazard
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Nadine Reitman, Reitman                 Nadine         G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Locations of active faults and their slip rates and earthquake recurrence
intervals are vital inputs for seismic hazard analysis and earthquake
forecasting. Although these data are well defined for at risk faults in the
U.S., they are lacking for many large and potentially destructive faults
elsewhere. Myanmar is an important location to study because of its role in an
active strain-partitioned plate boundary and high potential for damaging
earthquakes. Myanmar contains many active faults because it accommodates the
northward motion of India's collision with Eurasia via strain partitioning. The
Sagaing fault is a 1200-km-long right-lateral strike-slip (dextral) fault that
accommodates the lateral component of India's northward collision with Eurasia.
However, GPS data indicate that the Sagaing fault strains at a rate of ~18
mm/yr, only half the rate of India's movement. Why the Sagaing fault
accommodates only half the dextral motion remains unknown, and the locations and
rates of other faults that accommodate lateral deformation are not well
constrained. The research will be conducted at the Earth Observatory of
Singapore (EOS) under the guidance of Dr. Charles Rubin and Dr. Wang Yu, the
foremost expert on the tectonics of Myanmar.

This project integrates geologic (slip rates and recurrence intervals) and
geodetic (satellite radar) data to investigate spatial and temporal constraints
on the location and magnitude of dextral faulting in Myanmar. Interferometric
synthetic aperture radar (InSAR) data processed in time series will be used to
investigate interseismic strain. Paleoseismic trenching will be employed to
constrain fault slip rates and earthquake recurrence intervals. Initial work
will focus on the Meiktila Segment of the Sagaing fault, a ~200-km-long seismic
gap situated between two of Myanmar's largest cities. The results will further
knowledge of strain partitioning processes, as well as inform seismic hazard
analysis for the region.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.