* 1713460
* Change Makers: Urban Youth Food Justice Ambassadors
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* George Barnett, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,032,296.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This Change Makers project will
establish Food Justice Ambassador corps across three cities in Massachusetts
where youth will install, manage and learn the science and technology underlying
hydroponics. The project takes a near-peer mentoring approach that empowers high
school youth to take the lead in improving ethnic minority and low-income
residents' access to healthy produce and to help educate middle school youth
regarding the value of fresh produce in one's diet by learning the science of
hydroponics. Youth will create story maps to visualize food accessibility in
their communities. High school youth will work with their communities to
establish hydroponic farms in middle school after-school settings. The food that
is grown will be provided to the community through farmers' markets. Youth will
share their work with a larger community of urban farmers at the Massachusetts
Urban Farming Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand
the contribution on youth development by the model's three components: (1) STEM
learning embedded in a social justice framework, (2) near-peer mentoring, and
(3) youth purpose and career development. This will enable researchers to better
understand how the project enables youth to learn STEM skills; apply them to a
real life problem; learn the relevance of STEM skills for addressing personal,
career aspiration, and social justice issues; develop a sense of purpose and
aspirations related to STEM fields; and mentor other youth through the same
process. The project will use a mixed-method, multi-site longitudinal study
utilizing quantitative surveys, structural equation modeling, and qualitative
interviews to study the intersections of the components of the project. As such,
the study will address three key questions: 1) How do youth and mentors perceive
and experience their roles as participants in the pedagogy? 2) What is the
impact of the intervention on youth' sense of purpose, identity, career
adaptability, work volition, critical consciousness, school engagement, STEM
interests, and STEM intentionality? 3) What is the contribution of
relational/mentoring and psychosocial/career adaptability aspects of the youths'
contexts on their capacity to benefit from this program and to develop and
sustain purpose and engagement in school and STEM? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
urban youth (and adults) have little knowledge of where their food comes from
and have limited opportunities to learn how to grow produce as well as develop
related skills that can lead to a career in a STEM field. This is particularly
disconcerting as 55% of African Americans live inside central cities (90% in
metropolitan areas) and over half of all Latino/as live in central cities
(United States Census Bureau, 2011). This project entails the recruitment of
low-income youth from populations underrepresented in science into a program
where social justice concerns (food justice, food security) are illuminated,
analyzed, and acted upon through the development of STEM knowledge and skills.
Specifically, this project recognizes the potential for urban youth to become
deeply knowledgeable citizens who can mobilize their STEM knowledge and skills
to resolve social injustices such as food deserts. If successful, this project
will provide a model that should be transferable to similar contexts to help
broaden participation in STEM.