* 1713563
* EAPSI: Developing Statistical Methods for Removing Unwanted Variation with Negative Controls in Genetics and Causal Inference
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kristen Hunter, Hunter                  Kristen        B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400.00

Unwanted variation is a common problem in statistical analysis that makes it
difficult for researchers to distinguish between signal and noise. For example,
in the field of genetics, a researcher might to try to detect the difference in
gene expression between a cancer tumor and a nearby benign region. The
difference between the two regions is the variation of interest--this is wanted
variation. However, differences in genetic techniques between laboratories can
create unwanted variation in the data, which can lead to the researcher reaching
incorrect conclusions from the data. The unwanted variation can either induce
bias, distorting the true relationship between the genes and diseases, or can
decrease precision, masking the variation of interest. Ideally, the researcher
would like to remove the unwanted variation. One way to achieve this goal is
through a negative control, which is a variable that is associated with the
unwanted variation, but is not associated with the variation of interest. The
goal of this project is to develop statistical techniques for using negative
controls to effectively remove unwanted variation while keeping the variation of
interest. These methods will be useful in a wide variety of fields, but will
focus on genetics and causal inference, including experimental design. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Terence Speed, a
leading expert on negative controls in this context, at the Walter and Eliza
Hall Medical Institute in Melbourne, Australia.

The fields of epidemiology, causal inference, and genetics all have methods
related to removing unwanted variation. This project will synthesize approaches
from these fields to build new statistical methods for negative controls. These
methods include hypothesis testing, propensity score matching, and parametric
models, and rely on different frameworks and assumptions. This project will
bring together the flexibility of causal inference techniques, the statistical
efficiency of genetics methods, and the rigorous hypotheses of epidemiology.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.