* 1713134
* Transforming Rural Communities:  Virtual Instructional Coaching in Afterschool and Library Programs
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Sue Allen, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,874,140.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. The project will
derive a nationwide online coaching/mentoring program for out of school
educators in rural settings. The program builds on a Noyce Foundation pilot
project. The issue to be addressed is that educators in rural settings are
challenged in a multitude of ways due to isolation. This project will try to
find ways to alleviate some of the consequences of isolation through resource
sharing, knowledge sharing, and unique techniques for communicating with
students. Partners in this effort are the Maine Mathematics and Science
Alliance, the National AfterSchool Association, Development Without Limits, and
the Maine State Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using widely-available
technologies, this project will bring fully online instructional coaching in
STEM to out-of-school educators who live too remotely to attend ongoing in-
person workshops. The project team will achieve this by adapting a highly
promising coaching program where groups of educators video-record their own work
with youth, practice key skills, and meet regularly to discuss their work. The
project will: (a) test technical challenges to achieve fully virtual
implementation; (b) design and adapt a specific STEM-skill curriculum to align
with different levels of need; (c) customize the model to work with rural
librarians; and (d) integrate the work into existing state and national
accreditation systems.