* 1713812
* EAPSI: Effects of Habitat Fragmentation on the Connectivity of Wildlife Populations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Thomas Connor, Connor                  Thomas
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Habitat loss and the fragmentation of remaining habitat are the biggest causes
of declines in wildlife populations and global biodiversity. The way that human
disturbance and habitat loss affect animal movement across the landscape and
connect separate populations is difficult to understand, however. In order to
investigate this topic, the project will use genetic analysis to measure
population connectivity of giant pandas across several nature reserves and
unprotected areas facing varying levels of human disturbance as a case study.
This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Jindong Zhang of China
West Normal University, an expert in giant panda ecology. This will be done by
collecting panda fecal samples across the study area and extracting DNA from the
outer layer of each pellet. The genetic distance between panda individuals
across the region will be analyzed and compared with landscape features to find
out which ones enhance and which ones impede giant panda movement and gene flow.
For example, a road or village will likely be much more difficult to move
through than a forest. The project will also examine the amount of habitat that
is needed to keep populations connected across a landscape. Results will inform
management of not only giant pandas, but other habitat specialist species facing
habitat fragmentation and human disturbance pressures.

Habitat fragmentation, resulting from natural and anthropogenic disturbances, is
a complex pressure for wildlife that can affect species differently. The giant
panda is a species that faces extensive fragmentation throughout its range, and
is an ideal habitat-specialist to study its effects due to a reliance on
understory bamboo habitat. This project will use giant pandas as a case study to
investigate the effects of natural and anthropogenic habitat fragmentation on
the connectivity of wildlife populations. Non-invasive genetics sampling of
fecal deposits across a nature reserve network will be collected to compare the
genetic distance between panda individuals with different measures of
environmental distance. Analyses of the covariance of these matrixes will
determine the major barriers and areas of resistance to gene flow and population
connectivity throughout the region. Results will enhance understanding of not
only giant panda ecology, but also advance knowledge of the effects of habitat
fragmentation on habitat specialist species.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.