* 1713450
* Weather and Climate in the Newsroom: Expanding the Climate Matters Network and Its Science Communication Research
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Heidi Cullen, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,901,929.00

Over the seven years prior to this award, the principal investigator from George
Mason University and a national team of scientists, professional societies,
science communication researchers, and broadcast meteorologists have been
engaged in an effort to include in TV and other weather broadcasts information
about current research on the interactions of climate and weather. A Climate
Matters network has been established that involves 350 weathercasters at 218
stations, in 119 media markets, nationwide. A particular focus of the initiative
has been to help the public become more familiar with the science behind how
their local weather and its trends are related to the dynamics of the climate.
Many communities nationwide are engaged in deliberations about how to
understand, plan for, and adapt to the potential impacts of changes in their
weather on important factors pertaining to their economy and well-being, such as
natural resources, natural disasters, agriculture, industry, and health. The
goal of this continuing project is to expand the quantity and nature of the
coverage of such information into the news segments of local news media. By
stimulating local reporting on climate impacts and their relationships to
personal and community-wide decision-making, this project will potentially help
millions of Americans better understand and respond to critical factors that are
affecting their lives. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves five inter-related, complementary activities: (1) Knowledge
building through formative research and process evaluation, specifically in-
depth interviews and random sample surveys of journalists in each of the
participating journalism professional societies; (2) Recruiting 400 news
directors, producers, reporters and additional weathercasters into the Climate
Matters network; (3) Providing climate reporting training and professional
development to members of the network; (4) Producing and distributing Climate
Matters reporting packages to all members of the network on a near-weekly basis;
and (5) Evaluating the impacts of the climate reporting on public understanding
of science.