* 1713850
* EAPSI: Numerical and Experimental Investigations of Supplemental Distributed Damping for Seismic Energy Dissipation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Malcolm Ammons, Ammons                  Malcolm        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Recent advances in structural systems in conjunction with the proliferation of
the use of high performance materials have allowed for structures to become
taller and increasingly slender. As such, these structures are highly
susceptible to large vibrations induced by extreme loads, particularly those
caused by earthquakes or wind events. This can lead to significant economic
impact as a result of extensive repairs that are required prior to building re-
occupancy. In order to increase the post-event functionality of midrise to
super-tall steel structures and better control the structural response and
location of damage, this research will assess the ability of strategically
placed non-traditional civil engineering materials to reduce structural
vibrations. Specifically, high energy dissipating materials such as carbon and
polymer foams will be placed within the often underutilized voids of structural
members and subjected to large-scale shake table loading to simulate seismic
loads. Experimental testing will be supplemented by numerical models that will
allow for the assessment of building displacements and accelerations considering
different levels and location of the high energy dissipating materials. This
research will be conducted at Kyoto University under the guidance of Associate
Professor Masahiro Kurata. His expertise in large scale and numerical testing of
steel systems, coupled with the facilities of Kyoto University, make Japan an
ideal location to conduct this research.

The overarching goal of this project is to mitigate the structural response of
steel systems under extreme loads. Specifically, the main objectives are to
assess the ability of non-traditional civil engineering materials to provide
damping under seismic loading and determine what levels and location of this
supplemental damping will provide the greatest reduction in structural response.
In order to enhance the robustness and resilience of structures, the amount of
permanent damage incurred after an extreme event must be minimized. To this end,
an existing steel moment frame setup will be utilized with a shake table to
simulate the effects of seismic ground motion. Response time histories
(displacement, acceleration) and localized damage will be used to assess the
performance of the steel frame with and without the supplemental damping system.
A significant parametric study utilizing numerical models will augment the
experimental testing, and results from both investigations will be used to
develop recommendations for the use of non-traditional materials as a means to
provide customizable distributed damping.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.