* 1713995
* EAPSI: The Evolution of Proteins in Eukaryotes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Nicholas Kovacs, Kovacs                  Nicholas       A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Ribosomes are one of the largest molecular structures present in every cell of
life and their size is highly correlated with organism complexity. Composed of
both ribosomal protein and ribosomal RNA, ribosomes are the molecular machines
that translate information encoded on messenger RNAs into functional proteins
that perform processes essential to life. The unique ribosomal sequences,
structures, and interactions of all of life?s organisms has made it a major
focal point for antimicrobials. The known 3-dimensional structures of many
ribosomes from across the tree of life will be used in this project to document
the atomic characteristics of hundreds of thousands of atoms that comprise the
ribosome to understand why the size of the ribosome is so highly correlated to
species complexity and how their differences can be used to design new
antimicrobials. This project will be conducted at the National Taiwan University
under the guidance of Assistant Professor Dr. Chiaolong Hsiao who did his PhD
thesis under the guidance of Professor Dr. Loren Williams who is currently the
PhD advisor for the researcher of the proposed project.

The peptidyl-transferase and decoding centers of the ribosome are the catalytic
components of the ribosome responsible for the formation of peptide bonds and
reading mRNA, respectively. These catalytic centers are composed of the most
evolutionary ancient components of the ribosome; all other ribosomal components
accreted onto their surface as the ribosome and life evolved. The evolutionary
process of the ribosome can be seen in the structures of extant species; multi-
cellular eukaryotes have the largest ribosomes, within their structure is the
ribosome of single-cellular eukaryotes, which contains the structure of the
smallest ribosome belonging to prokaryotes. The projects database will consist
of sequence, structure, and molecular interactions of ribosomal proteins which
the researcher will then use to analyze how the ribosome evolved. The database
will also serve as a foundation for observing differences in ribosome structures
that could be exploited for the development of new antimicrobials.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.