* 1713601
* Communicating STEM - Advancing STEM Learning through Media by Developing and Fostering Expertise in Media Making
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Louis Nadelson, Jackson Wild
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2019
* USD 175,056.00

Research tells us that media -- be it on television or film or in the form of
radio podcasts -- are the most widely utilized and trusted sources for public
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning. Media
narratives can shape opinions and knowledge about STEM as well as either reduce
or enhance cultural biases and perceptions of STEM. However, little is known
about the process by which STEM media professionals develop and assess mastery
of "STEM Media," or to what extent evidence-based communication strategies and
data-supported effective practices are considered and used by creators of STEM
media. This conference proposal will bring together STEM professionals and media
creators to determine how STEM media makers develop and assess expertise in STEM
media making and articulate best practices. The goal is to promote cross-
industry collaboration between media producers, STEM professionals and
communication researchers in crafting evidence-based media for the public. The
project will also create a 2-year STEM Media Fellows program as well as expand
the Science of Communication Strand at two Jackson Hole Wildlife Film Festivals
(JHWFF) and at the Science Media Awards and Summit in the Hub (SMASH) conference
in 2018. The work will be led by Jackson Hole WILD, a nonprofit professional
organization, in partnership with Colorado Mesa
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ three strategies to
advance effective STEM media production and product effectiveness. First, an
initiative to provide professional development in Communication Science will be
part of the 2017 and 2018 Jackson Hole WILD conferences to increase the
attending STEM media professionals' understanding of evidence-based practices.
The content will be presented through structured sessions at the conferences
with recordings of the sessions made available online as well as through partner
organizations. Second, the STEM Media Fellows program will recruit emerging STEM
professionals who are interested in media making. The goals of the STEM Media
Fellows program are to prepare these diverse STEM professionals with knowledge
and skills for media development, and form collaborations among the STEM
professionals and media creators. Third, in collaboration with Colorado Mesa
University, the project will conduct a Delphi study to determine how mastery of
STEM media making is acquired and assessed. The Delphi study will involve
gathering perceptions and experiences from the world's leading STEM
communicators and media makers regarding how they learned to be professionals
and how they would determine the level of expertise of other STEM media makers.
The results of the Delphi study will synthesize models and identify best
practices that could be used to inform the STEM media industry efforts to align
media production with evidence-based practices. These results will be
disseminated through appropriate peer-reviewed journals, industry associations,
and other outlets of research on informal science education. This project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.