* 1713545
* Multimodal Visitor Analytics: Investigating Naturalistic Engagement with Interactive Tabletop Science Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2022
* James Lester, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,951,956.00

Engagement is the cornerstone of learning in informal science education. During
free-choice learning in museums and science centers, visitor engagement shapes
how learners interact with exhibits, navigate through exhibit spaces, and form
attitudes, interests, and understanding of science. Recent advances in
multimodal learning analytics are creating novel opportunities for expanding the
range and richness of measures of visitor engagement in free-choice settings. In
particular, multimodal learning analytics offer significant potential for
integrating multiple data sources to devise a composite picture of visitors'
cognitive, affective, and behavioral engagement. The project will center on
providing a rich empirical account of meaningful visitor engagement with
interactive tabletop science exhibits among individual visitors and small
groups, as well as uncovering broader tidal patterns in visitor engagement that
unfold across exhibit spaces. A key objective of the project is creating models
and practitioner-focused learning analytic tools that will inform the best
practices of exhibit designers and museum educators. This project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program. As part of its overall
strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, AISL funds research and
innovative approaches and resources for use in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct data-rich
investigations of visitors' learning experiences with multimodal learning
analytics that fuse the rich multichannel data streams produced by fully-
instrumented exhibit spaces with the data-driven modeling functionalities
afforded by recent advances in machine learning and educational data mining. The
research team will conduct a series of visitor studies of naturalistic
engagement in solo, dyad, and group interactions as visitors explore interactive
tabletop science exhibits. The studies will utilize eye trackers to capture
visitors' moment-to-moment attention, facial expression analysis and
quantitative field observations to track visitors' emotional states, trace logs
generated by exhibit software, as well as motion-tracking sensors and coded
video recordings to capture visitors' behavioral interactions. The studies will
also use conversation recordings and pre-post assessment measures to capture
visitors' science understanding and inquiry processes. With these multimodal
data streams as training data, the research team will use probabilistic and
neural machine learning techniques to devise learning analytic models of visitor
engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted by a partnership
between North Carolina State University and the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences. The research team will 1) design a data-rich multimodal visitor study
methodology, 2) create the Visitor Informatics Platform, a suite of open source
software tools for multimodal visitor analytics, and 3) launch the Multimodal
Visitor Data Warehouse, a curated visitor experience data archive. Together, the
multimodal visitor study methodology, the Visitor Informatics Platform, and the
Multimodal Visitor Data Warehouse will enable researchers and practitioners in
the informal science education community to utilize multimodal learning
analytics in their own informal learning environments. It is anticipated that
the project will advance the field of informal STEM learning by extending and
enriching measures of meaningful visitor engagement, expanding the evidence base
for visitor experience design principles, and providing learning analytic tools
to support museum educators. By enhancing understanding of the cognitive,
affective, and behavioral dynamics underlying visitor experiences in science
museums, informal science educators will be well-positioned to design learning
experiences that are more effective and engaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.