* 1713712
* Collaborative Research: Advancing first-principle symmetry-guided nuclear modeling for studies of nucleosynthesis and fundamental symmetries in nature
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Bei Wang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,066.00

Understanding the origin, structure, and phases of hadronic matter is key to
comprehending the evolution of the universe. To fully achieve this, we need to
model the complex dynamics of atomic nuclei. The scale of computational
challenges that are inherent to modeling such intricate quantum many-body
systems makes the utilization of petascale level resources, like Blue Waters,
essential. The objective of this project is to use the Blue Waters system to
advance large-scale modeling of light through intermediate-mass nuclei and, for
the first time, medium-mass nuclei, including short-lived isotopes not yet
accessible to experiment but key to breakthrough solutions to open questions in
basic and applied research, as well as the focus of next-generation radioactive
beam facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will use an
innovative approach, the symmetry-adapted no-core shell model (SA-NCSM), which
employs exact as well as approximate symmetries of nuclei to solve the
nonrelativistic Schrodinger equation for a system of particles interacting via
realistic nuclear forces. The proposed calculations will provide nuclear wave
functions of unprecedented accuracy that are crucial for gaining further
knowledge of fundamental symmetries in nature, as well as on extracting
information from large datasets that is essential for neutrino physics, for
probing physics beyond the standard model, and modeling of astrophysical
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the project will train and educate
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in nuclear structure modeling
using large-scale computational resources to address important problems in
physics and related fields. The students will acquire and further their skills
in the development of high performance computational physics software, laying
the foundations for their careers in science and technology. Moreover, the
project will provide open access to software and data, including nuclear
structure information of unprecedented accuracy and scope -- only possible when
coupled with the Blue Waters computational capabilities -- as a publicly
available database.