* 1713937
* EAPSI: How Signals Can Dictate Species Interactions and Shape Communication Networks about Danger
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Alexis Billings, Billings                Alexis         C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Some of the most conspicuous behaviors performed by animals are related to
communication. These communication signals are rarely reserved for private
conversation, but are inherently social signals involving numerous senders,
numerous receivers and complex species interactions. This communication network
perspective to animal communication has been slow coming and the majority of
studies focus on one-sender-one-receiver exchanges. This is a logistical
practicality in many instances, but it has the unfortunate side effect of
missing an entire realm of exciting biology. To address this gap, the project
tests how mobbing signals, which are acoustic signals used both within and
across bird species to communicate about predators, can dictate species
interactions in different avian communities and therefore shape communication
networks about danger. The project will use playbacks of different species'
mobbing calls to experimentally probe how bird species respond to one another.
The project is to be conducted with Dr. Toshitaka Suzuki at Kyoto University in
Japan. Dr. Suzuki is an up-and-coming researcher in the field of behavioral
ecology, who has contributed significantly to understanding how signals can
shape complex multi-species interactions. Together, the researchers will begin
to understand how species interactions scale-up to communication networks and
finally how those communication networks function within different communities.

Communication does not occur in private conversations between one sender and one
receiver. Yet the majority of studies of animal communication hold this overly
simplistic, dyadic viewpoint. Communication is an inherently social behavior and
needs to be addressed as a network with many senders, many receivers and complex
species interactions. The project will apply this network perspective to mobbing
calls, which are acoustic signals used both within and across bird species to
communicate about predators. These mixed-species mobbing events are comprised of
complex species interactions that vary by the participation of other species.
Therefore, they are an ideal signaling system to explore questions pertaining to
how species interact using a communication network framework. The researchers
will use playback experiments to test how the avian community assembly
influences species interactions in a mobbing call communication network. The
project will aid in the understanding of the asymmetrical participation in
mobbing communication networks and understand how species interactions may
dictate this asymmetry through context-dependent escalation.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.