* 1713666
* EAPSI: Orienting the Troops: Teaching and Learning Japanese cClture on a U.S. Military Base
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Carl Gabrielson, Gabrielson              Carl           A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

There are roughly 100,000 Americans living and/or working on U.S. military bases
located in Japan, and most of those bases require that incoming personnel
undergo orientations or trainings about Japanese culture. The goal of this
project is to understand what images and aspects of Japan are being taught and
learned in these official instances of military-mediated cultural education. To
do so, the researcher will observe these and other opportunities for cultural
learning and cross-cultural interaction created by the U.S. military at Yokosuka
Naval Base outside of Tokyo, and will interview newcomer Americans about their
impressions of Japanese people and culture and what they feel they are learning
about Japan while on the base. The researcher will use this data in his larger
project of exploring how cultural education can affect U.S.-Japan relations at
both the interpersonal and international levels. The study will be conducted
with Dr. Fumika Sat√¥, a top sociologist of the military and professor at
Hitotsubashi University in Tokyo.

Utilizing participant observation and semi-structured interviews, this study
will explore how understandings and experiences of a foreign culture are formed
within the highly militarized environment of a U.S. base in an allied nation
that is at peace. Despite the geographic intimacy of having American military
installations embedded within Japanese cities, preliminary data suggests many
personnel experience a strong sense of cultural remoteness that is tacitly
encouraged by current U.S. military orientation contents and practices. The
researcher postulates that when personnel experience banal, everyday
interactions with Japanese people and culture while simultaneously being taught
that Japan is alien and exotic, the resulting tension informs military personnel
behaviors and perceptions, which in turn affect relationships between bases and
host communities and, ultimately, the U.S.-Japan security alliance.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.