* 1713935
* EAPSI: Crystallization of Mutant N-demethylase Enzymes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Shelby Brooks, Brooks                  Shelby         G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The goal of this research project is to determine the crystal structures of
mutant enzymes derived from the bacterial caffeine-degrading enzymes NdmABCDE.
These enzymes are used to sequentially remove the N1-, N3, and N7-methyl groups
from the caffeine molecule. This N-demethylation process can result in a new,
economical, and environmentally-friendly method to produce valuable
methylxanthies from caffeine. NdmA and NdmB perform the first two steps by
removing the N1-methyl group followed by the N3-methyl group, respectively.
NdmCDE form a large protein complex to carry out the N7-demethylation of
7-methylxanthine to xanthine. We have created several mutant NÂ¬-demethylase
enzymes with improved abilities to produce high-value metabolites from caffeine,
but the yields of these metabolites are still low. Crystal structures of the
mutant caffeine-degrading enzymes with the metabolites they degrade will be
determined under the mentorship of Dr. Hyun Kyu Song of Korea University. The
crystal structures will provide insight into rationally designing new mutant
enzymes to increase the yield of high-value biochemicals from this process. Dr.
Song's research group is the only one to determine the structure of the
N-demethylase enzymes to date. The Song lab, thus, has all of the protocols and
equipment necessary to complete this project.

The N-demethylation of caffeine (1,3,7-trimethylxanthine) can provide valuable
methylxanthines in an economical, environmentally-friendly method compared to
the current chemical synthesis. Paraxanthine (1,7-dimethylxanthine) is produced
as a minor product through the N3-demethylation of caffeine due to slight
promiscuity of the N1-demethylase NdmA toward the N3-methyl group. The
N3-demethylase NdmB catalyzes the conversion of theobromine
(3,7-dimethylxanthine) to 7-methylxanthine, but exhibits very low activity
toward molecules that contain an N1-methyl group. Mutants of NdmA and NdmB have
been created to better understand the substrate interactions with the enzymes.
The hypothesis of this work is that the mutation of two residues in the NdmA
active site to those found at similar locations in NdmB will swap the NdmA
activity from N1-demethylation to N3-demethylation, resulting in higher yields
of paraxanthine. Under the direction of Dr. Song, the researcher will determine
the crystal structures of these mutants with their substrates and discover the
substrate orientation in the enzyme to ultimately optimize the yield of
paraxanthine. Additionally, the project will also seek to determine the crystal
structure of the native NdmCDE complex. The knowledge gained through these
crystallographic studies will enable rational engineering of bacterial
N-demethylase enzymes and accelerate the biosynthesis of high-value
methylxanthines for applications in the pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.