* 1713110
* Local Environmental Modeling: A Toolkit for Incorporating Place-Based Learning into Virtual Internships - A Scalable, Informal STEM Learning Environment
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,999,716.00

In this project, education researchers, environmental scientists, and educators
will develop a computer tool to let STEM educators and curriculum developers
build local environmental science models. The system will use data about land
use to automatically construct map-based simulations of any area in the United
States. Users will be able to choose from a range of environmental and economic
issues to include in these models. The system will create simulations that ask
students to change to patterns of land use -- for example, increasing land zoned
for housing, or open land, or industrial development -- to try to meet
environmental and social goals. As a result, students will be able to learn
about the interaction of environmental and economic issues relevant to their own
city, town, neighborhood, or region. These map-based simulations will be
incorporated into an existing science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education tool, Land Science, in which learners work in a fictional
planning office to study how zoning affects economic and environmental issues in
a community. Research has shown that Land Science is mode effective when
learners are exploring issues in an area near their home, and the current study
will investigate how and why local simulations improve environmental science
learning. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program which supports work to enhance learning in informal environments by
funding innovative research, approaches, and resources for use in a variety of
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team will build,
test, and deploy a toolkit that will allow informal STEM educators and
developers of informal STEM programming to easily adapt an existing
environmental science learning environment, which consists of a place-based
virtual internship in urban planning and ecology, to their local contexts,
learning objectives, and learner populations. Land Science is a virtual
internship in which young people explore the environmental and socio-economic
impacts of land-use decisions. To do so, they play the role of interns at an
urban planning firm developing a new land-use proposal for the city of Lowell,
Massachusetts: they read reports, virtually visit sites, determine stakeholder
priorities, and use a geographic information system (GIS) model to evaluate the
socio-economic and environmental impacts of land-use choices. No one plan can
satisfy all stakeholders, so learners must compromise to create an effective
plan and justify their decisions. Land Science has been shown to improve civic
engagement, interest in eco-social issues, and understanding of scientific
models, but it is most effective when the location of the virtual internship is
in or near the learners' home town. To improve the accessibility and impact of
this effective learning intervention, the interdisciplinary research team, which
includes learning scientists, land-use experts, and informal STEM educators,
will develop a Local Environmental Modeling toolkit, which will allow educators
to change the location of the simulation and the stakeholder groups, zoning
codes, and environmental and socio-economic indicators included in the land-use
model. The system will ensure that the model produced is functional, realistic,
and appropriately complex. The localized versions of Land Science produced by
informal STEM educators will be used in a range of contexts and locations,
allowing the research team to study the effects of an online, place-based
learning intervention on environmental science learning, STEM interest and
motivation, and civic engagement.