* 1713425
* Leveraging Citizen Science for Informal Science Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Laura Trouille, Adler Planetarium
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,899.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. The proposed project
broadens the utility of Public Participation in Scientific Research (PPSR)
approaches, which include citizen science, to support new angles in informal
learning. It also extends previous work on interactive data visualizations in
museums to encompass an element of active contribution to scientific data. To
achieve these goals, this project will develop and research U!Scientist
(pronounced `You, Scientist!')--a novel approach to using citizen science and
learning research-based technology to engage museum visitors in learning about
the process of science, shaping attitudes towards science, and science identity
development. Through the U!Scientist multi-touch tabletop exhibit, visitors
will: (1) interact with scientific data, (2) provide interpretations of data for
direct use by scientists, (3) make statements based on evidence, and (4)
visualize how their data classifications contribute to globe-spanning research
projects. Visitors will also get to experience the process of science, gaining
efficacy and confidence through these carefully designed interactions. This
project brings together Zooniverse, experts in interactive design and learning
based on large data visualizations in museums, and leaders in visitor experience
and learning in science museums. Over fifty thousand museum visitors are
expected to interact annually with U!Scientist through this effort. This impact
will be multiplied by packaging the open-source platform so that others can
easily instantiate U!Scientist at their institution.

The U!Scientist exhibit development process will follow rapid iterations of
design, implementation, and revision driven by evaluation of experiences with
museum visitors. It will involve close collaboration between specialists in
computer science, human-computer interaction and educational design, informal
science learning experts, and museum practitioners. The summative evaluation
will be based on shadowing observations, U!Scientist and Zooniverse.org logfiles
(i.e., automated collection of user behavior metrics), and surveys. Three key
questions will be addressed through this effort: Q1) Will visitors participate
in PPSR activities (via the U!Scientist touch table exhibit) on the museum
floor, despite all the distractions and other learning opportunities competing
for their attention? If so, who engages, for how long, and in what group
configurations? Q2) If visitors do participate, will they re-engage with the
content after the museum visit (i.e., continue on to Zooniverse.org)? Q3) Does
engaging in PPSR via the touch table exhibit--with or without continued
engagement in Zooniverse.org after the museum visit--lead to learning gains,
improved understanding of the nature of science, improved attitudes towards
science, and/or science identity development?