* 1713908
* EAPSI: The Role of Silica-redistribution in Healing Subduction-related Fault Rocks
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Gabrielle Ramirez, Ramirez                 Gabrielle      E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project will investigate subduction-related fault rocks in the Shimanto
Belt of Japan in order to assess the role of silica redistribution in the
healing of subduction zone fault rocks. These fault rocks record deformation
that occurred at temperatures and depths that span the seismogenic zone (i.e.,
where most earthquakes originate). We hypothesize that silica redistribution is
a viable process for fault healing on timescales relevant to earthquake
(seismic) cycles and therefore can significantly impact the location, frequency,
and magnitude of seismic events such as the destructive 2011 Tohoku-Oki
earthquake. Understanding these healing processes has potential implications for
seismic prediction and seismic hazard. Dr. Yoshitaka Hashimoto of Kochi
University will serve as source of knowledge for my field areas and will also
provide characterization equipment that will allow me to further our
understanding of the role of silica redistribution and other geochemical
processes that contribute to healing subduction-related fault rocks.

This project will study subduction-related fault fabrics and veins in the
Shimanto Belt from multiple m√©langes that represent the seismogenic zone in
order to assess the role of silica redistribution in healing fault rocks. The
proposed research includes (1) field work to gather samples for analyses and to
collect structural measurements (2) geochemical analyses of veins and slip
surfaces (i.e. scaly fabrics) using characterization techniques (i.e., EPMA, FE-
SEM) to investigate processes of dissolution and precipitation of silica and (3)
petrographically characterizing the distribution and dimensions of veins and
shear fabrics (i.e. spacing and thickness). The data from the proposed research
will help to better constrain a kinetics model for silica redistribution that
will assess timescales of subduction zone healing. Evaluating the timescales of
fault healing along the subduction interface will allow us to investigate the
connection between healing processes and the seismic cycle in subduction zones.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.