* 1713974
* EAPSI: Using Prosody to Learn Phonetic Categories
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Katarzyna Hitczenko, Hitczenko               Katarzyna      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Speech is highly variable. Though we often do not notice, every time we say a
word or sound, it comes out differently. Our best language technologies (e.g.
Siri) often fail precisely because of this variability, which shows just how
difficult it is to learn about the sounds of language from variable speech.
Nonetheless, infants learn about the sounds of their language within the first
year of their life, and they do this with much less data and fewer resources
than language technologies have access to. This project tests hypotheses about
how infants solve this learning problem so effectively, by using computational
models to simulate the learning process. This work will be done in collaboration
with Dr. Reiko Mazuka at RIKEN Brain Science Institute, who has the only
existing dataset with the necessary annotations for this project. Understanding
how infants, the most successful language learners, learn can help improve
language technologies so that they work more successfully across a wider range
of languages and are more usable by a larger proportion of society, including
people with accented speech and children, whose speech continues to pose
problems for such systems.

Various unsupervised sound category learning models will be tested on their
ability to learn the Japanese vowel contrast, which no previous models have
successfully learned. One of the factors that contributes to the difficulty of
this particular learning problem is prosody - or the rhythm and intonation of
speech - which systematically lengthens vowels in particular positions and
causes overlap between short and long vowels through a process known as phrase-
final lengthening. Knowing how prosody affects the duration of vowels and
factoring out its influence could be helpful in learning the Japanese sound
categories. This project will incorporate prosody into two existing
computational models of sound category learning and see whether this improves
learning outcomes.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.