* 1713456
* Exploring Careers and Learning Informally to Prepare for STEM Employment
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Cathy Ringstaff, Earth Team
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,452,339.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by designing,
implementing, and testing an afterschool internship program that will engage
older youth in work-based learning experiences in in STEM fields. The new model
program will link the resources and learning approaches of the Global Learning
and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program to career academies
where youth from populations underrepresented in STEM fields will gain direct
experiences in data collection and analysis through student-led investigations
in the geosciences and environmental studies. Two key outcomes of this project
will be: (a) Development of a replicable model of an afterschool STEM internship
program for informal STEM learning environments and schools across the nation,
and (b) Development of a set of measurement tools and approaches that can assess
and promote understanding regarding how youth think and feel about science and
their possible future roles in science careers. Participating youth will master
scientific practices and become immersed in science culture through
opportunities to develop research projects, interact with scientists, and
collaborate with fellow student-researchers. In the process, they will develop
collaboration and communication skills, and gain an increased sense of identity
and agency in science fields. They will also learn new strategies to attain
their career goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In developing and testing the new
model of an afterschool program focusing on STEM careers, the project will draw
on both existing and emerging knowledge from three areas of inquiry: informal
STEM learning, youth development, and work-based learning. The project will
bring together theory related to work-based learning and apprenticeship to
knowledge about informal STEM learning and youth development, addressing the
needs of older youth as they transition to adulthood. The program will also
explore the use of measurement tools that address workforce-related student
learning goals in addition to social-emotional learning and STEM learning goals,
adapting existing tools and developing new tools as needed. The result will be a
replicable model for an afterschool, career-focused internship that facilitates
STEM learning and identity, employing youth development principles, such as
experiential learning, peer collaboration, adult mentoring, and meaningful
contributions to the world beyond school. The project will use a mixed-methods
approach to investigate four research questions: (1) What aspects of the program
are most important for promoting the development of scientific practices, socio-
emotional learning, and career skills? (2) How can afterschool informal science
learning be designed to address the perceptions and needs of diverse groups,
especially those from populations underrepresented in STEM? (3) How do youth
make gains in developing facility with STEM practices, key social-emotional
outcomes needed in work and civic life, and career development knowledge? And
(4) How do we accurately measure development of scientific practices, socio-
emotional learning and career skills? The project will develop pretest and
posttest self-report measures to gauge program influence on social-emotional
outcomes and career-related outcomes, and performance-based assessments and
rubrics will be used to assess culminating science projects. Other factors
contributing to the success of the new model will be examined through analysis
of coach instructional logs, surveys, and questions, as well as participant
observations, interviews, and focus groups. Project participants will be youth
of ages 14-18 recruited from ten inner-city schools having large populations of
students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields. Participants will meet in
teams of approximately 14 interns for a total of 2.5 hours per week for 32
weeks. Each team will also meet an additional 4-6 times for weekend or overnight
outings associated with their study sites.