* 1713930
* Unity of Purpose for Equitable Representation in Geosciences Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Stephen Boss, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 32,037.00

The proposed Unity of Purpose for Equitable Representation in Geosciences
Workshop is a convening of geoscience organizations, minority-serving
professional organizations, minority-serving academic institutions, government
agencies, and large facilities with an interest and capacity to positively
effect change within their organizations around broadening participation
efforts. The proposed workshop will support up to 40 attendees (national and
local) and be held over two-days, January 2017 in Arlington, Virginia. Workshop
participants will: 1) engage in focused discussions about broadening
participation in geosciences academic programs and professions; 2) identify
systemic or institutionalized barriers to inclusion in geosciences; 3)
brainstorm methods to eliminate institutional barriers to inclusion, and 4)
support development of a unified message to equitably represent diversity in
geoscience disciplines nationwide that will be shared among participating
organizations and institutions.

This workshop will bring to light strategies for increased communication,
dialogue, and partnerships that are necessary to refine solutions to broadening
participation efforts. Knowledge gained will identify approaches to attract
increased participation of HBCU (Historically Black Colleges and Universities)
and TCU (Tribal Colleges and Universities) faculty and students in professional
meetings, and better understand how professional associations can support MSIs
(Minority-Serving Institutions). Traditionally earth science organizations have
positively cooperated and pooled resources on projects of similar scale however
they have not fully engaged in efforts with MSIs and minority-serving
organizations in such an all-encompassing manner. By bringing together an
assortment of professionals representing the geosciences and STEM that are
committed to diversity, we hope to embolden a model with which minority and
professional organizations can use to work together on broadening participation
efforts. This workshop has the potential to offer comprehensive approach to
support diversity and inclusivity efforts moving forward.