* 1713864
* EAPSI: Longitudinal Modeling of Neurocognitive and Psychosocial Trajectories in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Gloria Han, Han                     Gloria         T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

In collaboration with Dr. Susan Gau, at National Taiwan University in Taipei,
Taiwan, this project will develop and apply salient statistical methods in
longitudinal data analysis to an ongoing longitudinal follow-up study
investigating the development of neurocognitive functioning and psychosocial
outcomes in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Dr.
Gau is a distinguished expert and researcher in developmental psychology,
cognitive neuroscience, and epidemiology. Importantly, this study is the first
of its kind in facilitating a deeper cross-cultural understanding of ASD for Han
Chinese using many levels of analysis, including neuroimaging, genetic, and
behavioral measures. This project complements the researcher?s impending
dissertation work regarding the development of statistical methods to best
identify unique subgroups and trajectories of change in widely varied
populations. Through the EAPSI award, the researcher will be able to test and
compare different longitudinal modeling methods and identify informative
subgroups in the study population based on distinct neurocognitive and
psychosocial developmental trajectories. The project will provide insights in
both quantitative methods for developmental scientists, and substantive
identification of subgroups and distinct longitudinal trajectories for Han
Chinese with ASD.

The proposed study is situated at the intersection of research in developmental
science and statistical methods, specifically the analysis and identification of
distinct patterns of change within a population. Traditionally, studies may
implement whole sample analyses that lack the specificity and means to identify
subpopulations that are more vulnerable to psychosocial and neurocognitive
disturbance. By focusing on the identification of subgroups and distinct
trajectories of change, the researcher is able to identify protective predictors
and risk factors that lead to various outcomes of interest. This study will
compare methods such as growth curve modeling, growth mixture modeling, group-
based trajectory modeling, and alternative non-parametric methods to identify
the degree of convergence between models and assess model selection via
substantive and statistical reasons.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and isjointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.