* 1713717
* EAPSI: Characterizing the Global Proliferation of Antibiotic Resistance via Ballast Waters
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* William Gerhard, Gerhard                 William        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research will examine the prevalence of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs)
and pathogens in post-treatment ballast water used in international shipping.
Improperly managed ballast water discharge can have significant impacts on human
health, highlighted by a Vibrio cholerae outbreak in Peru in 1991 that killed
over 10,000 people. Despite well-documented ballast-associated introductions of
invasive species of various crabs and jellyfish, research exploring the role of
ballast in the global transport of microorganisms is limited. Singapore is an
ideal study site for ballast water research because it is home to the second-
busiest port by cargo tonnage in the world. Ballast samples will be collected
from vessels in the Port of Singapore and will be analyzed for physical,
chemical, and microbiological parameters. Research will be conducted at the
National University of Singapore (NUS) in collaboration with Dr. Karina Yew-
Hoong Gin, an expert in coastal water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ballast
water microbiome from vessels using several different ballast water treatment
methods will be examined using culture-based and molecular methods. Culture-
based methods will be used to quantify the typical indicator microbes of ballast
water: Escherichia coli, Enterococcus, and Vibrio cholerae O1 and O139.
Molecular analyses, including metagenomics via next-generation sequencing and
targeted PCR/qPCR analysis for 13 common ARGs, will also be performed at Duke
University and NUS, respectively. Samples will be gathered from vessels with
different ballast water treatment methods and the results of culture-based and
molecular methods will be compared across treatment method groups via ANOVA and
post-hoc tests. In addition, ballast samples from this research in Singapore
will be grouped and compared to ballast samples previously collected at several
domestic ports in the United States as part of the researcher?s ongoing
dissertation research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate
student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Chinese Ministry of Science and
Technology.