* 1713957
* EAPSI: The Effects of Biochar Addition on Denitrification and Carbon Sequestration within a Restored Wetland
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Danielle Perry, Perry                   Danielle
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Salt marshes are important wetlands that perform essential ecosystem functions.
They limit coastal erosion, mitigate storm effects, and are important buffer
system between coastal and terrestrial ecosystems. These environments are also
responsible for removing harmful greenhouse gases from the atmosphere including
nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide. This project will aid in the restoration of a
salt marsh environment located in Shanghai, China. The study will be conducted
under the guidance of Dr. Xuechu Chen, an expert in ecological engineering. Dr.
Chen has advanced the field in wetland restoration through his publication
contributions and commitment to international communications and collaborations.
The goal of the study is to enhance the natural chemical processes of salt marsh
environments in an effort to remove harmful greenhouse gases from the
atmosphere.

The proposed study seeks to investigate the effects of biochar addition on salt
marsh restoration. Biochar is a soil enhancer that is often used to improve soil
quality and can be a mechanism to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Biochar is
expected to aid in nitrous oxide removal by enhancing the denitrification
process through organic carbon additions. It has the potential to enhance plant
growth and slows the return of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, facilitating
carbon sequestration. The study site, Bihaijinsha, is located within northern
Hangzhou Wan Bay, Fengxian District, Shanghai. It is a restored salt marsh about
6000m2 that underwent sediment addition as part of the restoration process.
Biochar will be added to designated plots within the study area. Through the use
of a gas analyzer, the greenhouse gases fluxes of carbon dioxide and nitrous
oxide will be monitored from these plots. It is expected that gas fluxes will
decrease over time and plant growth will increase. The restoration technique
proposed in this project will help restore the biogeochemical processes within a
salt marsh environment, promoting essential ecosystem services.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.