* 1713741
* I-Corps: Multi-modal Robot Skins for Adaptive Human-Machine Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Dan Popa, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 02/28/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will consist of
creating higher performance human-machine interfaces, with wide-ranging
applications not only in robotics, but also in manufacturing, healthcare, and
intelligent consumer products. Increasing human-machine collaboration by adding
cost-effective and customizable sensory perception, for instance touch sensing,
to future machines will have an impact to their safety when operating around
people, and will enhance their usability, productivity, and level of
personalization. Consumers at large will benefit from product interfaces that
are more intuitive and easier to learn and use. Numerous companies and
government labs will also benefit from the commercialization of technology
resulting from this project, as it will help retrofit their existing
infrastructure with robotic skin patches to make it safer and more
productive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will undertake
commercialization feasibility research for 'Electronic Skin' technologies based
on multi-sensory perception of humans interacting physically with machines,
through sensing touch pressure, acceleration, temperature and proximity. Using
in-house fabricated tactile sensors embedded in flexible substrates, combined
with other types of commercial off-the shelf sensors, this project develops
modular systems that can be networked and scaled in large numbers. Numerous
sensor components are 3D printed, and can be retrofitted onto existing
machinery, such as robots, automated production units, appliances in a cost
effective manner. Furthermore, the human-machine interface software of the
system involves novel learning algorithms that can adapt to user preferences,
decrease the task completion time, and the level of expertise required by users.
The adaptive software learns to adjust the human-machine parameters in real-
time, according to interaction results, and can take into account sensor
degradation over time, user fatigue, and other persistent and costly technical
challenges that have limited the widespread adoption of this technology in the
past.