* 1713805
* EAPSI: Hierarchical Multiscale Methods for Flows in Fractured Media
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jun Sur Park, Park                    Jun_Sur        R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Multiscale fractured media occur in many subsurface and material science
applications. The simulations of complex processes in fractured media are
challenging due to multiple scales and high contrast. The material properties
within fractures can be very different from the background properties. These
problems require some types of model reduction. In this project, the EAPSI
fellow will study developing and applying hierarchical modeling concepts in
these multiscale simulations. This research will be conducted in the
collaboration with Dr. Viet Ha Hoang at Nanyang Technological University. Dr.
Hoang has an extensive experience in developing hierarchical models for
multiscale problems. The researcher will learn these techniques and work with
Dr. Hoang closely to develop these hierarchical methods for flows in fractured
media. The research can have an impact in many areas of research, which is
important for US. These include environmental problems such as CO2 sequestration
or unconventional hydrocarbon recovery. Multiscale methods, though efficient, it
may require many local simulations. These local solutions involve performing
local computations in each computational grid. The computational cost associated
with local solves can be drastically reduced if one can take into account the
neighboring coarse-grid information and local solutions. Many neighboring
coarse-grid blocks share similar features and effective permeabilities of the
neighboring coarse-grid blocks are close to each other. In this research,
hierarchical approaches will be employed for local problems to reduce the
computational cost by using different resolution in different coarse-grid blocks
and combining these multi-resolution solutions to achieve an accurate
approximation of the effective properties. These effective coefficients will be
used to simulate the global flow. Modeling global large-scale fractures,
multiscale finite element methods will be used. This award, under the East Asia
and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S.
graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the National Research
Foundation of Singapore.