* 1713746
* Measuring and Modeling How Clocks in Single Cells Communicate: an interdisciplinary apporach
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2021
* USD 944,275.00

Oscillators, by virtue of their periodic behavior, provide a way to tell time,
as illustrated by the movement of a clock's pendulum. The study of coupled
oscillators and their mutual synchronization has remained a problem central to
physics for centuries, but has only recently captured the imagination of
biologists. One example of synchronized oscillators are the biological clocks
found in living cells. Biological clocks are pervasive in their effects from
genes to ecosystems. Biological clocks affect the health of humans, animals and
plants and they are being engineered for timed delivery of therapeutics, algal
bioreactors for biofuel production, and crop improvement. The clock, through its
light entrainment feature, impacts the genetic dynamics of bacterial assemblages
in the world's oceans and hence may affect carbon cycling in marine ecosystems.
Understanding how cell populations synchronize their clock oscillations, to give
rise to a functioning "biological clock", is the central focus of this project.
The project will also develop an innovative interdisciplinary "Clock
Collaboratorium" graduate student research training course that will make
extensive use of cyber-learning tools. Investigators will invite undergraduate
and high school students to their labs to work on research related to this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent evidence suggests that single-cell
oscillators of the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa (N. crassa) are
stochastic on a single-cell level, while measurements on populations of millions
of cells indicate that their clocks are synchronized. In order to understand
this synchronization, a novel droplet microfluidics platform is deployed for
high-throughput, high-precision measurements on a controlled number of living N.
crassa cells. Single-cell measurements will confirm whether circadian rhythms
exist on a single-cell level and the extent of stochasticity. Multi-cell
experiments will probe communications and synchronization between single-cell
clock oscillators. Signaling molecules responsible for synchronization will be
identified using nuclear magnetic resonance on exo-metabolites from living
cells. Stochastic resonance, a fundamental concept from non-linear-systems
physics, will be tested as a possible clock synchronization mechanism, against
multi-cell measurements, using novel ensemble simulation modeling approaches.
This project is is expected to advance systems biology research on clock systems
through (1) tight coupling of modeling and experimentation, and (2) opening up a
new frontier by pushing the scale of measurements to single cells. A detailed
understanding of the clock's single-cell regulation in N. crassa will provide
new insights into clock mechanisms, regulatory clock controls, and physiological
consequences in other organisms, ranging from plants to humans.