* 1713931
* EAPSI: Using High-throughput Technologies to Quickly and Comprehensively Probe Enzymatic Function and Promiscuity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Steven Fleming, Fleming                 Steven         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Chemical synthesis is the main route to develop new molecules for use in
biomaterials, pharmaceutical drugs, and as chemical probes. Chemists often use
dangerous, time-consuming, and costly techniques when synthesizing these
compounds which must then be tested for relevant and robust function. Enzymes
are nature's powerful chemists, performing many synthetically challenging
chemical transformations simply and safely. It is the purpose of the grant to
utilize a high-throughput technique to rapidly test enzymatic function and
substrate promiscuity to realize enzymes able to replace dangerous and expensive
synthetic chemistry methods. Using "mRNA display", which is a technology to
generate and screen massive nucleotide-encoded peptide libraries, millions of
potential enzyme substrates will be synthesized and tested for enzymatic
modification. This streamlined process will provide a quick, comprehensive
analysis of enzyme promiscuity to reveal the usefulness of an enzyme for organic
synthesis applications. The project will be conducted under the guidance of Dr.
Hiroaki Suga, an expert on mRNA display, at the University of Tokyo in Japan.

LynD is a putatively promiscuous enzyme that acts on peptide substrates in the
maturation of ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptide
(RiPP) natural products. It is the purpose of LynD to transform cysteine
residues into thiazolines -- often a necessary transformation for RiPP
biological activity. Using mRNA display techniques, millions of unique
substrates for LynD will be synthesized and attached to genetic barcodes.
Substrates that are fully modified by LynD will be isolated using a resin that
covalently reacts with unmodified cysteines. Once modified substrates are
purified, the genetic barcodes will be sequenced to reveal the comprehensive
substrate promiscuity of LynD. Given a proper selection technique between
modified and unmodified enzyme substrates, it is envisioned that the processes
used in this award will be expandable to other peptide modifying enzymes. This
award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.