* 1713806
* EAPSI: In situ Structural Characterization of Lead-free, Bismuth-based Piezoelectric Thin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Austin Fox, Fox                     Austin
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

There is a pressing need to discover and understand the behavior of
environmentally benign, non-toxic, and sustainable replacements for lead-based
materials in all applications (as already has been done for lead-based paints
and solders). Suitable replacements have yet to be realized for piezoelectric
materials (those that change shape with applied electric field and vice versa)
that are important for a large range of devices and applications, such as
actuators, accelerometers, filters, vibration control, fuel injection, ink jet
printing, ultrasound generation and sensing, and resonators. One class of
materials that shows great promise as replacements is based on bismuth sodium
titanate (BNT). In thin films for microelectronic applications, the fundamental
piezoelectric effect in these new materials is not yet understood well enough to
allow devices to be reliably implemented. Accordingly, the objective of this
project is to explore the mechanisms associated with piezoelectricity in BNT-
based piezoelectric thin films using novel characterization methods available at
Professor Hiroshi Funakubo's laboratory at the Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Professor Funakubo's characterization tools allow for the measurement of atomic
structure while applying electric fields, giving direct insight into the
piezoelectric strain mechanisms of these exceptional materials.

In bulk form, these BNT-based materials belong to a class of materials called
relaxor ferroelectrics, which show enticing properties with regards to electric
field induced displacement mechanisms that are just beginning to be understood.
Many BNT-based compositions show the strain and polarization behavior that is
characteristic of a reversible field-induced relaxor-to-ferroelectric phase
transition; these are known as ergodic relaxors. However, BNT-based materials in
thin film embodiments do not exhibit the enhanced properties that are found in
the bulk. In particular, the ergodic relaxor compositions that have been studied
in thin films do not show the signs of a reversible field-induced relaxor-to-
ferroelectric phase transition, but rather behave similar to normal
ferroelectrics and have comparatively low displacements. This differing response
between bulk and thin films needs to be understood for this promising material
system to be viable for real-world applications. Therefore, novel in situ
microstructural characterization methods (2D X-ray diffraction and Raman
spectroscopy), available at the host institution, will be applied to elucidate
the electric field induced strain mechanisms in BNT-based piezoelectric thin
films.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.