* 1713868
* CQIS: RUI: Entanglement and Applications via Local and Permutational Symmetry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Lyons, Lebanon Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 174,999.00

The prospect of harnessing quantum mechanical systems to process information
promises spectacular applications. These include encrypted communication with
fundamentally new levels of security, computing machines that will outperform
existing supercomputers, and improved measurement devices that will probe new
physical realms. The "quantum advantage" at the heart of these revolutionary
technologies arises from exploiting entanglement and other nonlocal properties
that are easy to define but difficult to analyze. This project will study
quantum entanglement in order to design useful applications for a future with
quantum computers and quantum communication networks. In addition to achieving
scientific progress through new results, a major project component is scientific
development of undergraduate students through participation in real
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement a systematic
framework studying local unitary and permutational symmetries to probe
multiparticle quantum entanglement and to develop applications for quantum
protocols. Methodology will utilize the theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras,
including representation theory and Schur-Weyl duality. Achievements will
contribute novel techniques, theoretical results, and applications in areas of
mainstream Quantum Information Science.