* 1713072
* Collaborative Research: Closing the Gaps in Climate Models' Surface Albedo Schemes of Processes Driving the Darkening of the Greenland Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Marco Tedesco, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 405,166.00

Surface albedo is a measure of the percentage of solar radiation that is
reflected by a medium. The higher (lower) the albedo, the lower (higher) is the
amount of solar energy absorbed by the medium. Albedo plays a critical role on
the Greenland Ice Sheet, where absorbed solar radiation is the dominant driver
of surface melt during summer. The evolution of albedo on the Greenland Ice
Sheet is primarily driven by changes in snow grain size, the presence of liquid
water on the surface, the exposure of bare ice, and the presence of light-
absorbing impurities in the snow and ice. Such impurities include soot, dust,
and biological constituents like bacteria and algae. Interactions between
biological impurities and snow physical processes (e.g., metamorphism and melt
redistribution) are important because they can drive positive feedbacks in which
total melt is amplified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their importance, these
processes relating biological constituents to snow and ice evolution are
currently either absent or poorly represented in models used to simulate current
estimates and future projections of the contribution of Greenland to sea level
rise. Through an interdisciplinary and collaborative effort, this project will
integrate state of the art knowledge of how biological activity impacts albedo
into climate models. This will help reduce uncertainties of the contribution of
Greenland to sea level rise and will also improve our understanding of
interactions between the ice sheet and the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
regional climate and Earth System models that will be applied in our study are
open-source models, such as e.g., the Community Earth System Model). Model
improvements that are implemented will be released for use by other researchers
in a timely way. The project includes the involvement of a postdoctoral fellow,
and hence training of young investigators to address complex and yet crucial
science questions through an interdisciplinary effort. Results from this project
will be communicated to the media and public, thereby promoting deeper knowledge
of the processes affecting the surface mass balance of the Greenland Ice Sheet.