* 1713911
* EAPSI: A Cross-cultural Study of the Relationship Between Social Ecology and Evolved Cognitive Systems for Forgiveness
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Thomas McCauley, McCauley                Thomas         G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Social relationships are a key component of human life. However, even the
strongest of relationships can come under duress in the event that one partner
harms or offends the other. Rather than abandoning these relationships, people
frequently respond by forgiving. Because forgiveness is crucial in maintaining
valuable cooperative relationships, researchers have suggested that humans
possess evolved psychological mechanisms designed for achieving forgiveness.
These mechanisms utilize two criteria in determining whether an individual will
forgive or abandon a relationship: the value of the relationship, and the
likelihood that the offender will exploit them again. The purpose of this
project is to investigate the operation of these forgiveness mechanisms across
diverse cultural landscapes, as cultures vary in terms of the social
opportunities they offer, consequently impacting relationship value. Cultures
that offer few opportunities for new relationship partners commensurately raise
the value of existing relationships, making people more willing to forgive; when
new relationships are scarce, there is external incentive to give someone
another chance. In contrast, in cultures where new relationships are plentiful,
individuals may be less motivated to tolerate a harmful partner. This project
will be conducted at Kobe University in Japan in collaboration with Dr. Yohsuke
Ohtsubo, an expert in forgiveness research.

Japan is the ideal place to study this phenomenon, fostering a society where new
social relationships are difficult to find, making it an optimal foil to the
United States, a society that affords the opportunity to form many new social
relationships. This project aims to explain cross-cultural variation in
forgiveness using a socio-ecological perspective, emphasizing that behavior and
psychology are often the product of game theoretic strategies that individuals
adopt in response to local environmental conditions. In addition, this project
furthers research on the evolved design of psychological mechanisms undergirding
forgiveness and cooperation.

This award ,under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.