* 1713996
* EAPSI: Creation of Libraries of Methylene Thioacetal Bridged Peptides for Ligand Discovery
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Emil Iqbal, Iqbal                   Emil           S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Numerous disease states are driven by anomalous protein-protein interactions.
These interactions typically involve adhesive protein surfaces making large
contacts that are hard to disrupt. The result is that traditional small molecule
drugs cannot sufficiently break up these interactions; thus these interactions
have been drugged "undruggable." In the past few decades, peptides have emerged
as an alternative due to their large size are ability to interact with large
surface contact area in protein-protein interactions. There are many well
developed technologies for identifying potential peptide therapeutics, this work
will focus on developing technology to expand the chemical diversity of peptides
available in the most powerful technique: mRNA display. This work will be
completed under the guidance of Dr. Hiroaki Suga at the University of Tokyo. Dr.
Suga is a world expert in mRNA display and peptide ligand discovery whose
expertise will prove invaluable for completion of the project.

Many biologically relevant peptides and proteins contain macrocycles to
stabilize tertiary structures and protect against proteolytic degradation.
Researchers have developed several macrocyclization techniques to create peptide
mimics of biological structures, most notably: lactam bridging, Grubbs
metathesis, dibromoxylene cyclization, azide-alkyne "click" chemistry, and head-
to-tail cyclization to name a few. Many of these peptides have even moved to
clinical trials in several disease models. Though all these methods create large
macrocyclic peptides, all require a bridging moiety of substantial size.
Evolutionarily pressures have optimized biological macrocycles to create many
surface contacts in ligand-protein interactions; large bridging moieties can
sufficiently disrupt this optimized network negating any benefits of stability
conferred. This project will focus on integrating a method of methylene bridge
disulfide creation into the peptide ligand discovery platform of mRNA display.
This platform is far and away the most powerful method of peptide ligand
discovery, capable of simultaneously creating and screening 1013 unique
peptides. Because the methylene bridge cyclization introduced in the proposed
work is only a single carbon, this method will be offer a tool to create large
libraries of peptides having a minimally disrupting bridging moiety. This
technology will be initially applied to a screen for trypsin inhibitors and will
ultimately be be added to the growing toolkit for identifying peptide ligands
inhibiting protein-protein interactions.

This award, under the East Asian and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by the NSF and
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.