* 1713749
* More Power to the Many: Scalable Ensemble-based Simulations and Data Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2020
* USD 29,150.00

Glutamate receptors, and understanding their binding characteristics, are of
fundamental biomedical importance as they mediate neuronal signaling. This
project proposes to characterize and understand glutamate binding to the
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAr), a member of the glutamate receptor family
of proteins, with potential profound consequences for neuroscience and
pharmacology. However, the characterization of the configurational landscape of
NMDAr is a High Performance Computing (HPC) problem. It requires simulations
with timescales and system sizes well beyond any that have previously been
undertaken. The project will use the petascale computing capabilities of Blue
Waters to study such a system, using new sampling methods and original computing
and data processing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to study this macromolecular system.
However, it remains a challenge to obtain an adequate sampling of the
configurational space of complex chemical systems to accurately describe the
structural properties of important substates, their relative propensities, and
accessible transitions between them. The project proposes to use a novel
software framework that on the right computational resource makes a step-change
in our ability to sample the conformational space of macromolecules by MD. The
project will study a protein of great biomedical relevance that exemplifies
these issues, namely the ligand binding domain (LBD) of the N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor (NMDAr). The idea at the core of the software strategy is similar to
many other multiscale methods -- such as umbrella sampling, metadynamics,
adaptive biasing methods, or transition path sampling: instead of one or a few
long MD trajectories being run, many (hundreds or thousands) of short
trajectories may be simulated concurrently. Information is extracted from these
very large datasets using sophisticated data reduction and analysis methods, and
the coarse-grained information -- which embodies the chemical insight necessary
to understand the system, e.g. an approximate free energy -- is used to refine
the way in which further trajectories are generated (i.e., how we sample).
Results from the analysis of the space sampled are then used in an iterative
process to further direct the search of the conformational space (i.e., where we
sample). This Blue Waters allocation will allow the project to access a total of
2.7 milliseconds of simulation of the NMDAr LBD system. With the three orders of
magnitude (at least) speed-up in sampling allowed by our methodology with
respect to plain MD, the project will be able to map the configurational
landscape of this protein relevant for conformational dynamics up to a timescale
of seconds, that is, to completely characterize the role of the ligand binding
domain in the biological function and mechanism of NMDAr.