* 1713969
* EAPSI: Investigating How Stoicism Influences Empathy for Pain: A Cross-Cultural Neuroimaging Study
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Steven Anderson, Anderson                Steven         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Brain imaging studies have demonstrated that empathy, an adaptive and often
automatic process occurring when we view pain in others, may be influenced by
social and cultural factors. Stoicism, or the endurance of discomfort without
outward expression, is a factor relevant to pain perception that is known to
differ between East Asian and Western individuals. This project will use
neuroimaging to test whether culturally variable beliefs about stoicism
influence empathy for pain in a sample of Chinese and American individuals. The
data from this project will prove useful in understanding how social and
cultural factors influence empathy. Research will be performed in collaboration
with Dr. Shihui Han in the Culture and Social Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory
at Peking University. Dr. Han is an expert in the social and cultural
neuroscience of empathy.

This award supports a cross-cultural neuroimaging study in China and the United
States to investigate the effect of stoicism beliefs on empathy and to identify
neurobiological mechanisms of the hypothesized effect. The experiment will use
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure brain activity during an
emotion regulation task in response to negative and neutral images. The
experiment will also measure the neural empathic response to pain in others. The
experimenter will test 1) if differences in stoicism beliefs predict differences
in the emotion regulation strategy of expressive suppression, and 2) if
differences in neural activity during suppression explain variation in the
neural empathic response to pain. The data collected from participants in China
will be compared to results from participants in the United States. By comparing
functional brain activity during an emotion regulation task with the neural
empathic response to pain in a cross-cultural sample, this research will
contribute to our understanding of how culturally variable beliefs about pain
influence empathic responding.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and
China's Ministry of Science and Technology.