* 1713978
* EAPSI: The Role of Salicylic Acid Binding Plant Lectins in Hormone Regulated Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Timothy Westlake, Westlake                Timothy        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Plant hormones are a diverse group of regulatory molecules. These chemical
regulators dictate an array of plant physiological processes. Despite the recent
advances in plant hormone signaling, much is still unknown. This work will look
at two novel plant hormone binding proteins and their function in plants. The
researcher will attempt to uncover the roles that these two novel proteins play
in hormone signaling. The research will be conducted under the direction of
Professor Chiu-Ping Cheng. The project will be performed at National Taiwan
University in Taipei, Taiwan. National Taiwan University is a premiere research
institute with equipment and instruments required for the project. The knowledge
of plant immunity, plant diseases resistance, and plant molecular biology that
Dr. Chiu-Ping Cheng, the host professor, possesses would be invaluable to the
project.

Salicylic acid is a phenolic plant hormone with critical importance in plant
physiology, plant development, and plant disease resistance. Prior work
identified targets of salicylic acid utilizing state of the art protein
microarrays. Two plant lectin-domain containing proteins were identified as
novel salicylic acid binding protein, however their function in salicylic acid
signaling is unknown. This work will be pivotal in understanding the mode of
action of immune signaling and hormone perception in plants. Specifically, this
work will investigate the roles and function of hormone-binding plant lectins
with respect to hormone signaling, abiotic defenses, and immune signaling. The
knowledge is instrumental to efforts to bolster pathogen and abiotic defense
responses in plants.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.