* 1713867
* EAPSI: How Geomagnetic Field Strength Influences Magnetoreception and biodiversity within Magnetotactic Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Courtney Wagner, Wagner                  Courtney       L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) are single celled, oxygen-sensitive organisms that
synthesize iron-rich particles called magnetosomes. Magnetosomes are
morphologically distinct and reflect the unique ecology of MTB. Therefore, when
magnetosomes are preserved in the geological record they can be used as proxies
for environmental change and microbial diversity, that in turn may be sensitive
to climate. This project will test if magnetic field strength, which MTB use for
orientation, modulates their phylogeny and magnetosome formation. Thus, this
EAPSI will investigate how geomagnetic field strength affects biodiversity and
biological function in modern environments, thereby improving the rigor of
magnetosomes as proxies for oxygen-poor environments and microbial diversity in
deep time. The researcher will collaborate with Dr. Yongxin Pan at the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Dr. Pan is a global leader in MTB
microbiology and access to his facilities and expertise will be indispensable
for the success of this project.

Magnetofossils (fossilized magnetosomes) have the potential to encode linkages
between microbial diversity, ambient environmental conditions, and external
environmental forces. The goal of this EAPSI project is to test if there is a
measurable relationship between the strength of the geomagnetic field,
phylogeny, and magnetosome biomineralization in MTB. The researcher will test if
and how the external force of the geomagnetic field affects biodiversity in
aquatic ecosystems. Furthermore, this project will demonstrate how the smallest
and most sensitive organisms, microbes, respond to changes in geomagnetic field
throughout time. The PI will work with Dr. Yongxin Pan, at the Chinese Academy
of Sciences in Beijing, China, to culture field and laboratory samples of MTB in
prescribed magnetic field intensities. She will then characterize these
organisms using genomic analyses, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and
mineral magnetic measurements to determine how MTB cultured in variable magnetic
field strengths differ phylogenetically and in magnetosome biomineralization (by
observing morphology, crystallographic structure, composition, and magnetic
grain size/domain state of magnetosomes).

This award is through the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program and
supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student; it is jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation and the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.