* 1713762
* I-Corps: Thermally-Responsive Hydrogels for Ocular Drug Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Mark Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to ensure
patients with glaucoma are compliant with their prescribed treatment. Compliance
with a medication regimen is defined as the extent to which patients take
medications as prescribed by their health care providers. Glaucoma patients
require lifelong treatment and a strict commitment to administer eye drops
daily, which is especially challenging for elderly patients. The successful
application of eye drops requires coordination, manual dexterity, hand-eye
coordination, and good vision, which result in fewer than 50 % of patients
administering their eye drops as prescribed. Ophthalmic pharmaceuticals (eye
drops) represent the most widely used treatment for glaucoma with more than 30
million prescriptions filled in the United States each year. This project has
the potential to significantly reduce the number of patients who lose their
vision due to glaucoma, dramatically improving the prognosis of those who are
afflicted with this disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
upon the development of a drug delivery platform to guarantee patients with
chronic diseases are and continue to be complaint. Chronic diseases are
especially sensitive to compliance issues due to the necessity of the patient to
commit to a lifetime of treatment. This will be accomplished through the use of
a proprietary drug eluting, thermally-responsive polymer that is liquid at room
temperature and solidifies when it heats to body temperature. A solution of the
polymer loaded with a therapeutic agent will be inserted into the tear duct
where it will solidify, forming a solid, liquid-permeable plug. The plug
conforms perfectly to the shape of the patient?s unique anatomy due to the
liquid-to-solid phase transition that occurs after insertion. Once inserted, the
therapeutic agent is continuously released from the plug, maintaining drug
efficacy over an extended period, eliminating the need for the application of
daily eye drops and ensuring patient compliance.