* 1713766
* Collaborative Research: Robust and Reliable Research Workshop Proposal: Rethinking Comparison in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Erica Simmons, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2021
* USD 41,635.00

General Abstract Comparison is an important research tool in the social
sciences. Scholars make comparisons across time and place to better understand a
wide range of political and social phenomena. One of the central techniques that
social scientists often use is the controlled comparison, whereby scholars hold
potential explanatory factors constant across different cases to help them
assess their contribution to particular outcomes. This approach has been central
to some of the most influential works of social science. It has helped scholars
explain everything from why some countries are rich and some are poor to why
some countries are democratic and some are authoritarian. Yet even as controlled
comparisons have produced lasting insights, they are not the only form of
comparison that scholars utilize to answer important questions about social and
political life. There is little guidance, however, on how to develop and execute
comparisons that do not rely on the controlled case model, and what types of
insights alternative comparison models can offer. The goal of this project is to
lay out just such guidelines. To do so, this project will explore two of the
most fundamental questions in the study of politics: (1) how and why scholars
decide on what they compare, and (2) how the methodological assumptions scholars
make about why and how they compare shape the knowledge they produce. By
answering these questions, the project will create new resources for future
students and researchers to draw upon in their efforts to advance knowledge.

Technical Abstract This project aims to reimagine three central components of
the comparative method in order to develop new logics for comparative research
designs that move beyond traditional controlled comparison designs. First, it
will encourage political scientists to think critically about what a case is by
challenging dominant norms and encouraging scholars to think of processes,
practices, meanings, and concepts as cases to be compared. Second, the project
will expand the notion of what it means to compare. It aims to push scholars to
conceptualize comparison as a method that includes approaches beyond controlled
comparison, including greater attention to the experiences of subjects being
studied and the ways those experiences re-order social worlds. Finally, the
project proposes to expand the explanatory goals of comparative research by de-
emphasizing variations in outcomes and opening up variations in political
processes, meanings, and concepts as similarities or differences to be
explained. To achieve these goals, this project will convene a workshop on
comparative methods, and produce an edited volume based on contributions
emerging from the workshop that will serve as a resource for scholars looking to
conduct non-controlled comparisons to guide future scholars in new research
directions.