* 1713881
* EAPSI: Providing Smart User Feedback Based on Bayesian Models
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* William Martin, Martin                  William        D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Anthropogenic climate change is one of the biggest challenges of the century and
part of the solution lies with people adopting more sustainable behavior; this
has led to the development of eco-feedback devices for water consumption, power
use, and most importantly driving behavior. However, despite the plethora of
eco-driving feedback devices, very few of them tailor their feedback based on
user behavior and situation. There is a need for proactive situation-aware
feedback like "leave 30 minutes early to avoid traffic" because it drastically
reduces emissions as compared to a reactive feedback that tells a driver "use
your brakes less" every morning when they are stuck in traffic. This research
will build the framework for such a situationally aware feedback device by
combining on-board diagnostic and global positioning system (OBD/GPS) data,
belonging to Dr. Lynette Cheah of the Singapore University of Technology and
Design (SUTD), with traffic and weather data to create training data for a
Bayesian Network (BN) structure learning algorithm. The resulting BN will act as
a behavior and situation specific model capable of determining what variables
are the root cause of poor fuel economy.

The BN of the system that characterizes driving in Singapore will be learned
from a dataset created from the combination of multiple datasets. The
amalgamation of multiple datasets and the involvement of human decisions in that
data?s generation mean that the training dataset will be noisy and filled with
outliers. The goal of this research is to learn the BN that best describes the
true nature of the system given this type of training data. To learn the best
BN, different BN learning algorithms drawing upon different mathematical
principles will be investigated. These different learning algorithm?s results
will be compared to a human expert generated BN. The BN learning algorithm that
most faithfully recreates the human expert generated network will be identified
and the future eco-feedback device will be built off this algorithm.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.