* 1713068
* Growth of Tensile Germanium  Nanowires Embedded in a III-V Matrix
* MPS,DMR
* 09/14/2016,05/31/2019
* Minjoo Lee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 352,135.00

Non-technical Description: Many of the properties of electronic and photonic
materials are determined by the length of and the angle between their chemical
bonds. Stress and strain can slightly alter these bonds, but cause profound
changes in the way that materials interact with both light and electrical
charge. Germanium is particularly noteworthy in this regard. A 2% change in bond
length enables it to emit light very efficiently while in its normal state,
germanium is a poor light emitter. This project seeks to engineer the properties
of germanium nanostructures by embedding them into a matrix that induces stress.
Nanocomposites formed from Ge nanostructures embedded in a foreign host enable
new optical and electrical properties. The research project is integrated with
the education and outreach activities. Besides interdisciplinary research
training provided at the graduate and undergraduate levels, the PI schedules
regular meetings with junior faculty in engineering to discuss how K-12 outreach
can improve work-life balance, a growing concern among academic scientists.
Through these outreach activities, he uses his personal experience to encourage
junior faculty members in developing innovative outreach activities. Another
activity involves pre-college outreach to talented seniors at Wilbur Cross High
School, a racially and economically diverse public high school in New Haven.

Technical Description: This project aims to demonstrate novel nanocomposite
materials consisting of tensile-strained Ge nanowires embedded in III-V
matrices. Recent research has shown that the properties of Ge nanomembranes,
nanowires, microdisks, and microbridges can be tuned using external stressors to
apply large biaxial or uniaxial tensile strains. In this project, surface-
mediated phase separation during molecular beam epitaxy growth is investigated
as a new approach to grow epitaxial Ge nanostructures embedded in a III-V matrix
with high tensile strain. Specifically, Task 1 seeks to draw connections between
growth conditions, structure, and properties of Ge/III-V nanocomposites,
including basic understanding of interfacial strain coupling; Task 2 focuses on
the coupled effects of matrix composition and lattice constant on the kinetics
of Ge phase separation and the resulting microstructures. Finally task 3 seeks
to understand the changes in structure and properties when the nanowires are
modulated into nanorods or quantum dots. The ability to design and grow Ge/III-V
nanocomposites with previously unattainable strain states may lead to a range of
unprecedented material properties for Ge, such as the indirect-gap to direct-gap
conversion or even becoming a semi-metallic material. Moreover, the fundamental
understanding of epitaxial nanocomposites could apply to a wide range of other
material systems such as complex oxides, dilute magnetic semiconductors, and
highly mismatched alloys.