* 1713936
* EAPSI: Rheology and Coalescence Behavior of Oil-Water Interfaces Stabilized by Soy Lecithin
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jerome Nash, Nash                    Jerome         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Emulsion-based delivery systems are widely applicable to a range of commercial
applications (including pharmaceutical drug delivery, enhanced oil recovery,
personal care products, and food processing) because these advanced material
systems enable the delivery and controlled release of valuable active compounds.
Coalescence (a destabilization process where two liquid droplets merge to form
single, larger droplet) is an undesirable limiting factor for implementing these
delivery systems within the foregoing commercial applications. Therefore,
systematic investigations which improve current understanding of the dynamic
processes that lead to droplet coalescence are crucially important. This project
will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Patrick Spicer, an Associate
Professor at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia and a noted
expert on the production of shaped and targeted droplet delivery systems.

The objective of this EAPSI project is to elucidate how nanoparticle-surfactant
mixtures adsorbed to oil-water interfaces impact the interfacial rheology and
observed coalescence behavior between neighboring oil-in-water droplets. It has
been hypothesized that the presence of surfactants in Pickering (particle
stabilized) emulsions can significantly modify particle interactions at the oil-
water interface and thus improve an emulsion's resistance to coalescence
dynamics. This theory will be explored for oil-in-water Pickering emulsions
stabilized by silica nanoparticles (~500 nm dia.) and lecithin (one of the most
widely used surfactants for the delivery of active compounds). Characterization
of the co-adsorption and interfacial rheology of silica nanoparticles and
lecithin molecules at the oil-water interface will be studied using pendant drop
tensiometry procedures developed at Purdue University. Direct observation of
dynamic coalescence processes between micrometer-scale oil droplets at relevant
timescales (<1 ms) will be conducted using custom micromanipulation equipment,
optical microscopy, and high-speed imaging capabilities available through
collaboration with Prof. Patrick Spicer at the University of New South Wales.
The expected outcomes of this research will provide improved capacity for
understanding and predicting the physical phenomena which govern the successful
development of template emulsion-based delivery systems.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.