* 1713790
* EAPSI: A Semi-classical Nonlinear Dissipative Model of Quantum Spin in Three Dimensions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Joshua Heiner, Heiner                  Joshua         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

In this current era of nanotechnology, the science and engineering community
need a more accurate way to describe and predict the motion and interaction of
subatomic particles. The researcher has preliminary data showing that the result
from a uniquely different quantum mechanical spin model tentatively agrees with
the well-known standard model; however, it has the distinct advantage of
potentially providing a better quantum spin interpretation. The project will
continue using this highly complicated representation of quantum spin to model a
realistic 3D object. The researcher will have access to a supercomputer at the
Massey University in Auckland, New Zealand. More importantly, the researcher
will be under the supervision of Dr. Joshua Bodyfelt who excels in highly
complicated nonlinear computational models, which is crucial for the success of
this project.

In a recent publication it was discussed that it may be possible to understand
the quantum mechanical spin states in a similar method used in deterministic
chaos, specifically in driven nonlinear dissipative systems. The project shows
further insight regarding the process of the quantum mechanical collapse using
this model, where preliminary data has reproduced the quantum spin statistics in
a Stern-Gerlach device. There will be a semi-classical interpretation of the
torque due to the magnetic field to incorporate a two-sided torque function of
the angle, è, that the magnetic moment makes with the magnetic field. Ultimately
the complete semi-classical model simulation utilizes a highly complex nonlinear
dynamics process, exhibiting quantum spin statistics.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.