* 1713980
* EAPSI: Understanding the Chemistry behind Cystic Fibrosis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Taylor Harris, Harris                  Taylor         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder characterized by the build-up of a
thick sticky mucus at the epithelial surface of organs such as the lungs,
pancreas, gut and gastrointestinal tract, giving rise to complications such as
chronic infection, inflammation and/or organ failure. CF is caused by mutations
of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), in which
there are over 2000 different mutations. Currently, many of the medicines for CF
are symptomatic treatments, used for airway clearance, preventing infection and
inflammation, etc. while very few are used to treat the mutated CFTR protein
itself. This work will investigate small molecules capable of binding to and
stabilizing a region of the mutated protein, in hopes of improving current
treatments used to do so. This will be done using both experimental and
computational methods. This research will be conducted at Kwansei Gakuin
University (KGU) under the advisement of Dr. Tsukasa Okiyoneda, an expert
experimentalist in CF research. This collaboration provides access not only to
Dr. Okiyoneda's knowledge-base, but also to the resources at KGU in which can be
used to validate computational findings.

As stated, there are over 2000 mutations of CFTR. Of the 2000, the most common
mutation is the ÄF508 (ÄF508-CFTR), which is a deletion of a phenylalanine
residue at position 508. This ÄF508 mutation exists in the NBD1 region of the
protein. CFTR consists of five domains: membrane spanning domains 1 and 2
(MSD1/2), nuclear binding domains 1 and 2 (NBD1/2), and the regulatory domain
(R). This research will focus on finding drugs and/or small molecules that can
bind to the NBD1 region of CFTR and stabilize it. Computationally, programs such
as Glide, ProBiS and LiSiCA will be used to predict binding sites and binding
interactions with several compounds. The data received from the computational
efforts will then be applied to experimental techniques by testing the compounds
on purified protein from E. coli.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.