* 1713973
* EAPSI: A Machine Learning Approach to Lunar Spacecraft Trajectory  Optimization
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Christopher Sprague, Sprague                 Christopher    I
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research will investigate innovative spacecraft trajectory optimization
methods at the Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) in collaboration
with Dr. Yasuhiro Kawakatsu for the upcoming lunar small-spacecraft mission,
EQUULEUS, which will be launched aboard NASA's Space Launch System (SLS) rocket
at the end of 2018. The findings may enable space missions that were once
thought to be impossible, leading to more exotic and exciting opportunities for
science collection. This mission will also further scientists understanding of
the radiation environment surrounding Earth by imaging its plasmasphere and
measuring its distribution, which may provide important insight for protecting
both humans and electronics from radiation damage during long space journeys.
This research explores transformative concepts, combining machine learning and
trajectory optimization, two subjects which, in combination, have been largely
unexplored. Collaboration with JAXA is a unique opportunity to further this
research, as it is a recognized trajectory design leader and has extensive
mission experience with low-thrust and low-energy spacecraft.

The spacecraft will insert itself into a stable orbit about the L2 Lagrange
point of the Earth-Moon system through a cislunar trajectory, exploiting the
topological stability of the Earth-Moon system's effective potential through
low-energy pathways. A large data set of optimal control trajectories will be
generated through conventional trajectory optimization methods (i.e. direct
methods and indirect methods). Once the data set of state-control pairs is
generated, an artificial neural network (ANN) will be trained on the data set.
Through training, the ANN develops a spatial control policy that can be
implemented in real-time. The spacecraft, at any moment in time, will perceive
its environment and take actions (i.e. throttle its thrusters) accordingly. This
control method is analogous to how organisms behave in nature. Just as a simple
house fly is able to navigate to its food source, making decisions in real-time,
a spacecraft should be able to do the same when trying to achieve its objective.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.