* 1713835
* EAPSI: Conversion of Carbon Dioxide and Water Using Visible Light and Nanostructured Ruthenium
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kehley Davies, Davies                  Kehley
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project seeks to utilize the products of combustion in conjunction with
metal nanoparticles to create a cyclic reaction series, much like nature's
photosynthesis. The impact of this research is far-reaching, as this technique
could allow for the replacement of gasoline removed from the Earth's crust as a
fuel source. A precursor to many other chemicals, naphthalene is the simplest
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon. In today's industry, it is removed from coal
tar, and to a lesser degree, petroleum, during the various refining and
distillation steps. Research performed by our lab group has demonstrated that
certain nanostructured metal particles can convert carbon dioxide and water into
gasoline using visible light. Recent research has demonstrated that naphthalene
can be produced with a cobalt catalyst when methanol is used instead of water.
These methods are significantly cleaner than the refining and distillation steps
that are currently used, as well as being able to produce target compounds
depending on the simple starting materials. This project will expand upon the
known metals that can be used to perform these conversions by using ruthenium
instead of more common metals. This research will be conducted at the National
University of Singapore under the invaluable mentorship of Dr. Boon Siang
(Jason) Yeo.

Naphthalene and normal-alkane hydrocarbons are produced during the refining and
distillation steps of coal tar and petroleum. Research performed by our lab
group has demonstrated the ability of Fischer-Tropsch nanostructured metal
particles to convert water and carbon dioxide into arrays of n-alkane
hydrocarbons when exposed to visible light overnight. Recently we have
discovered that when methanol is used instead of water in a cobalt-containing
system, the single product of naphthalene results. This project will continue
the work done previously to test ruthenium as the final Fischer-Tropsch metal in
both water and methanol systems.

This award, under East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.