* 1713670
* Surface Stress Relaxation: Science and Effects on Glass Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Minoru Tomozawa, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 637,994.00

Non-Technical Description: A trace amount of water vapor in the atmosphere can
have large effects on mechanical strength of oxide glasses. One important step
of this effect is the fast elimination of the surface stress. This surface
stress removal can cause weakening of strengthened glasses. At the same time,
the phenomenon can be used to make glass mechanically stronger. The present
research can clarify how a trace amount of water can cause these seemingly
contradictory phenomena. Research results are discussed in the formal Glass
Science course during the academic year, as well as in a "pop-up' short course
that includes a broader audience beyond science and engineering during summer
sessions. Students - both women and men, and both undergraduates and graduates
-trained in this research become valued employees for US high technology
companies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Details: In comparison to bulk
glass, oxide glass surfaces (of the same composition) exhibit faster stress
relaxation realized by moisture in air. This phenomenon is used to make
mechanically stronger glass fibers by building the surface compressive stress
caused by the fast surface stress relaxation. The phenomena can also explain
long-standing mysteries related to mechanical strength of glasses such as the
strength degradation of ion-exchange strengthened glasses, and static fatigue
limit. The phenomenon of the fast surface stress relaxation is expected to be
important in all amorphous oxides with large surface areas such as thin films,
nano-particles and curved surfaces, which readily interact with a trace amount
of water vapor. One main objective of the present research is to clarify the
scientific origin of the fast surface stress relaxation. The second objective is
to optimize the fiber strengthening process and clarify various anomalous
features such as anomalous oxidation kinetics of Si with small radius of
curvature. During this proposed research, two graduate students and four
undergraduate students per year are trained in the glass science field.