* 1713946
* EAPSI:EAPSI: Using Mass Spectrometry to Identify Protein Interactions at Fertilization
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Lauren Bates, Bates                   Lauren         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Understanding the processes that occur during fertilization is critical for
developing safe and effective contraceptives and for treating infertility. Much
has been learned about these processes in recent years. However, despite these
successes, our knowledge of what happens on the molecular level during
fertilization and the initiation of embryonic development is limited. For
example, it is not known what molecules on the surface of the egg and the
surface of the sperm start the fertilization process and allow the sperm to fuse
with the egg. This project will investigate these molecular interactions taking
place between the egg and sperm in collaboration with Dr. Rommel Mathias, an
expert in studying protein-protein interactions, at Monash University in
Melbourne, Australia. The primary goal is in the identification of molecules on
the surface of the egg that are required for sperm binding and fusion during
fertilization.

In all animals, the initial conserved fertilization signal is a calcium wave
that sweeps the entire egg. This calcium wave is initiated at sperm-egg fusion
by a Src family tyrosine kinase and phospholipase C (PLC) gamma and it functions
to both block polyspermy and initiate zygote development. The upstream protein
interactions that influence the activation of Src and PLC are mostly unknown.
Using a protein binding domain from the phospholipase C gamma enzyme, this
project will identify proteins that interact with phospholipase C gamma during
fertilization in the starfish. The starfish is an excellent model system for
fertilization research because of the large quantity of easily accessible
gametes, the success of in vitro fertilization, and the similarity of the known
fertilization signaling pathways to that of humans. The Mathias lab specializes
in viral-host protein interaction studies utilizing mass spectrometry and their
expertise will be applied to identifying these fertilization-specific protein
interactions using a state-of-the-art Thermo Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.