* 1713926
* EAPSI: Do Symbiodinium Exhibit Species-specific Responses to Iron Availability?
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Hannah Reich, Reich                   Hannah         G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The mutualistic symbiosis between reef-building corals and their photosynthetic
symbionts in the genus Symbiodinium form the basis of many shallow water
tropical marine ecosystems. Episodes of severe ocean warming linked to climate
change has driven largescale declines of coral populations in many tropical and
subtropical regions. While many symbioses are susceptible to heat stress,
various species and colonies appear unaffected visually, spurring many
investigations into learning the underlying biological attributes that explain
this resistance. The persistence and growth of Symbiodinium and host coral
requires trace metals which are essential to vital processes such as
photosynthesis and nitrogen assimilation. Previous studies have shown that the
availability of trace metals, most notably iron, influences marine phytoplankton
growth and assists in stress responses. The possibility that trace metal
availability affects resistance to thermal stress in symbiotic corals is
currently unexplored. The host scientist, Dr. Tung-Yuan Ho (Academia Sinica,
Taiwan) recently described the trace metal requirements for growth by
Symbiodinium kawagutii finding that increased iron availability was positively
correlated with algal growth. To build upon this study, this project will expand
upon this study by evaluating iron requirements among distantly and closely-
related species of Symbiodinium and capitalize upon my access to Dr. Ho's trace
metal clean laboratory. Knowledge of iron requirements for a diversity of
Symbiodinium species (in culture) will lay the foundation for future
investigation on whether the availability and subsequent acquisition of iron
affects corals in symbiosis during periods of thermal stress.

During this experiment, ten species of Symbiodinium will be grown in ambient
conditions and exposed to various trace iron concentrations. Growth rates will
be quantified and compared using cell density. To determine the iron requirement
of Symbiodinium spp., cellular iron levels will be quantified using elemental
analysis at multiple points during the growth experiment. Examining how trace
iron availability alters the growth kinetics of numerous Symbiodinium species
will determine whether iron requirements follow phylogenetic patterns and are
unique in hot- and cold-water adapted Symbiodinium spp.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.