* 1713997
* EAPSI: Investigating the Reasons Behind Chemical Weathering on Venus
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Sara Port, Port                    Sara
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

After 50 years the climate history on Venus is still a mystery to planetary
scientists. Using various computer models we can observe if Venus has undergone
a climate change in recent history. Studying climate change is fundamental in
explaining Venus as it is today. Understanding the climate will constrain the
atmospheric composition in the near surface environment, illuminate the possible
weather patterns that can exist on Venus, and possibly determine the origin of
the low emissivity metal frost on the mountain tops. Venus and Earth were once
identical planets of similar origin, atmosphere, and geology. By understanding
the Venusian atmosphere it may help us figure out how and why Earth and Venus
diverged from one another and assist us in better understanding planetary
formation. Venus' atmosphere is comprised of 97% CO2 and so is a perfect example
of the effects of runaway greenhouse effect, a problem currently plaguing our
planet. If we can determine why Venus is so hot and how high concentrations of
CO2 can affect the surface conditions, we can learn more about climate change on
Earth.

Using global circulation, radiative heat transfer, and chemical composition at
equilibrium models we can observe if Venus has undergone a recent climate change
that could account for the metal frost in the mountain tops. Using the codes we
will alter the temperature of the atmosphere, for example by injecting hot or
cold air into the circulation model to see how it will disburse around Venus and
affect the temperature of the surface. This change in temperature may modify the
formation and composition of clouds and precipitates. From there we can study
possible interactions between the atmosphere and the surface. In order to study
this the PI will work under the mentorship of Dr. George Hashimoto of Okayama
University to develop a code together to model surface-atmosphere chemical
reactions. Using the Japanese Space Agency's orbiter, Akatsuki, we can use the
IR1 camera to study the surface at various levels and compare the surface
emissivities with our results to see if the minerals are the same.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.