* 1713738
* WORKSHOP: The iConference 2017 Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2018
* USD 27,840.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 12 U.S.-based doctoral
students (out of an estimated 21 total participants) who have completed their
dissertation proposals. along with distinguished faculty mentors, in a doctoral
colloquium (workshop) on information science research to be held in conjunction
with the twelfth iConference that will take place March 22-25, 2017, in Wuhan,
China, and which will be the first iConference in Asia. Since 2005, the
iConferences have provided a forum where information scholars, researchers and
professionals from around the world gather to share insights on critical
information issues in contemporary society. An openness to new ideas and
research fields in information science is a primary characteristics of these
events, which have been successful in bringing together people who otherwise
might rarely interact with one another, thereby helping to promote
interdisciplinary research. Recent iConferences have drawn approximately 500
attendees, a testament to participants' appreciation for the inspiring sense of
community, high quality research presentations, and myriad opportunities for
engagement. The iConferences are presented by the iCaucus, now a consortium of
77 Information Schools in the United States and abroad dedicated to advancing
the information field and preparing students to meet the information challenges
of the 21st Century. This year's theme is "Effect, Expand, Evolve: Global
collaboration across the Information Community"; more information may be found
online at http://ischools.org/the-iconference. The iConference doctoral
colloquia traditionally bring together the best of the next generation of
interdisciplinary researchers focused on the interplay of information and
technology in a social context, allowing them to develop a network both among
themselves and with senior researchers. Participation is encouraged from a broad
range of relevant disciplines, thereby expanding attendees' perspectives on
their topics of study and promoting advancement of the field. The organizers of
the 2017 event will proactively work to maximize diversity along such key
dimensions as institution type, research topic, methodological approach,
disciplinary tradition, gender, ethnicity, and national or cultural background,
so that the students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in their
professional development. Based on past experience, the organizers expect a
majority of the 21 accepted students will be women, but at a minimum will ensure
that at least 10 of them are. Furthermore, no more than 4 students will be
accepted from any single university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral
Colloquium will be tightly integrated into the conference experience, starting
with an orientation event highlighting specific content during the technical
program, and culminating in a full day focused on peer-research critique and
career development which will overlap with and immediately follow the closing
session of the conference technical program on March 25. The primary objective
of the Doctoral Colloquium is to help train the next generation of information
science researchers. To this end, it will provide the student participants with
an environment in which they can share and discuss their goals, methods and
results in order to gain feedback on their work both from the mentors and from
other students, which should allow them to enhance their research. The student
participants will come away with a better understanding of the various research
communities engaged in the study of information science, and learn how to
position their work within the field. In addition, the colloquium will provide
students with opportunities such as poster sessions to make new professional
connections beyond their own disciplines and institutions, and it will also help
them successfully launch their careers whether in industry or academia.