* 1713725
* NeTS: Small: Optimizing Information Freshness in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Eytan Modiano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Future Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications will increasingly rely on the
exchange of delay sensitive information. Application domains such as autonomous
vehicles, industrial control systems, virtual reality, and sensor networks,
heavily rely upon the distribution of time-critical information. Age of
Information (AoI) is a recently proposed performance metric that measures the
freshness of the information from the perspective of the application. AoI
measures the time that elapsed from the moment that the most recently received
data was generated to the present time. This project develops an AoI framework
for characterizing latency in wireless networks, and mechanisms for minimizing
latency; thus enabling a wide range of societal benefits including the control
of critical infrastructure, mobile health care, and automated manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to extend the Age-of-
Information framework to the wireless network setting. In particular, this
project advances the theory of AoI from the simple and abstract queueing models
to realistic wireless network models, taking into account the effects of
wireless interference, transmission scheduling, and multi-hop routing. The
project will consider single-hop networks, such as LTE or WiFi; multi-hop
networks such as sensor networks; and mobile ad-hoc networks. The goal is to
understand the impact of network topology, node mobility, interference and
channel reliability on AoI, and to develop network control mechanisms that
minimize AoI under different wireless network settings. The project will
progressively extend the AoI framework to the wireless setting: Starting with
simple single-hop networks and extending to mobile multi-hop networks. The
research agenda includes the following tasks: 1)Single-Hop Wireless Networks:
Develop methods to analyze AoI in single-hop wireless networks, and devise
transmission scheduling schemes for minimizing AoI; 2) Multi-Hop Networks:
develop routing and scheduling schemes for minimizing AoI in multi-hop wireless
networks; and 3)Mobile Wireless Networks: develop fundamental limits on AoI in
mobile networks, and develop packet relaying schemes for minimizing AoI.