* 1713989
* EAPSI: Implementation of Advanced Computer Vision Techniques to Improve Real Time Imaging of Single Molecule Conformation Changes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Joshua Stuckner, Stuckner                Joshua         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The goal of this project is to implement advanced computer vision algorithms for
the automatic analysis of ultra-slow motion movies of single molecules. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Koji Harano and his team at
the University of Tokyo, who have for the first time directly observed a single
molecule undergoing a particular and important change in shape. The event was
captured on video using a powerful microscope equipped with a high speed camera.
Understanding the shape, or conformation, changes of molecules is critical to
the analysis of complex chemical systems and reactions. This technique produces
over 100 gigabytes of data per second of video. Currently, the brute-force
method that is used to compile this data into meaningful information requires
tremendous computing time and power. Computer vision techniques will vastly
increase the speed and accuracy of this analysis and lead more scientific output
in this critical area. This project also represents an important exchange of
scientific knowledge and techniques between the United States and Japan and will
lead to future collaboration on similar projects.

Dr. Harano's team used an advanced imaging technique to observe and measure a
molecular รณ-bond rotation for the first time using an aberration corrected high
resolution transmission electron microscope equipped with a 1600 fps electron
counting direct detection camera. The massive datasets generated by this
technique must be processed before meaningful analysis can take place. Presently
the technique relies on mathematical cross-correlation algorithms for automatic
sorting, classification, and alignment of frames; a task far too cumbersome for
manual frame by frame sorting at 1600 fps. However, cross-correlation is
somewhat of a brute-force approach and the speed and accuracy of this process
can be greatly increased by implementing feature matching computer vision
algorithms. This project will implement and evaluate advanced computer vision
algorithms for the automatic processing of data generated by Dr. Harano's
imaging technique.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.