* 1713439
* Applying Game Design Principles for Supporting Computational Literacy Experiences in Museum Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stephen Uzzo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 951,474.00

Becoming computationally literate is increasingly crucial to everyday life and
to expanding workforce capacity. Research suggests that computational literacy--
knowing what, when, how, and why to use the ideas of computer science, in
combination with the capacity to view problems and potential solutions through
the lens of computational structures and procedures--can be supported through
digital game play. This project aims to develop a social and creative exhibit
game that foregrounds aspects of computer science, specifically artificial
intelligence (AI) and computer programming, in ways that enable youth to
explore, construct, and share computational complex systems content with one
another and other museum visitors. To play the game, pairs of youth visitors
will use code cards to program the behavior of AI animals in a virtual forest.
As they do so, youth will engage with computational literacy practices, such as
basic computer programming, describing their computational ideas, and doing
computational problem solving with their friends. Their activity will be
projected on a large screen as a strategy for enabling youth to test, rehearse,
and communicate their computational ideas and to also interest other visitors
into computational problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using multi-perspective
and iterative design-based research, university learning scientists, museum
practitioners, and game developers will pursue research questions around how
science museums can better engage youth who are traditionally underrepresented
in computer science in complex computational practices. Data sources will
include interactive-log data, observations of visitor interactions with the
game, visitor interviews, and visitor surveys. A multimodal and mixed methods
approach that searches for convergences between qualitative analysis,
quantitative analysis, and learning analytics will be used to generate research
findings. Changes in computational literacy will be assessed by evaluating what
problems visitors choose to solve with programming, how they frame those
problems, and their selections from among possible solutions, what they program,
how they program, and how they describe programming ideas. The results of this
project will include: 1) a social, interactive gameplay experience that supports
the development of computational literacy; 2) design principles for game-based
exhibits that facilitate development of computational literacy; and 3) new
knowledge of variations in design and gameplay across diverse gameplay users,
including those from underrepresented groups in computer science. It is
anticipated that 1,000 museum youth visitors will directly participate in the
study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.