* 1713299
* Remake Making: Understanding Adoption and Adaptation of Facilitated Making in Libraries
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kevin Crowley, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,495.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. The project plans to
deliver and improve a constructivist professional development (PD) program
called Remake Making for library staff that work with youth in maker spaces. The
proposed project will be led by a partnership of the University of Pittsburgh
and the Children's Museum of Pittsburgh and builds on a pilot facilitation
framework developed in an earlier project by this team. The PD program responds
to the rapid growth of makerspaces with a constructivist PD program focused on
facilitation. Maker spaces are a new service model in many public libraries,
part of a broader shift in general library services. Effective facilitation for
learning, like that required in makerspaces, is a relatively new facet of
librarianship that is not a consistent part of librarian education or PD. The
project will work with two local library systems with libraries that have
makerspaces but little to no PD opportunities around facilitation. The project
plans to iteratively design and investigate the Remake Making program, its
impact on library maker facilitators and their interactions with child and youth
learners. This will provide a setting for preliminary research about
constructivist PD and the experiences and struggles of staff who facilitate
making in libraries within the context of shifting library norms. This project
will produce an efficient, maker-friendly PD system for facilitation in
makerspaces, applicable to a broad range of informal and formal educators who
wish to incorporate facilitated making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans
to conduct an iterative development process involving several cohorts of
participants and using multiple data sources which include embedded PD workshop
data, participant pre-post surveys, observation of library makerspaces, and
interviews/focus groups. A participatory approach will be employed by involving
participants in creating and refining research questions within the scope of the
project. This approach is designed around inquiry-based improvement, which is
experienced by participants as reflective practice or continuous improvement.
The proposed project aims to advance knowledge and PD strategies for
facilitation in library makerspaces. The research will build knowledge about the
efficacy of an innovative constructivist PD program with adaptation as a key
feature. The data collected in the context of the development of this innovation
will provide opportunities for applied research about informal STEM learning in
the context of library maker spaces, and the role that library staff play in
facilitating this type of learning.