* 1713785
* EAPSI: Developing a Predictive Model for Compulsive Behavior in Individuals with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Lindsay Fields, Fields                  Lindsay        D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The most often used method of diagnosing Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is
the Yale-Brown scale, however the scale only considers the quantifiable time and
energy lost to compulsions, while also relying on potentially false self-
reporting. Furthermore, OCD differs significantly from other anxiety disorders
by the existence of compulsive behavior. Therefore, current means of diagnosing
and treating OCD cannot be measured by their effectiveness in treating other
anxiety disorders. This research is focused on developing a predictive model of
compulsive behavior based upon Minsky's Society of Mind. The objective is to
develop a model which would predict the probability of an individual performing
compulsive behavior. The research has applications both in understanding
pervasive anxiety, and in treating the physical consequences therein. This
project will be conducted at Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine in Kyoto,
Japan under the mentorship of Dr. Takashi Nakamae. The collaboration provides
access to unique data that will enable new insights into compulsive behavior.

By considering each neurological agent as an automaton, which has a certain
probability of reacting to an environmental stimulus and moving into an excited
state, it is possible to observe the system?s behavior. By applying this concept
continually, with agents given by the sectors of the worry circuit, a computer
algorithm was designed which implied that the number of compulsions performed
could be predicted using a threshold cellular automaton. Later revisions of the
model may potentially take into consideration probabilistic determination of
playing order, as well as utilizing a function of the number of compulsions
already performed to determine the probability of each agent reacting to a
stimulus. A successful method must be capable of empirically quantifying
compulsivity, however it has the potential to improve the therapeutic treatment
of OCD. Additionally, by including a variant for the subject?s average number of
compulsions, the model may be customized and thus provide a more personal means
of treatment. Finally, the proposed research has implications for brain mapping;
by detailing the nature of compulsivity, scientists may be able to isolate the
direct functions of the worry circuit which could give us clues into brain cell
function.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.