* 1713899
* Mass spectrometric based analysis of plasma membrane proteins that regulate cell expansion in Arabidopsis thaliana.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Michael Sussman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Molecules present in the outer membranes of cells act as antennae to perceive
changes in the environment, and transmit this information into the cell by
chemical reactions (for example phosphorylation) and by changes in shape (or
conformation.) Newly developed technologies allow such conformational changes in
molecules to be detected using the methods of mass spectrometry, and in this
project these new technologies will be used to understand how signals regulate
the rapid expansion of plant cell size. Exercises will be developed for high
school students, using mass spectrometry to analyze common food proteins such as
soybean tofu. A PBS television series "Wednesday Nite at the Lab" that is
broadcast free from the University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center will
explain to the general public (and demystify) mass spectrometry, using as an
example the analysis of plant proteins and explaining how this impacts their
everyday lives.

Overall this project seeks to combine in vitro and in vivo approaches to
understanding the molecular basis for signal transmission across the plasma
membrane. The focus of this project is Feronia, a plant plasma membrane receptor
kinase, and its peptide hormone ligand, RALF. When RALF binds to the
extracellular domain of Feronia, the rate of cell expansion is reduced within
minutes. This project will develop and apply novel mass spectrometric based
tools for analyzing the conformational changes that extracellular RALF induces
in Feronia. The newly devised PLIMB instrument (Plasma Induced Modification of
Biomolecules) that generates microsecond pulses of hydroxyl radicals will be
used to "footprint" Feronia and other proteins that are involved in Feronia/RALF
action at the plasma membrane.