* 1713791
* Testing General Relativity with Galaxy Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Martin White, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2022
* USD 458,126.00

Cosmology has made tremendous advances in the last decade, and we now have a
highly predictive model for the emergence of structure in the Universe, which
draws upon a rich set of ideas from high energy physics, gravitation theory, and
astrophysics. However, this model requires one very surprising ingredient, an
accelerating expansion of the Universe. This acceleration poses the most
profound question in physical science today with even the most prosaic
explanations demanding the existence of a new constituent ("dark energy") with
exotic physical properties. More extreme alternatives include extra spatial
dimensions or a breakdown of General Relativity on cosmological scales. Luckily,
the motion of galaxies allows us to probe dark energy and to test General
Relativity. Turning this realization into a precision tool is the goal of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop the insight that
large-scale structure can provide as a probe of dark energy and modified
gravity. By combining state-of-the-art modeling and new analysis methods with
the massive new data sets being accumulated from redshift surveys, it is
possible to simultaneously measure the growth rate of cosmic structure and the
cosmological geometry using redshift-space distortions. The investigators will
validate and apply models rooted in perturbation theory to the most constraining
subsets of existing near-future data sets to generate a consistent meta-analysis
of the current state of the field.