* 1713929
* EAPSI: Investigating the Fundamental Relationship Between Conductivity and Molecular Motion of Polymerized Ionic Liquids
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Preeya Kuray, Kuray                   Preeya
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Today's energy demands have led to an increased need for improved electrolytic
materials in applications such as lithium ion batteries and dye-sensitized solar
cells. Traditionally, liquid electrolytes have been used in these applications
due to their high ionic conductivity, but because they are prone to flammability
and leakage, it is crucial to find a safer alternative. This study will
investigate the structure and conductive properties of polymeric ionic liquids
(PILs) as mechanically robust alternatives to liquid electrolytes. This research
will be conducted at Osaka University in Japan with Dr. Tadashi Inoue, a world-
leading expert in polymer dynamics.

Polymerized ionic liquids (PILs) are defined as single ion conducting ionomers,
in which one of the ionic species is incorporated in the polymer chain while the
other is nominally free to transport. Although they are a safer, mechanically
stable alternative to traditional liquid electrolytes, the challenge that
remains is increasing the low ion transport rates inherent to polymeric
materials. Utilizing smaller ionic charge carriers should increase the
conductivity of the material and by varying the size of the charge carrier,
greater insight on the relationship between conductivity and structure can be
obtained. Because changing the material architecture will change the segmental
motion of the polymer chain, Dr. Tadashi Inoue's expertise in polymer dynamics
will greatly aid in understanding the fundamental relationship between
structure, mobility, and polymer chain relaxation. The results of this study
will make a positive contribution to the current understanding of polymer
conductivity for the design of safer and more efficient electrolytic materials.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.