* 1713353
* Probing New Physics in Galaxy Formation at Ultra-High Resolution
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Philip Hopkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,064.00

A wealth of exciting new observational projects promise to revolutionize our
understanding of galaxy and star formation: from the LSST and Gaia measuring
Milky Way stellar populations in game-changing detail, to the James Webb Space
Telescope probing galaxies during cosmic "first light", while the Hubble
telescope identifies the long-"missing" mass in the medium around galaxies. This
project intends to run large-scale cosmological hydrodynamic simulations on Blue
Waters to make detailed predictions and leverage these transformative
observations. The simulations will support the Feedback In Realistic
Environments (FIRE) project, a network of theorists at 13 institutions,
including several NSF postdoctoral and graduate student fellows: this
collaboration has developed new, fully-cosmological simulations of galaxy
formation that explicitly follow a diverse range of physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will carry out novel studies of galaxy
formation by running cosmological simulations on Blue Waters with unprecedented
resolution and physics. The project run a large suite of cosmological
simulations, targeting galaxies from the faintest dwarfs through the Milky Way,
at the ultra-high resolution and realism required to leverage the next-
generation of observations. The petascale resources of Blue Waters will allow
the project to resolve each galaxy with ~1 billion particles and follow them
self-consistently over their entire history in live cosmological settings. These
simulations will model the physics of galaxy formation with unprecedented
realism, uniquely incorporating not only all of the important stellar feedback
mechanisms (radiation pressure, photo-heating, stellar winds, supernovae), but
also magnetic fields, physical (anisotropic) Braginskii conduction and
viscosity, passive scalar (metal) diffusion, and explicit, multi-wavelength
radiation hydrodynamics. This represents the culmination of several years of
work supported by NSF, and will be critical to enable the science of the FIRE
project. The project will support an outreach component involving high school
students and teachers, and undergraduate students, as well as a large science
team using these simulations. The simulations will be used to make predictions
specifically for next-generation observatories including (but not limited to):
JWST, LSST, Gaia, and HST, in order to test theories of galaxy and star
formation, constrain the origin of the heavy elements in the Universe, the re-
ionization history of the early Universe, the effects of fundamental plasma
physics in the circum and inter-galactic medium, and the nature of cold dark
matter.