* 1713120
* Misspecified Mixed Model Analysis: Theory and Application
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jiming Jiang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 279,935.00

This project, a collaboration between statisticians and a statistical
geneticist, focuses on the development of statistical theory and methods for the
analysis of data from genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Over the past
decade, while GWAS have been very successful in detecting genetic variants that
affect complex human traits/diseases, these discoveries have only accounted for
a small portion of the genetic factors. Recently, significant progress has been
made using statistical analysis based on a class of statistical models called
mixed effects models. However, there is a gap in understanding why the method
works, because, in a way, the statistical model used in the analysis is
misspecified. This project aims to fill the gap by developing new theory and
methods, and evaluating the methods through applications to real data. The
project will promote teaching, training and learning, broaden the participation
of students from under-represented groups, and build research networks between
institutions. The research will be of great interest to many other areas of
science, and the results will be widely disseminated in subject matter domain
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past decade, more than 24,000 single-
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been reported to be associated with at
least one trait/disease at the genome-wide significance level. However, these
significantly associated SNPs only account for a small portion of the genetic
factors underlying complex human traits/diseases, referred to as "missing
heritability" in the genetics community. Recently, significant progress has been
made in using the restricted maximum likelihood (REML) approach based on linear
mixed models (LMM). While the REML approach appears to provide the right answer
to many problems of practical interest, researchers have been puzzled by the
fact that the LMM, under which the REML estimators are derived, is misspecified.
In a recently published article, the investigators proved that the REML
estimators of some important genetic quantities, such as heritability and the
variance of the environmental error, are consistent despite the model
misspecification. While this pioneering work led to a new field called
misspecified mixed model analysis (MMMA), many theoretical and practical
challenges remain unsolved. This project seeks to address the following
problems: (1) extension of MMMA to correlated SNPs, (2) development of the
asymptotic distribution of the REML estimator under misspecified LMM, (3)
resampling methods for MMMA, (4) estimation of the number of nonzero random
effects, and (5) extensions to multiple random effect factors and discrete
traits. The research will also include software development to implement the
methods.