* 1713994
* EAPSI: Computational Screening of Metal Alloys for the Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to Fuels
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Yufeng Huang, Huang                   Yufeng
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Discovering an efficient and selective catalyst for CO2 reduction to fuels is an
important step towards sustainable energy production, for the benefits of
reinforcing national energy independence and allowing the integration of
renewable energy sources to current energy infrastructures. In this study
rigorous quantum mechanical calculations will be employed to screen for CO2
reduction catalysts in metal alloys. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Haibin Su, a noted expert on modeling chemical reactions
in nanoparticle systems, at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore.

Currently, copper is the only known electrocatalyst that reduce CO2 beyond
2-electron reduction. However, neither efficiency nor selectivity are sufficient
for industrial scale application. In this study, CO2 reduction materials will be
screened under specific pH and applied potentials. Formate forming metals will
be chosen as the host substrate and one of the surface metal atom will be
replaced by a different metal atom to form single-atom alloys (SAA) for targeted
reactions. For the purpose of high efficiency, moderately applied potentials are
required. At such a potential range, formate forming metals will not produce
undesired by-products like hydrogen gas and CO, thus providing adsorbed hydrogen
atoms to activate CO2. By using different transition metals at the single metal
atom site, the activity as well as the selectivity towards CO2 reduction can be
optimized. To determine the stability of the metal alloy, metal-metal
interactions will be evaluated in collaboration with Dr. Su.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.