* 1713987
* EAPSI: Investigating Hydrothermal Structures by Electrical Self-potential Measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Christine Sealing, Sealing                 Christine      R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Understanding the architecture of the hydrothermal system will improve
interpretation of geophysical and geochemical signals, enabling a deeper
understanding of volcanic processes for more effective monitoring and eruption
forecasting. The results of this project have the potential to benefit
monitoring and hazard mitigation efforts at active volcanoes in the United
States and worldwide. In this project, the researchers will map the structure of
the hydrothermal system on White Island volcano, New Zealand. The work will be
carried out under the guidance of Dr. Bruce Christenson, Senior Volcanic Fluids
Geochemist at GNS Science, New Zealand.

The chemistry of gases and thermal waters near the surface provides vital
information about the state of the volcano and the magma below. However, these
hydrothermal systems present specific challenges for volcanology, as surface
waters can alter and dilute volcanic fluids and mask seismic signals that may be
coming from the movement of magma at depth. There are also inherent dangers
associated with volcano-hydrothermal systems, such as phreatic (steam) and
phreatomagmatic (steam + magma) eruptions and contamination of fresh surface
waters, all of which put local populations at risk. Understanding the structure
and behaviour of these systems is critical for interpreting volcanic signals.
This in turn enables better eruption forecasting to protect the lives of people
living near active volcanoes. This award will support fieldwork to map the
hydrothermal system on White Island, the most active volcano in New Zealand,
using a method known as electrical self-potential. As thermal fluids flow
through the ground, they generate minute electrical currents. By measuring the
change in electrical potential along the ground, these currents can be used to
effectively map the path and direction of fluid flow.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.