* 1713567
* Data Visualization Literacy: Research and Tools that Advance Public Understanding of Scientific Data
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Joe Heimlich, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,355,236.00

As the world is increasingly dependent upon computing and computational
processes associated with data analysis, it is essential to gain a better
understanding of the visualization technologies that are used to make meaning of
massive scientific data. It is also essential that the infrastructure, the very
means by which technologies are developed for improving the public's engagement
in science itself, be better understood. Thus, this AISL Innovations in
Development project will address the critical need for the public to learn how
to interpret and understand highly complex and visualized scientific data. The
project will design, develop and study a new technology platform, xMacroscope,
as a learning tool that will allow visitors at the Science Museum of Minnesota
and the Center of Science and Industry, to create, view, understand, and
interact with different data sets using diverse visualization types. The
xMacroscope will support rapid research prototyping of public experiences at
selected exhibits, such as collecting data on a runner's speed and height and
the visualized representation of such data. The xMacroscope will provide
research opportunities for exhibit designers, education researchers, and
learning scientists to study diverse audiences at science centers in order to
understand how learning about data through the xMacroscope tool may inform
definitions of data literacy. The research will advance the state of the art in
visualization technology, which will have broad implications for teaching and
learning of scientific data in both informal and formal learning environments.
The project will lead to better understanding by science centers on how to
present data to the public more effectively through visualizations that are
based upon massive amounts of data. Technology results and research findings
will be disseminated broadly through professional publications and presentations
at science, education, and technology conferences. The project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is driven by the assumption that
in the digital information age, being able to create and interpret data
visualizations is an important literacy for the public. The research will seek
to define, measure, and advance data visualization literacy. The project will
engage the public in using the xMacrocope at the Science Museum of Minnesota and
at the Center of Science and Industry's (COSI) science museum and research
center in Columbus, Ohio. In both museum settings the public will interact with
different datasets and diverse types of visualizations. Using the xMacroscope
platform, personal attributes and capabilities will be measured and personalized
data visualizations will be constructed. Existing theories of learning
(constructivist and constructionist) will be extended to capture the learning
and use of data visualization literacy. In addition, the project team will
conduct a meta-review related to different types of literacy and will produce a
definition with performance measures to assess data visualization literacy -
currently broadly defined in the project as the ability to read, understand, and
create data visualizations. The research has potential for significant impact in
the field of science and technology education and education research on visual
learning. It will further our understanding of the nature of data visualization
literacy learning and define opportunities for visualizing data in ways that are
both personally and culturally meaningful. The project expects to advance the
understanding of the role of personalization in the learning process using
iterative design-based research methodologies to advance both theory and
practice in informal learning settings. An iterative design process will be
applied for addressing the research questions by correlating visualizations to
individual actions and contributions, exploring meaning-making studies of
visualization construction, and testing the xMacroscope under various conditions
of crowdedness and busyness in a museum context. The evaluation plan is based
upon a logic model and the evaluation will iteratively inform the direction,
process, and productivity of the project.