* 1713918
* EAPSI: Using Seismic Waves to Probe the Structure of Colliding Stars
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Emily Leiner, Leiner                  Emily
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Blue stragglers are stars that have recently gained mass by colliding with a
passing star, or accreting material from a binary companion. Similar
interactions are responsible for creating many other interesting objects,
including the Type 1a supernovae we use to measure the expansion of the
universe. To better understand these processes, astronomers need reliable
measurements of the mass and internal structure of mass-transfer and collision
products like blue stragglers. Such measurements only recently became possible
using a new technique called asteroseismology. Similar to seismologists using
earthquakes to study the interior of the Earth, astronomers use seismic waves
that propagate inside stars to probe their interior structures. These wave
patterns can be detected as small variations in a star's brightness. NASA's
Kepler mission has monitored the brightness of thousands of stars for four
years, providing a groundbreaking data set to study these seismic waves. This
project will study a sample of blue stragglers observed by Kepler, using their
seismic wave patterns to determine their masses, rotation rates, and internal
structures. This research will be done in collaboration with Dr. Dennis Stello
at the University of New South Wales, one of a handful of experts on
asteroseismology in the world.

Two key uncertainties in the physics of collisions and binary mass transfer are
the mass transfer efficiency and the angular momentum evolution. In combination
with detailed stellar modeling, asteroseismology can shed light on mass transfer
efficiency by providing precise mass measurements of blue stragglers, a
constraint that has been largely unavailable to modelers. Some blue stragglers
display mixed p- and g- mode oscillations, allowing separate measurements of
core and envelope properties. For this project, measuring a core and an envelope
rotation rate will illuminate how much angular momentum is accreted at the blue
straggler surface, and if it is transported down into the stellar core. This
technique has already offered many insights into angular momentum transport in
normal stars. This project will be one of the first efforts to measure these
properties in non-standard stars like blue stragglers, and promises to offer
more insight into the angular momentum evolution of mass-transfer and collision
products.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.