* 1713695
* Petascale Integrative Approaches to Protein Structure Prediction
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Ken Dill, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,566.00

This project addresses a central challenge of biology: the prediction of protein
structure from sequence. Accurate determination of protein structure is
essential to understanding biological mechanism and designing new drugs. The
purpose of this work is to use the petascale capabilities of Blue Waters to
overcome limitations of current experimental and computational tools of
structure determination. The project will do this by running a physics-based
simulation method, called MELD (Modeling Employing Limited Data) that rationally
incorporates sparse, noisy, and ambiguous experimental or heuristic information.
Currently around 15% of protein targets cannot be tackled by known methods. The
transformative goal of this work is to use MELD, running on Blue Waters, to
break substantial barriers in size and complexity for computational structure
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has three major goals: (1) use MELD
to provide structures for the known, small proteins were bioinformatics methods
fail and where databases are sparse (e.g. membrane proteins), (2) provide
kinetic and pathway information for protein folding by seeding Markov State
Models (MSM) with MELD intermediate states, and (3) use accurate relative free
energies of folding upon binding for more accurate peptide design. The project
will use the the petascale capabilities of Blue Waters to push the size
boundaries of full atomistic physics based predictions. Both the software and
the results obtained from this project will be freely accessible to the larger
scientific community.