* 1713220
* I-Corps: Clinical diagnostics for bowel disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2017
* Sunyoung Kim, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
diagnostic tests for gastrointestinal disease and to reduce healthcare costs.
Digestive diseases constitute a worldwide burden on health care. Moreover, the
incidence of inflammatory bowel diseases has increased in children and in
adults. Current diagnostic tools, such as biopsy, are not usually available to
initiate patient treatment or management; nor is it a favorable method for
repeat sampling needed in such chronic conditions. Thus, lack of tools to
molecularly identify disease has restricted the ability to manage
gastrointestinal inflammation in both pediatric and adult patients. A molecular
diagnosis can translate to better care for the patient and financial advantage
for payers.

This I-Corps project will examine the potential product-market fit of diagnostic
biomarkers for gastrointestinal tract disorders. Accurate, rapid, and
inexpensive diagnostics can make personalized management of inflammatory bowel
disease accessible. A prototype of a simple and accurate diagnostic medical
device for a common and devastating bowel disease in preterm infants has been
developed. Customer interviews will provide an in-depth understanding and
prioritization of their needs and requirements. They also will trigger an
iterative evolution of the team?s business model and product design. Beyond the
economic benefit of improved clinical management of patients, technology use in
clinical labs, veterinary labs, and pharmaceutical development markets can be
evaluated.