* 1713060
* Determining the Landscape of Informal Physics Programming in the United States
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Noah Finkelstein, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 06/30/2022
* USD 689,455.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. The subject of
physics and all of its sub-disciplines are becoming more prevalent in the public
press as the research results appear to be quite interesting and important.
While the physics discipline has made a Nation-wide effort to acquaint the
public with physics knowledge through informal education learning experiences
for years, it has not been as successful as the community desires. Thus, this
project is aimed to gather all of the informal and outreach physics education
efforts that have been attempted in the hope of finding the best practices for
learning physics concepts and practices. A compendium will be published to
inform future opportunities on how to educate the public through informal and
outreach mechanisms. This project is a collaboration between Michigan State
University and the University of Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics
community has a long history of engaging audiences in informal education
activities. Physics institutions that facilitate informal programs include
university departments, national laboratories and centers, and professional
societies and organizations. There is, however, no systemic understanding of how
these programs are facilitated, nor an assessment of the collective impact that
these programs have on participants. This project will address numerous research
questions in the broad areas of Activity Detail, Structural Aspects, and
Assessment. Further, their efforts will determine the "who, what, why, where and
how" of informal physics offerings, focusing on their facilitation, impact on
participants, and the academic and discipline-specific cultures from which these
programs originate. The study has several definite research outcomes that will
emerge from this methodology: 1) They will produce a survey of the informal
efforts of university physics departments, national physics labs and national
physics organizations, 2) They will develop a taxonomy of informal physics
programs from which we can characterize the landscape of programs, and 3) by
investigating both "successful" as well as "failed" or terminated programs, they
will develop an understanding of the culture and resources needed to support
outreach from these research findings. In addition, they will produce published
works that can be utilized by informal practitioners and administrators in
physics to examine current programs and guide the development of new programs.
With regards to the research questions and framework, the overarching and
driving question for this research project is: "What is the landscape of
informal physics learning, specifically, of those programs in the United States
facilitated by physicists and physics students at academic institutions,
national labs and by national physics organizations?" This study will provide a
robust understanding of the state of informal physics programs and outreach by
physicists in the United States today. Findings will inform practitioners and
administrators as to how best to support and design informal physics
programming. The results will also have broad implications for other discipline-
specific informal STEM programming. The primary data collection methods will be
a nationwide survey and interviews with a large sample of informal practitioners
from the physics community. Site visits will be conducted with a subset of these
programs in order to observe programs in action and to glean insights from
university participants, community partners, public, and K-12 audiences.