* 1713962
* EAPSI: Examining the Innate Immune Responses of the Pacific Coral Pocillopora Damicornis from Thermally Variable Reefs
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Michael Connelly, Connelly                Michael        T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Coral reefs provide important benefits to coastal communities and are in
worldwide decline due to rapid environmental change. Stony corals that build
reefs are comprised of the cnidarian host, symbiotic algae and additional
bacteria, fungi and viruses that are collectively termed the "coral holobiont".
Disruptions that affect the healthy holobiont, such as high temperature stress
due to climate change, are hypothesized to increase the incidence of coral
bleaching and disease via immune suppression of the coral host. However, coral
innate immunity research has been limited, and there is a poor understanding of
in vivo host-microbe regulatory mechanisms. Nanwan Bay in southern Taiwan has
unique oceanographic and bathymetric features that cause deepwater upwelling
during spring tides, leading to temperature fluctuations as great as 10ºC over
the course of a few hours. This highly variable temperature regime experienced
by corals on reefs near upwelling regions in Nanwan Bay may contribute to
increased resilience to thermal stress, although the physiological basis for
enhanced tolerance is undetermined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this EAPSI
fellowship, recirculating aquarium experiments will use antibiotics, heat stress
and immune stimulation to perturb the holobiont of the model coral species
Pocillopora damicornis before gene expression, protein expression, and flow
cytometry analyses are applied to assess the capacity for coral immune
adaptation in variable temperature settings. The primary hypothesis is that
temperature fluctuations caused by tidal upwelling in Nanwan Bay select for
Pocillopora corals with a broader immune capacity to modulate microbial
community shifts due to temperature variability. This research will be completed
under the supervision of Dr. Pi-Jen Liu from National Dong-Hwa University in
Kaohsiung, Taiwan, and will make use of the marine operations and aquarium
facilities at the National Museum of Marine Biology and Aquarium in
Kending.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.