* 1713444
* Combining Media and Messaging to Engage Underserved Families in STEM Learning: A Study
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Sandra Sheppard, WNET
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 11/30/2019
* USD 1,125,000.00

WNET, working with Education Development Center, will lead a small scale
Innovations in Development effort to develop, research, and evaluate a new model
to engage underserved families in STEM learning. The new endeavor, Cyberchase:
Mobile Adventures in STEM, will build on the proven impact of the public media
mathematics series Cyberchase and the growing potential of mobile technology and
texting to reach underserved parents. WNET will produce two new Cyberchase
episodes for 6-9 year olds, focused on using math to learn about the
environment. Drawing on these videos and an existing Cyberchase game, the team
will produce a bilingual family engagement campaign that will combine an in-
person workshop followed by a 6-8 week "text to parent" campaign, in which
parents receive weekly text messages suggesting family STEM activities related
to the media content. The engagement model will be piloted in three cities with
large low-income/Latino populations, along with one texting campaign offered
without the workshop. This project will build knowledge about how to deploy
well-designed public media assets and text messaging to promote fun, effective
STEM learning interactions in low-income families. While past research on
educational STEM media has tended to focus on children, especially preschool
age, this project will focus primarily on text messaging for parents, and on
learners age 6-9, and the wider scope of parent/child STEM interactions possible
at that age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project will be to
develop, test and refine a family engagement model that includes a face-to-face
workshop, rich narrative Cyberchase content, and text-message prompts for
parents to engage in short, playful STEM activities with children. The project
team will explore which features of the mobile text-and-media program have most
value for low-income and Latino families and prompt STEM learning interactions,
including a comparison of workshop-based and text-only variants. The project
will have three phases: needs assessment and preliminary design; an early-stage
test in New York and development and testing of media; and three late-stage
tests in contrasting locations, two including workshops and one "text-only," and
analysis of findings. Ultimately, the project will share knowledge with the
field about the opportunities and challenges of using mobile texting and public
media to reach underserved families effectively. This knowledge will also inform
a future proposal for production and outcomes research, which, based on the
study results, may include a scaled-up version in ten locations and a ten-city
Randomized Control Test. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.