* 1713828
* Collaborative Research: A Tale of Dwarf Galaxies and Giant Galaxies: Connecting the Smallest and the Largest Galaxies to Their Dark Matter Halos
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jenny Greene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 253,400.00

Astronomers seek to understand how galaxies form and evolve. The luminous matter
in galaxies such as our own galaxy (the Milky Way) resides within more extensive
halos of dark matter. Although the nature of dark matter is still unknown, its
effects due to gravity can be studied. Astronomers use simulations to predict
how dark matter halos evolve. They use indirect means to infer its presence
among observed galaxies. However, the relationship between these dark matter
halos and their host galaxies is still uncertain. Our understanding is weakest
for the very lowest mass galaxies and for the highest mass galaxies. Leauthaud
and collaborators will explore both extremes in this innovative observational
research program. Using a new, high resolution imaging survey, they will measure
the dark matter halos for tens of thousands of galaxies. They will compare dark
matter to the profiles of luminous matter. They will focus on dwarf galaxies and
giant galaxies where observations are most needed. This research will lead to
new insights into the relationship between dark matter and luminous matter.
Outreach from this proposal will include summer training in statistical and
computational methods for undergraduates as part of established programs at
Princeton and UC-Santa Cruz. The Princeton program will work with the National
Astronomy Consortium to recruit students from minority and underserved
populations. The UC-Santa Cruz program will recruit students through Hartnell
College, a neighboring Hispanic serving institution. Together these activities
will broaden participation in science among historically underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will advance our understanding of the
stellar mass ? halo mass relation that describes the relationship between
ordinary matter and dark matter in galaxies. Indirect detection of dark matter
will be made via weak lensing using data from the Hyper Suprime-Cam (HSC) survey
on the Subaru 8.2m telescope at Mauna Kea. This project will advance the state-
of-the-art for such weak lensing measurements. In addition, due to the large
area of this survey, HSC will detect rare and extremely massive galaxies ( &gt;
1011.5 Msun) that lie at the heart of the largest dark matter halos. This
proposal will identify tens of thousands of such massive galaxies and perform
weak lensing measurements on them. It will also study large numbers of dwarf
galaxies ( &lt; 109 Msun) via weak lensing. Together these studies will reveal
the relationship between luminous matter and dark matter for both low and high
mass galaxies. It is in these extremes of the mass range where new measurements
are most needed to resolve discrepancies with theoretical models.