* 1713803
* EAPSI: Fabrication of Complex Microstructures Using Global Inputs on Biofactory-On-A-Chip
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Samuel Sheckman, Sheckman                Samuel         I
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Designing microstructures on the small scale can provide a number of challenges.
One such challenge is the ability to reproduce a small scale design for minimal
costs. As interesting as the small scale can be, the most limiting factor is
cost. Equipment usage can be great expenditure for universities and individuals,
but the investigations they lead to can one day change the world. Such
investigations in the microscale is using biocompatible microrobots that can be
used for drug delivery or minimally invasive surgery. Having the right
microstructure of the microrobotic system can help determine when and how
microrobots perform specific tasks within the body. With the assistance of Dr.
Chi Won Ahn, Director at the National Nano Fabrication Center (NNFC), located at
the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) in Daejeon,
South Korea; the production of a biofactory-on-a-chip capable of the repeatable
fabrication of complex microstructures can be completed.

Biocompatibility is a component of large concern when it comes to the topic of
microrobots for the specific use of in vivo applications, as such
polysaccharide-base hydrogels are an interesting point of research. To create
polysaccharide-base hydrogels, the process of cross-linking sodium alginate and
calcium chloride is completed through a droplet producing method, which can also
encapsulate organic and nonorganic materials. It is because of this ability that
these hydrogels are referred to as artificial cells. Artificial cells
encapsulated by paramagnetic nanoparticles can be manipulated to move under
global inputs of a uniform magnetic field. Using an algorithmic method call,
object particle computation, these artificial cells are moved under the globally
input magnetic field until they reach an obstacle. From the obstacle, the
artificial cells then move in a clockwise direction and the pattern is repeated.
The process continues until the artificial cells reach their final destination
and exits the algorithm. To produce the algorithm, a PDMS mold, produced from
photolithography and softlithography techniques are used. Controlling the flow
is a pneumatic valve system which would control the fluid flow as well as the
input of new alginate cells into the algorithm. Altogether, the system is called
a biofactory-on-a-chip, which can continually produce microstructures designed
in the object particle computation. With the assistance of Dr. Ahn?s team at the
NNFC, the equipment and expertise necessary to complete the manufacturing
process is readily available. Such a biofactory-on-a-chip will enable the
repeatable cost-effective fabrication method of complex microstructures.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.