* 1713963
* EAPSI: Balancing Conservation and Animal Welfare in Twenty-first Century Zoos
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Anne Clay, Clay                    Anne           S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Zoos of the twenty-first century not only entertain their visitors, but also
educate them about humanity's relationship to the environment. They have a broad
mission to collaborate with other research and educational institutions, engage
in innovative projects to conserve habitats and species, and help make the
public case for sustainability. In addition, modern zoos have a responsibility
to understand and present the challenges between conservation and animal welfare
ethics in order to balance animal rights with conservation. Unlike the animal
welfare or rights viewpoint, the conservation standpoint gives precedence to
endangered species, and says that the willingness to protect ecosystems defines
moral consideration of wild species. Discrepancies between animal welfare and
conservation occur when the rights or interests of individual animals conflict
with the need to preserve ecosystems or a particular species. Because the
welfare of individual animals is often sacrificed at the expense of conservation
research, the two concepts have traditionally been thought to be incompatible.
Created as a place for leisure in 1984, the Seoul Grand Park Zoo in South Korea
only recently made conservation a core priority and improved animal care under
the influence of the animal rights movement. However, not only does the Seoul
Zoo still lack resources and funds both for the development of animal welfare
and conservation research, but South Korea also has very little legislation
protecting the welfare of zoo animals. By focusing on the Seoul Zoo's direct
involvement in the conservation of three different animals (the Asiatic black
bear, the red fox, and the Asian leopard cat), this research aims to determine
the degree to which the institution prioritizes individual animal welfare in
their conservation endeavors. This project will be conducted at Ewha Women's
University, under the guidance of Professor Jae Chun Choe, a prominent biologist
who has spurred conversations on the treatment of animals in zoos and is active
in researching improvements in animal welfare science for captive animals. This
collaboration could help provide a framework to aid in the improvement of the
welfare of Korean zoo animals and make for more humane scientific education and
conservation methods.

This project will focus on the Seoul Grand Park Zoo's conservation endeavors
within the framework of compassionate conservation, where empathy plays a role
in conservation decision-making. The application of this concept's guiding
principle "first do no harm" in education programs, zoological institutions,
dealings with invasive species, the capture and tagging of endangered animals,
and other acts related to protecting ecosystems, can help encourage a peaceful
coexistence between humanity and the natural world. The research project will
complete an ethnographic analysis of the Seoul Zoo's current conservation and
education programs. The researcher will analyze several conversations with Seoul
Zoo officials, Korean academics, and conservation experts, which will reveal the
zoo?s struggles in balancing its different welfare and conservation priorities,
especially in its current projects to the breeding and propagation of three
different species: the Asiatic black bear, the red fox, and the Asian leopard
cat. Compassionate conservation aims to use techniques in animal welfare science
to inform and improve conservation methodology. Using the concepts of animal
welfare science as a framework for a broad questionnaire, the project seeks to
find out whether the conservation programs at the Seoul Zoo focus on the desires
of individual animals as well as the improvement of their health, consciousness
and emotions. Such research could provide guidelines for evidence-based
decisions to aid in the improvement of legislation concerning the welfare of
Korean zoo animals, in turn improving the function of the institution for the
Korean people. The results of this project are expected to explore an innovative
perspective on the management and conservation priorities of Korean zoos, an
underrepresented group in the twenty-first century debate on the role of these
modern institutions.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.