* 1713871
* EAPSI: Genetic Variation and Structure of Snow Leopards in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Charlotte Hacker, Hacker                  Charlotte      E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Snow leopards are vital to their ecosystem, but face extinction in many areas
due to human-wildlife conflict, habitat loss, climate change, and shrinking food
sources. Snow leopards are difficult to study due to their elusive nature, low
densities, and wide range. Genetic analysis of their feces (scat) can get around
these obstacles. This research aims to noninvasively sample snow leopards in
China by collecting scat, extracting DNA, and identifying individuals. Data will
be used to estimate abundance and genetic diversity. Comparisons will be made to
previous surveys to assess population stability through time. Results from this
EAPSI award will aid in the conservation of snow leopards in China and ecosystem
management, and will contribute to a larger, range-wide initiative. This project
will build on a collaboration with Dr. Yuguang Zhang of the Chinese Academy of
Forestry, who has extensive experience conducting snow leopard conservation
research, and will lead to other valuable partnerships.

Snow leopards are a keystone species that face extinction in many areas due to
human-wildlife conflict, habitat loss, climate change, and low prey densities.
Researchers must work together to obtain reliable quantitative data to
prioritize conservation initiatives and policy. This research will conduct a
non-invasive genetic survey to better understand the snow leopard population in
China. Snow leopard scat will be collected, DNA extracted, amplified via PCR,
and genotyped. Data analyses will include snow leopard abundance, genetic
diversity, and density. Comparison to previous samples will provide the first
measurements of population stability over time via genetics. Results will aid in
making conservation plans and management decisions, and will serve as part of a
larger, range-wide initiative. This project will build on a collaboration with
Dr. Yuguang Zhang of the Chinese Academy of Forestry, who has extensive
experience conducting snow leopard conservation research, and will yield other
important partnerships.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes Program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.