* 1713278
* 2017 NSF CISE CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Wenchao Zhou, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 92,806.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is the NSF's most
prestigious award bestowed on outstanding tenure-track faculty members to
support their exceptional research and educational activities. Junior faculty
who are just starting their careers often have limited experience with proposal
writing and evaluation. They also have little or no interaction with the program
directors at NSF. The goal of this workshop is to allow junior faculty to obtain
first-hand experiences through the combination of presentations and interactive
activities with recent CISE CAREER awardees and NSF program directors. The CISE
CAREER Workshop has happened over the past 6 years, and has been successful in
disseminating knowledge of the CAREER program requirements within CISE to the
community of early-career CISE researchers in academia. This workshop aims to
continue this proven and successful format to benefit the emerging community of
early-career researchers in CISE-related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will consist of the presentations on CISE CAREER solicitation, talks
given by recent CAREER awardees, mock panels, as well as program-specific
discussions with NSF program managers. The workshop is tentatively scheduled to
be held on Monday March 20th, 2017 in the Hilton Arlington hotel in Arlington,
Virginia. This location is easily accessible through the Metro and within short
distance from three major airports in the Washington DC metropolitan area. The
workshop organizers, in conjunction with NSF program directors, will also
facilitate one-on-one meetings with individual program officers from the CISE
directorate on the day following the workshop for those attendees who are
interested in learning more about the specific program and obtaining feedback on
their ideas for a CAREER submission.