* 1713142
* Lineage: A Cross-Platform Learning Experience Exploring the History of Life on Earth
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Amy Bolton, Twin Cities Public Television
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 10/31/2021
* USD 2,992,401.00

Lineage is a comprehensive educational media and outreach initiative that will
engage individuals and families in learning about deep time and evolution,
helping audiences come to newfound understandings of the connections between the
past, present, and future of life on Earth. The project is a partnership between
Twin Cities PBS (TPT) and the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of
Natural History and is linked to the opening of that museum's new Deep Time
Fossil Hall in June 2019. The project includes a two-hour film for national
broadcast on PBS, and a 20-minute short version for exhibition in science
centers. The documentaries will show how scientists, using paleontology,
genetics, earth science and other disciplines, can reconstruct in detail the
origins of living animals like birds and elephants, revealing their ancient past
as well as evidence of ecological change that can inform our understanding of
Earth today. Extensive educational outreach will include the creation of "Bone
Hunter," an innovative VR (Virtual Reality) game designed for family co-play
that engages multiple players in the process of paleontology as they piece
together a fossil in a digital lab. Bone Hunter and other collaborative
educational activities will be deployed at Family Fossil Festivals that will
attract multi-generational learners. One such Festival will take place at the
Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., while others will be based at
geographically diverse institutions that serve underserved rural as well as
urban communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lineage is a collaboration between
national media producers, noted learning institutions and researchers, including
Twin Cities Public Television, the Smithsonian Institution / National Museum of
Natural History, Schell Games, the Institute for Learning Innovation (ILI), and
Rockman et al. One of the project's primary innovations is its exploration of
new learning designs for families that use cutting-edge technologies (e.g. the
Bone Hunter virtual reality game) and collaborative multi-generational learning
experiences that advance science knowledge and inquiry-based learning. An
external research study conducted by ILI will investigate how intergenerational
co-play with physical artifacts compared to virtual artifacts influences STEM
(Science Technology Engineering Mathematics) learning and engagement. The
findings will lead to critical strategic impacts for the field, building
knowledge about ongoing innovation in the free choice learning space. The
project's external evaluation will be conducted by Rockman et al and evaluative
findings, as well as the educational materials derived from the project, will be
widely disseminated through partnerships with professional and educator groups.
Clips from the Lineage film and related learning resources will be hosted on PBS
LearningMedia, so educators can incorporate these resources into their
classrooms, and students and lifelong learners can explore and discover on their
own. The project outcomes will have broad impact on public audiences, deepening
and advancing knowledge and understanding about important scientific concepts,
and promoting continued, family-based collaborative learning experiences to
expand and deepen STEM knowledge. This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning.