* 1713756
* Symposium on Interdisciplinary Collaboration Among Ecological Engineering, EcoScience, and Eco-Art to Enhance Ecological Restoration Research
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Changwoo Ahn, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

CBET 1713756 PI: Ahn, Changwoo

This is a grant in assistance of international travel for a total of nine
U.S.-based ecosystem scientists/ecological engineers and eco-artists to
participate in a focused symposium at the 12th International Congress of Ecology
(INTECOL) to be held in Beijing, China on August 21-25, 2017. The goal is to
advance ecosystem restoration methodology through enhancing ecological
engineering research. The focused symposium will facilitate cultural and
scholarly exchange and dialogue between USA and China on approaches and
experiences relating to environmental sustainability and resilience design with
respect to soil, water, and urban landscapes across national and geographic
boundaries.

The novel, unprecedented theme of the focused symposium will provide a unique
opportunity to share experiences and build collaborations among ecological
engineers, ecosystem scientists, and eco-artists in the context of an
international Congress. All of the participants for the focused symposium are
U.S. citizens in the fields of ecological engineering, ecosystem ecology, and
eco-art, with much of their work based in USA. The symposium will provide an
international audience with U.S. experiences on ecological design, ecosystem
restoration, urban ecology, ecological engineering practices, ecosystem science
and engineering, and eco-art, both separately and collaboratively. The focused
symposium will also present an opportunity for both the participants and the
attendees of the Congress for cross-cultural, interdisciplinary connections and
thus further collaboration opportunities among them. This type of scholarly and
cultural exchange is rare and will strengthen U.S. scientific research and
practices in ecosystem restoration, watershed management, biodiversity, storm
water management, and ecological engineering practices. The learning outcome of
the focused symposium will be a transformational nexus of ecosystem science and
engineering and eco-art to enhance communication, research, and education as a
key aspect of advancing environmental sustainability.