* 1713972
* EAPSI: A Common Sensor and Software Approach For Humanoid Material-Handling Missions in Disaster Scenarios
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Blake Hament, Hament                  Blake
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Major disasters like Hurricane Katrina and the Fukushima nuclear accident strike
quickly but leave regions devastated for years afterwards. Even a fractional
reduction in cleanup time can drastically reduce economic opportunity costs and
low social morale while more quickly returning these communities to pre-disaster
quality of life. One possibility for reducing cleanup time is the deployment of
humanoid robots. In the 2015 DARPA challenge, teams from around the world
demonstrated that humanoid robots have the ability to navigate and interact with
their world with unprecedented complexity: driving, using tools, opening doors,
and manipulating facility controls. The biggest obstacle to overcome before
humanoids can be deployed for cleanup is developing better material-handling
capabilities like lifting, pushing, pulling, and stacking. As roboticists
develop these capabilities, their humanoid robots are evolving different
software and sensor approaches. This project will compare the software and
sensors of an American and a Korean humanoid being developed for disaster
cleanup, identify disparities in configuration, and determine optimum
configuration for material-handling missions. The project will be conducted at
Korea Advanced Institute for Science and Technology under the mentorship of Dr.
Jun Ho Oh, whose team placed first in the 2015 DARPA Robotics Challenge.

The humanoids being compared in this study are DRC Hubo 2 platforms. The
American and Korean Hubos use many of the same scripts and hardware, but
differences have evolved as both groups continue to develop the platform
independently. In cases that these differences significantly affect performance,
the researcher will use a combination of simulated and real material-handling
trials to determine which software and sensor approach produces superior success
rates and completion times.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.