* 1713000
* Convening for EHR Core Research: Fundamental Research - Progress, Issues, and the Future
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Jeremy Roschelle, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 02/28/2018
* USD 283,878.00

The Education and Human Resources Core Research (ECR) program funds fundamental
research on education and workforce development in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) focused on STEM Learning and Learning
Environments, Broadening Participation in STEM, and STEM Workforce Development.
The convening will bring together researchers who have been funded by ECR to
share their research results and ongoing studies to better inform the continuing
research funded by the program. Principal Investigators supported with ECR
funding will attend a 2-day meeting where they will share their own work, but
also hear from luminaries in the field on the broad issues converging across the
research areas supported by ECR. The goals of the convening are to engage
interdisciplinary leaders around the findings of their research, identify big
issues related to fundamental research in STEM education, solicit PI feedback on
opportunities and barriers to rapid advancement within the ECR research
community, and help shape the field's future research and development efforts.
The meeting will strengthen and deepen understanding of project activities and
results, the challenges encountered by PIs conducting fundamental research, and
the foundational knowledge that has been developed and accumulated by these
projects. Additionally, the meeting will increase the PIs' knowledge of the wide
range of research topics in STEM education that are addressed by the ECR
program, and identify opportunities and gaps in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to planning and executing the
convening will include appointing program committee members, identifying session
formats, coordinating participation of keynote speakers and panelists,
developing a web site to support the event, facilitating and participating in
sessions at the event, writing a report based on the content of the event, and
promoting and disseminating information after the event (e.g., press releases,
blogs, and social media). During the planning process, the team will actively
seek input from potential attendees. They will use the input to focus the
convening on what matters most to attendees. They will broadly disseminate the
resources produced by the event and a final report on the convening's outcomes
through social media channels, newsletters, and other connections we have
throughout the research community, including through resource centers supported
by NSF. The online resources will be open, broadly advertised, and permanently
available. Additional stakeholders, practitioners, and policymakers will be
invited as panelists and keynote speakers to help encourage discussions toward
broader impacts aligned with overall ECR goals.