* 1713808
* EAPSI: Discernment of Japanese and Native American Ancestry Using Nonmetric and Metric Dental Traits
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Madelyn Green, Green                   Madelyn
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Forensic anthropologists work alongside law enforcement to expedite the
identification process of unknown individuals that are a financial and physical
burden to medical examiners and coroners across the United States. Observing
skeletal collections and identifying unique variation among different
populations is a key method when attempting to identify unknown persons from
their skeletal remains alone. Through the development of new methods that are
used by forensic anthropologists to determine the sex, age, ancestry, and trauma
analysis for skeletonized remains, more individuals can be identified. This
study focuses on the determination Native American or Asian ancestry of
individuals through the observation of dental variation in shape and size.
Cooperation with international institutions and researchers, such as Dr.
Yoshikatsu Negishi at Jikei University in Tokyo, is essential not only to access
skeletal collection with which new methods will be established, but also so form
professional relationships to better ensure the standardization of new methods.

This research study endeavors to dispel the grouping of Native Americans and
Asians into one umbrella ancestry category which is based on the two groups'
ancient genetic relationship. Since the two populations have been separate from
each other, both geographically and genetically, for thousands of years, they
have experienced different population histories that may have influenced the
expression of dental morphological traits and the dimensions of their tooth
crowns. By using a Japanese skeletal collection and dental casts of a population
of the Seminole Native Americans, this study serves as an exploration of the
variation between Native Americans and Asian populations. This study will be a
contribution to the anthropological discussion of ancestry and to the
identification methods of law enforcement.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by National
Science Foundation and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.