* 1713013
* Mathematical Finance, Probability, and Partial Differential Equations Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Paul Feehan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,000.00

A conference on mathematical finance, probability theory, and partial
differential equations will be held at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, May 17
--19, 2017. (See http://finmath.rutgers.edu/partial-differential-equations-
conference.) The scientific themes are stochastic analysis and its applications
to mathematical finance and partial differential equations. These topics touch
upon the highly active research areas of stochastic differential games, backward
stochastic differential equations, stochastic portfolio theory, and systemic
risk. This conference seeks to encourage and promote early-career
mathematicians. The conference will bring together distinguished senior speakers
and a wide range of junior mathematicians, and will help to support, train and
encourage the next generation of researchers. Contributed talks free of
competing parallel sessions will give an opportunity to graduate students and
junior mathematicians to present their research and to obtain feedback from
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University will host a conference on
mathematical finance, probability theory, and partial differential equations,
May 17--19, 2017. Stochastic analysis and probability theory in general provide
powerful mathematical tools for areas ranging from mean field game theory to
equilibrium theory. In particular, significant progress has been made on
backward stochastic differential equations, large interacting particle systems,
and their applications to stochastic control theory related to equilibrium
theory, investment decisions, and systemic risk. The areas of application
include investment in large equity markets, systemic risk in banking systems,
and model selection for pricing and optimal retirement planning. The aim of the
conference is to bring together experts working on these different topics, to
foster the exchange of ideas among the participants, and to provide exposure to
graduate students and junior mathematicians.