* 1713947
* EAPSI: A Novel Approach to Subsea Length Estimation Using Cameras in Parallel and Open-Source Software.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Garrett Johnson, Johnson                 Garrett        B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Since the dawn of ecological studies of coral reefs in the 1950s, scientists
have documented lengths of fish populations which indicate the overall health of
fishery stocks and their habitat. The traditional method for fish length
estimations is diver-based, where a researcher observes fish underwater and
records length estimations by hand. Due to the optical properties of water these
estimations are difficult and subject to researcher biases. Generally, fish
lengths are averaged and grouped into a few size classes (Ex. 5 - 10cm, 11 -
20cm, 21 cm+). To increase the accuracy underwater length estimates, stereovideo
cameras can be used, where two cameras are run in parallel and software
calculates lengths of objects of interest to the nearest millimeter, a magnitude
of greater accuracy than diver-based visual census techniques. The problem with
using these systems over traditional methods is the high cost, which prevents
widespread use.

Accurate fish length records are critical for fishery resource managers in
determining the overall health of coral reef systems to ensure that they remain
healthy for future generations. In this study I will use OpenCV open-source
software tools and low-cost GoPro underwater video cameras to develop an
underwater diver based stereovideo system at a fraction of the cost of currently
available systems. In Taiwan, I will be working with Dr. Colin Wen of Tunghai
University, an expert on current fish length estimation techniques.
Additionally, my low cost system will be used in collaboration with Dr. Wen and
Dr. Allen Chen of Academia Sinica, in support of a current survey of
commercially important fishery species of Taiwan.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.