* 1713319
* National Parks Science Challenge
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Suzanne Thurston, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,458,551.00

The project will advance efforts by the American Association for the Advancement
of Science and the Institute for Learning Innovation to bring together young
adults from communities historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) to collaboratively conduct scientifically
driven challenges embedded in a mobile learning tool based upon the AAAS Active
Explorer platform. The project will be conducted at the Washington National
Mall, San Francisco National Golden Gate Park, and the Boston Harbor Islands
National Recreation Area, and will study how a mobile technology used in these
settings can facilitate learner engagement in science content; how it can affect
young adults' engagement in science-learning processes; and whether interest in
learning science and technology has been furthered. The project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments, including pathways for broadening
access to STEM learning experiences and advancing research STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions will investigate science learning
inequalities by addressing how place-based augmented reality games can connect
young adults to scientific practices, including observing science phenomena,
analyzing data, and communicating findings; how young adults develop science
skills related to their science self-efficacy through participation in augmented
reality science exploration; and how mobile technologies and gaming can serve as
mediators that enable young adults to improve their science identity. In
addition to engaging young adults in science activities at the National Parks
and increasing their science skills, the project will provide valuable
information to National Park staff and scientists to assist them in designing
effective tools, resources and experiences to better engage young adults.
Research teams will collect data in the form of digital ethnography, focus
groups, activity reports, artifacts, and surveys. The project will document
learning and engagement through mobile technology in three urban national parks
that will involve 60 young adults at each location, and will create innovative
measurement tools to monitor how informal settings can leverage the
intersections of the arts and sciences to support student engagement and
learning.