* 1713955
* EAPSI: Assessing Butterfly Evolutionary Divergence in a Post-mating, Pre-zygotic Interaction
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Melissa Plakke, Plakke                  Melissa
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project aims to identify genes that are important for the formation of new
species by using reproductive interactions in the Cabbage White butterfly,
Pieris rapae. There are two subspecies of P. rapae: P. r. rapae and P. r.
crucivora, the latter being endemic to the islands of Japan. These subspecies
have diverged in coloration, pheromone profiles, and mate choice behaviors. In
addition, research on their reproductive physiology suggests functional
mismatches between reproductive proteins may have also arisen during the ~5,000
years that these subspecies have been geographically separated. The specific
identities of these mismatched proteins, and their associated genes, remain
undescribed. For this project, the researcher will collect butterflies in Japan
and compare key reproductive genes between the two subspecies. The research will
be conducted at SOKENDAI in Hayama, Japan in collaboration with Dr. Kentaro
Arikawa, a leading world expert on butterfly research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
Japan, the researcher will collect biological samples, including DNA from wild
caught individuals and RNA from lab-reared virgin females. The DNA sequences and
RNA expression levels for genes of interest will be assessed for divergence
between the two subspecies. Further, the research will determine whether genes
of interest (i.e., those involved in reproductive interactions between the
female reproductive tract and male ejaculate) show signatures of adaptive
evolution. Such a finding would indicate that these reproductive traits evolve
at elevated rates, consistent with the hypothesis that this reproductive
interface could play a role in the divergence and/or maintenance of these two
subspecies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.