* 1713677
* GEOTRACES Arctic section: Dissolved micronutrient trace metal distributions and size partitioning
* GEO,OCE
* 10/03/2016,12/31/2019
* Jessica Fitzsimmons, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2019
* USD 445,603.00

In this project, investigators participating in the 2015 U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic
expedition will measure the concentrations of iron, manganese, zinc, copper,
cadmium, and nickel from a variety of seawater and ice samples in the Western
Arctic Ocean. These are commonly referred to as 'micronutrients' because they
are present in the ocean in extremely low concentrations and because they are
essential for marine organisms. In common with other national initiatives in the
International GEOTRACES Program, the goals of the U.S. Arctic expedition are to
identify processes and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key
trace elements and isotopes in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of
these distributions to changing environmental conditions. Some trace elements
are essential to life, others are known biological toxins, and still others are
important because they can be used as tracers of a variety of physical,
chemical, and biological processes in the sea. The six trace elements to be
measured in this study are arguably the most important bioactive trace elements
in the oceans, and their measurement will provide key information on biological
and physical processes in the Arctic. This project will be carried out under the
direction of a postdoctoral researcher, providing a unique professional
development opportunity for an early career scientist. In addition, the research
will involve the training of an undergraduate researcher, and provide public
outreach opportunities to K-12 teachers and students, and indigenous populations
in Alaska.

The six micronutrients to be measured under this project have all been
identified as key trace elements for the GEOTRACES Program. This research will
allow rigorous testing of the Arctic physical and biological processes, many of
which are already undergoing fundamental changes as a result of climate change,
that control the inputs and fate of key micronutrient metals in the Arctic
Ocean. Colloidal distributions are specifically targeted in order to derive
additional information on the unique physicochemical form and reactivity of
distinct dissolved metal pools. The project will also explore the role of
melting sea ice in driving near-surface concentrations of these elements by
measuring concentrations and size partitioning of these six metals in sea ice,
snow, melt ponds, and in the seawater immediately under sea ice. Given that the
Arctic is a relatively small basin surrounded by broad continental shelves,
sedimentary sources and sinks will also play a major role in controlling the
distributions of these elements. Thus, metal concentrations in porewater samples
from bottom sediments will also be determined from cores in the Bering and
Chukchi Seas, in order to investigate benthic exchanges.