* 1713731
* Quorum sensing control of bacterial biofilm formation and dispersal
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Bonnie Bassler, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2021
* USD 610,000.00

The overall goal of the research is to understand quorum sensing, the cell-to-
cell communication process that controls bacterial collective behaviors. The
studies proposed here will explore quorum-sensing control of single-species and
mixed-species biofilm formation and dispersal. Biofilms are surface-attached
bacterial communities and they represent the predominant form of bacterial life
on Earth. Bacterial biofilms are crucial for ecology, industry, and medicine.
This work will advance the progress of science by revealing the mechanisms that
provide these multicellular systems their resilience. These investigations could
lead to synthetic strategies for controlling bacterial biofilm formation and
dispersal, when biofilm formation negatively impacts the environment and human
health. Students at all levels will be trained by working on this project.
Efforts to promote diversity among science faculty and students will continue,
as will outreach efforts to inform the public across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms are communities of cells adhered to
surfaces. Biofilms represent the predominant form of bacterial life on Earth.
Bacterial biofilms are crucial for ecology, industry, and medicine. This project
will develop new imaging tools capable of resolving the growth dynamics and gene
expression patterns of individual bacterial cells inside living biofilms. Gene
regulation programs will be defined to understand what drives the spatial and
temporal organization of biofilms and what mechanisms provide these
multicellular systems their resilience. Other goals will be to discover how
quorum sensing controls development of clonal and non-clonal biofilms, to reveal
the molecular mechanisms driving transitions between the biofilm growth mode and
the free-swimming state and to explore the ecological consequences to bacteria
of transitioning into and out of biofilms. At the most general level, the
research should move quorum-sensing studies out of the realm of shaken flask
cultures and into new territory that includes realistic spatial and temporal
features that more closely resemble the conditions under which bacteria normally
live. Consequently, the results should reveal the principles underpinning the
evolution and maintenance of expensive traits that are not essential under
laboratory conditions, but are crucial and precisely regulated in nature. With
this knowledge in hand, the field should be able to rapidly move forward to
develop synthetic strategies to prevent or promote quorum sensing, to prevent or
promote single-species and mixed-species biofilm formation, and to prevent or
promote biofilm dispersal, as required.