* 1713920
* EAPSI: An Investigation of Closed Surfaces in 3-manifolds via Character Varieties
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Charles Katerba, Katerba                 Charles        W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

To understand the structure of a 3-dimensional shape, or 3-manifold, it often
helps to study certain surfaces in the 3-manifold that encode important
information. Culler-Shalen theory provides the most general tools for
constructing such surfaces and has been instrumental in the resolution of many
well-known questions. These special surfaces split naturally into two classes:
those with boundary and those without. Much of Culler-Shalen theory's power
comes from a deep understanding of the surfaces with boundary that one can
construct with these tools. On the other hand, very little is known about the
associated surfaces without boundary. In this project, we will use a novel
algebraic perspective on Culler-Shalen theory to study the associated surfaces
without boundary. Our work will resolve numerous problems concerning Culler-
Shalen theory itself and will also open the door to applying the theory to an
even broader class of questions about 3-manifolds. This research will be
conducted in collaboration wth Dr. Stephan Tillman, a leading expert on Culler-
Shalen theory and 3-manifolds, at the University of Sydney in Sydney, Australia.

More specifically, Culler-Shalen theory uses the algebraic geometry of a
3-manifold's character variety and a construction, due to Stallings, to build
essential surfaces in the manifold. The A-polynomial and the Culler-Shalen norm
both determine precisely which boundary slopes arise in this fashion when the
manifold's boundary consists of a single torus. However, not every boundary
slope is detected by Culler-Shalen theory. We will address an analogous question
concerning the detected closed essential surfaces using a module-theoretic
perspective on character varieties developed by Chesebro. In particular, we hope
to construct an in nite family of hyperbolic 3-manifolds with torus boundary
containing closed essential surfaces that are not detected by the character
variety. We will also explore the connection between the singular slopes of a
closed surface and the bounded surfaces which are weakly detected by the
character variety.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.