* 1713275
* EAGER:  Reducing uncertainty in clumped isotope thermometry by evaluating the effect of 17O excess
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Casey Saenger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 69,304.00

The clumped isotope composition of carbonates is a valuable paleothermometer
with diverse applications in geoscience including paleoaltimetry,
paleoclimatology, biomineralization, diagenesis and human evolution. Results are
usually expressed as Delta47 (referred as "cap 47"), which is the deviation of
the ratio of isotopes of CO2 with molecular weight of 47 to those with a weight
of 44 from the ratio expected if they were randomly distributed. Significant
discrepancies in Delta47-temperature calibrations among laboratories add
considerable uncertainty to these studies, and limit the applicability of
Delta47 paleothermometry to temperature anomalies greater than about ± 5ºC. The
proposed work will help identify the source(s) of interlaboratory Delta47
discrepancies by constraining the triple oxygen isotope compositions of all
materials used in its measurement. These results will make progress toward a
Dletal47 paleothermometer limited only by analytical precision that is able to
resolve the much smaller temperature variations characteristic of many
processes. It will also build the foundation for community inter-calibration
efforts that will advance the work of the many disciplines currently applying
Delta47 to societally relevant geological and environmental research questions.
By building the foundation for community calibration efforts, it will strengthen
existing domestic and international collaborations, as well as foster new ones,
thereby helping to identify the most relevant and achievable future work.

The accuracy and precision of carbonate clumped isotope measurements improve
significantly when interferences in mass spectrometer data associated with the
abundance of 17O are corrected using parameters based on the global water pool.
However, the new correction scheme incorrectly assumes that the abundance of 17O
and 18O in the gases, waters and carbonates used to derive Delta47 follow a
specific relationship in which 17O excess is zero. The proposed work will
leverage existing CO2-water equilibration and abiogenic carbonate samples
generated at multiple temperatures, as well as unique University of Washington
analytical capabilities, to evaluate how 17O excess impacts Delta47. This
diverse sample suite is representative of the isotopic compositions,
precipitation methods and temperatures used by most clumped isotope
laboratories, allowing the proposed work to provide important constraints on the
magnitude of 17O excess variability in the many analytes used by the clumped
isotope community. It will allow an evaluation of how 17O excess can be used to
make the most accurate and precise Delta47 measurements when it is known in all
analytes, as well as to develop - best practices - for the vast majority of
institutions that cannot measure 17O excess directly. The latter will include
suggestions both for re-evaluating previously published results, including
Delta47-temperature calibrations, and for generating new data.