* 1713960
* EAPSI: The Influence of Cultural Differences in Emotion Conceptual Knowledge on Emotion Perception
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jeffrey Brooks, Brooks                  Jeffrey        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Upon seeing another person's face, we are able to effortlessly understand what
emotions they might be feeling, and researchers in psychology and neuroscience
have done a great deal of work to understand how we are able to understand this
information so quickly. Recent theoretical insights hold that conceptual
knowledge about emotion (e.g. how we think about and conceptualize emotions like
anger) helps us rapidly understand the meaning of emotional facial expressions.
This offers a possible explanation for cultural differences that have been
observed between Western and East Asian (e.g. Japanese) people perceive emotions
from facial expressions. This study will use neuroimaging (functional MRI) to
measure the way that emotions such as "anger" and "fear" are represented in the
brains of Japanese and American participants when they view emotional facial
expressions. By also measuring each participant's concepts about emotion, we
will be able to show the influence of emotion concepts on the way the brain
processes emotion. We hypothesize that cultural differences in conceptual
knowledge will be the strongest influence on cultural differences in emotion
perception. This research will help scientists understand where cultural
differences in emotion come from, and will also inform important debates about
how emotions are processed in the brain. Aside from its theoretical
contributions, this research will inform clinical research on conditions such as
autism that reduce patients' ability to perceive emotions accurately. This study
will be a collaborative effort between the fellow and Dr. Norihiro Sadato of the
National Institute for Physiological Sciences in Okazaki, Aichi Prefecture,
Japan. Dr. Sadato is an expert in the field of human neuroimaging with an
enthusiasm for participating in cross-cultural psychological and neuroscientific
research with scientists from the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent accounts of
emotion perception and person construal suggest that conceptual knowledge about
emotion categories is able to provide a top-down influence on emotion perception
before emotion categorizations have fully stabilized. This theoretical approach
offers a new route for understanding cultural differences between Western and
East Asian subjects in emotion perception. Thus far, many researchers have
interpreted these differences as reflecting different cultural norms between
American and Japanese participants in how emotions are interpreted and reported.
However, we predict that the strongest predictor of cultural differences in
emotion perception will be differences in emotion concept knowledge between
cultures. To test this, we will perform an fMRI task that measures patterns of
neural activity in response to emotional facial expressions, as well as a
behavioral task in which we index the conceptual structure of emotion categories
and similarity in how they are perceived. Using representational similarity
analysis (RSA) we will index the correspondence between conceptual similarity,
perceptual similarity, and neural pattern similarity. These results will inform
ongoing debates in social and affective neuroscience on the way that emotion is
processed and represented in the brain, and the way that cultural differences
observed in behavior can manifest at the level of neural
representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.