* 1713562
* Embedded Assessment and Innovation Adoption for SciStarter 2.0: Understanding Participant Dynamics and Outcomes in a Landscape of Citizen Science Projects
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Caren Cooper, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 868,885.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings.The project plans to
develop evidence-based principles to guide citizen science project owners in the
coordinated management of project participants within the SciStarter landscape.
SciStarter is a repository of over 1,500 citizen science (CS) projects. Through
prior research, SciStarter 2.0 tools were developed which can be used to study
and coordinate recruitment and retention strategies across projects. Coordinated
management has the potential to deepen volunteer learning and growth and benefit
project goals because it can address across-project skew (CS volunteers involved
in multiple projects), evolving motivations, seasonal gaps, untapped synergies
across projects, and other unanticipated factors that cannot be addressed via
management within project silos. The project will increase the capacity of
citizen science projects to achieve their myriad scientific, learning and
conservation goals through enhanced coordination of volunteer management,
facilitated by evidence-based guidance from the SciStarter's User's Manual for
Project Owners. The findings of the research will guide project design and
implementation towards synergies that increase the capacity of projects to
generate scientific, learning, and conservation outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research about citizen scientists has focused on within-
project assessments and comparisons of projects, but few have examined dynamics
of recruitment, retention, and movement of individuals across projects.
SciStarter is designed for embedded tracking of participation dynamics in a
landscape of projects. The project will expand embedded assessment to measure
scientific, learning, and conservation outcomes and their links to participation
dynamics within and across projects. Through social network analysis, the
project will describe patterns of bridges, ties, and distances among projects
based on the cross-over of participants. The project will also propose
qualitative research to understand project managers' perceptions of SciStarter
and the costs and benefits of coordinated management of citizen scientists. The
research is designed to provide insights into participation dynamics that will
lead to subsequent knowledge building across citizen science projects, and
determine whether new evidence about advantages and disadvantages of coordinated
management will persuade project owners to rely less on the silo approach to
volunteer management.