* 1713932
* EAPSI: The Role of Monoamine Oxidase - A Gene Polymorphism in Aggressive Behavior in Macaques
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Danielle Jones, Jones                   Danielle       N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Aggression is a behavior that plays a functional role in maintaining social
order and vital resource procurement among all primate species; however, in
humans, aggression is sometimes manifested as violent crime, including assault,
murder, and rape. For the sake of maintaining safe, healthy communities, it is
crucial that scientists work to understand the biological underpinnings of
aggressive behavior. This award supports the researcher as she investigates this
topic by traveling to Inuyama, Japan, where she will work under the advisement
of Dr. Yukiori Goto at the Primate Research Institute (PRI). In particular, this
project will examine the relationship between the MAOA gene and levels of
aggression in two macaque species. The PRI offers a unique opportunity to study
primate behavior and genetics simultaneously, and the results will contribute to
our understanding of how genes contribute to levels of aggression. In the
future, this research may aid in the development of pharmaceutical therapies for
antisocial personality disorders in humans.

Research on the genetic basis of aggressive behavior has focused on the MAOA
gene, though its role in behavior modulation is not fully understood. The MAOA
gene codes for the enzyme monoamine oxidase-A and it functions in the brain to
degrade the neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine. In humans
and nonhuman primates, two variants of the MAOA gene have been documented, a
high-activity variant (MAOA-H) and a low-activity variant (MAOA-L). Past studies
have found the low-activity variant to be associated with elevated levels of
aggression, presumably due to higher levels of circulating neurotransmitters.
This project will focus on differential levels of aggression and its
relationship to particular MAOA gene variants in rhesus (Macaca mulatta) and
Japanese (Macaca fuscata) macaques. The research will consist of three
components: I.) collection and analysis of behavioral data as it relates to
aggressive behavior within and between species, II.) determination of MAOA
genotype for all individuals involved in the behavioral studies, and III.)
examination of the data for associations between gene variants and levels of
aggression that may explain inter-individual levels of aggression as well as
species-specific patterns.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.