* 1713200
* 3-D Stellar Hydrodynamics Simulations for Convective-Reactive Nucleosynthesis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Paul Woodward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 18,900.00

Astronomical observations are now probing the early stages of the universe, in
which galaxies developed and merged, and the formation of structure in the
universe and its evolution to the present era was set in motion. An important
part of this story is the chemical evolution of galaxies. The formation of the
elements in stars and their subsequent dispersal are powerful tracers of
structure formation and evolution. This project will simulate on Blue Waters
processes deep inside stars that play an important role in the heavy elements
they generate. These processes are driven by mixing of gases at the boundaries
of convection zones, which can bring new fuels into a convection zone, carrying
them down into much hotter regions where they burn very rapidly and activate
nuclear reaction networks in a special convective-reactive regime. In this
regime, reacting nuclei are transported by the turbulent convection flow on
about the same timescale as the reactions take place, so that significant
departures from spherical symmetry, even in a statistical sense, can result.
This project will use the petascale capabilities of Blue Waters to simulate
these brief events in 3D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project we will build on
earlier work on Blue Waters to study a process where the O-shell convection zone
in a massive star can work its way to the base of the C-shell convection zone
above, leading to ingestion of carbon fuel and an ultimate merger of the two
burning shells. The project will compute the resulting nucleosynthesis by
following the concentrations of a large number of nuclear isotopes and computing
their interactions on a 4-D grid of reduced resolution in space and time. A fine
grid is required to accurately advance the turbulent convection flow and to
compute the amount of fuel entrained in it at the convection zone boundary. The
study will follow the most important species on this fine grid, but will
represent on the coarser grid the large number of nuclear reactions from which
energy release is minor and has minimal back reaction on the flow. This project
will generate a large database of results from the 3-D simulations on Blue
Waters of convective boundary mixing in stellar interiors. The project intends
to organize this database so that the simulation codes can mine it
automatically, comparing it to a variety of potentially useful 1-D models of the
mixing process. In terms of broader impacts, the project will make this database
and tools available to the community on-line in a useful format, so that it will
enable research by many others. In addition, the project will work with the
NuGrid collaboration to see that the results are incorporated into data sets
that are available to the community for chemical evolution simulations of
galaxies and structures in the early universe.