* 1713428
* Changemakers: Advancing Community Science Literacy
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Julie Sweetland, New England Aquarium Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,248.00

This ChangeMakers project builds on a 2016 National Academies report finding
that scientific literacy can be understood at a community level as opposed to a
traditional focus on the individual. This is important since scientific
knowledge is often seen as abstract and distant from the daily concerns of
average citizens. A community focus shifts the spotlight away from individual
learning to collective learning facilitated by trusted cultural institutions
serving as social assets. This work brings together scientific expertise and
community organizations to advance operational science literacy--scientific ways
of problem-solving--for community leaders and functional science literacy--
information and skills people can use in their daily lives--among their service
populations. This will be done by gathering and sharing knowledge and developing
skills and abilities to contribute to the community's overall well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New England Aquarium (NeAq) and Aquarium of the
Pacific (AoP) will apply a community engagement model involving active
listening, documentation, alignment of concerns and goals, and co-development of
shared solutions that serves the needs of all participants. As part of the
Advancing Community Science Literacy (ACSL) project, multi-disciplinary teams
from NeAq, AoP and their regional partners will participate in training on the
model. They will apply that training to build and implement action plans to
advance community-driven responses to local environmental issues. Teams will be
assessed with respect to how they use tools from their shared training, along
with peer support and coaching, to make progress in engaging diverse community
stakeholders. Results of the evaluation will offer insights and recommendations
for informal science learning centers to serve their communities more
effectively as engagement facilitators and change agents to support science
literacy development and action. By applying techniques developed for cultural
institutions to communicate about climate science, and combining those with
techniques developed for libraries and other organizations to help meet emergent
community concerns, such as storm surges and coastal flooding, it is possible to
redefine the role informal science learning centers can play as part of a
community culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACSL is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which supports projects that provide
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advances innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and develops understandings of deeper learning by
participants.