* 1713125
* Topics in Strong Force
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Andrei Belitsky, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2021
* USD 323,999.00

Understanding the internal structure of nucleons -- protons and neutrons, the
building blocks of matter that is most familiar to us -- is one of the
fundamental challenges in nuclear physics. This project will contribute new
understanding to Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the theory describing the strong
force between the quarks and gluons making up the nucleon. The PI will apply
theoretical methods to build phenomenological models used to understand
experimental data obtained at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(JLab) from experiments focused on measurements of nucleon properties. The
recent 12 GeV upgrade at JLab will allow scientists to study the properties of
QCD with an unprecedented level of precision. The educational component
represents an important aspect of this project. The training and mentoring of
graduate and undergraduate students will prepare junior researchers for future
careers in industry or academia. The PI's outreach activities will increase
public awareness of nuclear-particle physics through popular science
presentations, as well as by mentoring and guidance of high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two research areas of this project are
related to the physics of the strong force and are based on phenomenological and
theoretical approaches to the problem of quark confinement, broadly defined. The
first thrust of the project is focused on understanding of higher twist/order
corrections to processes sensitive to quasiprobability distributions, known as
Generalized Parton Distributions (GPDs), and will be indispensable for proper
analysis of experimental data. The PI and his students will develop a separation
technique to disentangle GPDs from data by providing analytical formulas for
azimuthal moments of differential cross sections of photon electroproduction
cross sections. The second thrust is centered around maximally supersymmetric
Yang-Mills theory, which took on the status of the harmonic oscillator of Yang-
Mills theories and is central in attempts to solving QCD at strong coupling.
Understanding gauge scattering amplitudes, which possess very similar
perturbative expansions in the two theories, is the focus of the currently
pursued analytical approach to gauge dynamics. A crucial step in establishing a
formalism that allows one to address scattering amplitudes nonperturbatively is
their dual description in terms of Wilson loops on null polygonal contours that
are amenable to analytical techniques.