* 1713156
* Public Participation in Scientific Research: Arctic Harvest
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Christa Mulder, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 06/30/2023
* USD 878,592.00

Northern ecosystems are rapidly changing; so too are the learning and
information needs of Arctic and sub-Arctic communities who depend on these
ecosystems for wild harvested foods. Public Participation in Scientific Research
(PPSR) presents a possible method to increase flow of scientific and local
knowledge, enhance STEM-based problem solving skills, and co-create new
knowledge about phenology at local and regional or larger scales. However, there
remain some key challenges that the field of PPSR research must address to
achieve this goal. The proposed research will make substantial contributions to
two of these issues by: 1) advancing theory on the interactions between PPSR and
resilience in social-ecological systems, and 2) advancing our understanding of
strategies to increase the engagement of youth and adults historically
underrepresented in STEM, including Alaska Native and indigenous youth and their
families who play an essential role in the sustainability of environmental
monitoring in the high latitudes and rural locations throughout the globe. In
particular, our project results will assist practitioners in choosing and
investing in design elements of PPSR projects to better navigate the trade-offs
between large-scale scientific outcomes and local cultural relevance. The data
collected across the citizen science network will also advance scientific
knowledge on the effects of phenological changes on berry availability to people
and other animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Harvest research goals are
to 1) critically examine the relationship between PPSR learning outcomes in
informal science environments and attributes of social-ecological resilience and
2) assess the impact of two program design elements (level of support and
interaction with mentors and scientists, and an innovative story-based delivery
method) on the engagement of underserved audiences. In partnership with
afterschool clubs in urban and rural Alaska, we will assess the impact of
participation in Winterberry, a new PPSR project that investigates the effect of
changes in the timing of the seasons on subsistence berry resources. We propose
to investigate individual and community-level learning outcomes expected to
influence the ability for communities to adapt to climate change impacts,
including attributes of engagement, higher-order thinking skills, and their
influence on the level of civic action and interest in berry resource
stewardship by the youth groups. Using both quantitative and qualitative
approaches, we compare these outcomes with the same citizen science program
delivered through two alternate methods: 1) a highly supported delivery method
with increased in-person interaction with program mentors and scientists, and 2)
an innovative method that weaves in storytelling based on elder experiences,
youth observations, and citizen science data at all stages of the program
learning cycle. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. The project also has support
from the Office of Polar Programs.