* 1713782
* Collaborative Research:  Simulating Two-Fluid MHD Turbulence in Star Forming Molecular Clouds on the Blue Waters System
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Alexandre Lazarian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Astrophysics is at the threshold of a new data-rich and simulation-rich era in
star-formation studies. The question of how stars form is fascinating in itself
and has a great impact on several other areas of astrophysics. There is a
general consensus that a predominant amount of star formation in our Galaxy
takes place in molecular clouds, and specifically in giant molecular clouds
(GMC). Consequently, NASA has made multi-million dollar investments in
instruments such as HAWC+ on the SOFIA airborne observatory with the specific
goal of understanding the turbulent nature of star forming clouds. This project
on Blue Waters will use the petascale capabilities of the system to validate
theories of star formation by simulating the same processes the NASA's
instruments are currently measuring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
carry out simulations on Blue Waters that integrate the ions and the neutrals to
reproduce the turbulent, partially ionized gas in which stars form. Since
neutral gas does not couple to the magnetic field, but ionized gas do, the
project has built frontline simulation capabilities for simulating two-fluid
plasmas. Simultaneously, the project has built theoretical and numerical
analysis tools that will enable cross-comparison of simulations with
observations. This cross-comparison provides important verification of theories
of star formation. Further diagnostics that emerge from the simulations will
also be used to motivate more detailed observations. In this fashion, Blue
Waters will enable theory, computation and detailed observations to support one
another. In addition, the project intends to combine education in computational
astrophysics with code releases of their simulation tools to the greater
astrophysics community.