* 1713316
* Developing innovative techniques for using museum-based theater and gaming to support visitor understanding of complex systems
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Liza Pryor, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,999,578.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. The project will use
a design-based research process to research and develop an innovative theatrical
game that will improve visitors' understanding of complex topics requiring
conceptual change. This project will research a novel experience that helps
visitors engage with difficult content in informal science education venues,
uses existing exhibit and collection assets in a new way, and creates a venue
for visitor engagement that requires less capitalization than a full exhibition
project. For the public, this project will blend best practices from exhibit
development, museum theater, and facilitation with emerging theories about game-
based learning to create a novel experience that deeply engages visitors with an
evolution storyline and allows them to explore the museum and interact with one
another in new ways. For the field, the project will examine how theatrical
games can be valuable, viable experiences in museum environments and what game
mechanics and supports contribute to players' conceptual thinking. While the
project's games with theatrical elements will focus on evolution, the tested
strategies will provide valuable information about effective approaches for
informal STEM education more broadly wherever audiences exhibit major
misconceptions or discomfort with scientific ideas. The project will disseminate
findings through conferences and workshops, academic reports, a research-to-
practice implementation guide, and a training video about best practices for
engaging the public in theatrical gaming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus on the creation and modification of a theoretical framework that describes
the content, program format, and degree of facilitation necessary to create
experiences that support conceptual change in visitors' thinking about evolution
--and, by extension, other complex topics. The project team and advisors will
collaboratively will build varying levels of facilitation and challenge into
theatrical programming that connects objects and experiences across the museum
to help visitors construct a story of evolution. Project research will focus on
the creation of three variants of a theatrical game to test a theoretical
framework that describes the game dynamics and facilitation necessary for
experiences that support conceptual shifts in visitors' understanding about
evolution. This work will take place in four phases, and will be conducted by
researchers at the Science Museum of Minnesota with input and review through an
external evaluation process. The questions guiding the research are: (1) How,
and in what ways, do game design features support conceptual shifts in evolution
concepts?; (2) Do player outcomes differ in each game? If so, in what ways?; (3)
What other factors (player profile, collaboration, evolution beliefs) influence
player outcomes? (4) What are the best practices for facilitating the games and
supporting visitors' experiences? The research will contribute to the under-
studied field of participatory museum theatre experiences; broaden our
understanding of the roles facilitation and gameplay have in informal learning;
and help exhibit and program developers make informed choices about the
potential of various exhibit components and aligned programming.