* 1713982
* EAPSI: Understanding How a Complex Cellular Environment Influences Amyloid Fibril Protein Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Whitney Costello, Costello                Whitney        N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project supports research in a collaboration with Prof. Xueqian Kong, an
expert on studying materials using the cutting-edge technique of fast magic
angle spinning-nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS-NMR), in the department of
Chemistry, Zhejiang University in Hangzhou to develop innovative methodology in
the field of biological solid-state NMR. These new methods could significantly
enhance the spectral sensitivity in biological NMR samples. Over the 8-week
funding period, we will focus on studying protein dynamics in complex cellular
environments. Current solid-state NMR techniques suffers from the poor
sensitivity because it reads out information on low gamma nuclei (e.g.
Carbon-13). This can be solved by using a sensitivity enhancing technique,
dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) NMR, but this must be done at extremely cold
temperatures (100 K), which eliminate dynamic motions. The current collaborative
project is to learn and apply fast MAS-NMR which reports on higher gamma nuclei
(e.g. Hydrogen-1), performed at room temperature, to study the protein dynamics
of amyloid fibrils in their native cellular environments. The broader impact of
this project includes applying these methods to study fibrils formed by proteins
such as tau, which is implicated in Alzheimer's disease.

This project will encompass a balanced approach that uses the innovative sample
preparation methods developed in the home lab and sound methodology and
instrumentation to demonstrate significant sensitivity enhancement in
biomolecular NMR during the EAPSI research at Zhejiang University. This work
will result two major findings i) if fast MAS-NMR can be used to study proteins
at endogenous levels and ii) determine if the cellular environment affect
protein dynamics, particularly of intrinsically disordered regions. The
intellectual merits of the proposed research lie in establishing fast MAS-NMR as
a complementary technique to DNP-NMR for studying proteins at endogenous levels
in complex cellular environments. Its broader impacts lie in developing
alternative methods that will allow for the further study of intrinsically
disordered proteins that make fibrils that are often implicated in disease
states.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.