* 1713872
* EAPSI: Study of Mitochondrial Interactions at Presynaptic Terminals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Stephen Madamba, Madamba                 Stephen
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Mitochondria are important machines inside cells which play a number of key
roles, from being the energy factories of the cell to regulating the process of
programmed cell death. A byproduct of energy production is reactive oxygen
species (ROS), molecules capable of damaging organelles and leading to further
release of ROS. Therefore, cells must maintain a population of healthy,
functioning mitochondria. The maintenance mechanisms that have been identified
include the recycling of mitochondria and the ongoing division and joining
together of mitochondria. While these mechanisms have been well studied in
numerous types of cells, they remain poorly understood in neurons, a type of
cell of the nervous system. Neurons transmit signals to and from the central
nervous system, requiring high amounts of energy, especially at synapses, sites
distant from the cell body where there would also be a greater need to remove
damaged mitochondria. In collaboration with Professor Michael Ryan at Monash
University, an expert in mitochondrial fission and fusion, this project will
investigate functional interactions of mitochondria with cellular components in
locations of the cell with high metabolic activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of mitochondrial quality control mechanisms in neurons has focused on
their occurrence in the cell body, while little is known about how damaged
mitochondria are removed from axons and presynaptic terminals. In addition to
fission/fusion events and mitophagy, the selective autophagy of mitochondria,
trafficking of mitochondria along microtubules may act to replace damaged
organelles with healthy ones from the cell body. To study which of these
mechanisms are activated in response to oxidative stress, a photoactivatable
ROS-producing peptide targeted to mitochondria will be introduced into live
cells in which our proteins of interest have been labeled with fluorescent dyes.
Using confocal live imaging and super-resolution microscopy, snapshots of
presynaptic mitochondria exposed to or unexposed to green light will be
generated and compared to assess which factors are involved in the removal of
damaged mitochondria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and
Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate
student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.