* 1713804
* EAPSI: Multiband Photometry Simulations to Distinguish Transiting Exoplanets from False Positives
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Dana Louie, Louie                   Dana           R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400.00

This research will be conducted in collaboration with two Japanese experts in
the field of exoplanetary science, Professor Motohide Tamura and Assistant
Professor Norio Narita. Both are scientists at the University of Tokyo,
Department of Astronomy. Professor Narita and this project's principal
investigator (PI) are members of the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
(TESS) Science Team. TESS is a NASA mission that will launch in March 2018 to
search most of the sky for relatively nearby transiting exoplanets. With near-
term technology, mankind's best chance of finding exoplanets that could host
life lies in examining the atmospheres of super-Earth planets transiting
relatively cool, low-mass M-dwarf host stars within their habitable zones
(Charbonneau & Deming, 2007). Simulations predict that TESS will detect about
1,700 exoplanets over its two-year primary mission, and that one-third of those
planets will have radii less than twice that of Earth, with three-quarters of
these super-Earths orbiting M-dwarfs (Sullivan et al., 2015). However,
simulations also show that TESS will detect over 1,000 astrophysical false
positives. Thus, TESS discoveries must be validated as originating from real
exoplanets using additional instruments and/or techniques. The Japanese have
proposed that their recently-developed Multicolor Simultaneous Camera for
Studying Atmospheres of Transiting Exoplanets (MuSCAT) at Okayama Observatory be
used as a tool to distinguish TESS-discovered exoplanets from false positives.

The purpose of this research project is to simulate follow-up observations of
TESS detections using MuSCAT, thereby revealing which planet candidates can be
efficiently validated using MUSCAT, and which must be validated using other
techniques. This understanding will allow astronomers to better prioritize and
optimize follow-up validations of TESS detections, which in turn will lead to
optimal use of valuable space assets, such as the James Webb Space Telescope
(JWST). Transiting exoplanets can be distinguished from astrophysical false
positives by determining the wavelength/color-dependence of the amount of
stellar light received transiting exoplanets are largely achromatic when
observed in different bandpasses. Thus, TESS discoveries can be validated as
true transiting exoplanets by determining the wavelength/color-dependence of the
amount of stellar light detected on Earth. The PI will simulate MuSCAT
observations of TESS detections by developing a software code that models the
performance of the MuSCAT instrument (Narita et al., 2015) and accounts for all
significant noise sources, such as photon noise, sky background noise, and
scintillation noise. TESS planet candidates will vary tremendously in terms of
parameters such as the temperature and brightness of the host star, or size and
orbital distance of the planet. To provide a realistic estimate of likely
candidate planets, the PI will use the database of simulated TESS-detected
exoplanets published by Sullivan et al. (2015), as well as simulated false
positives detected by TESS (available to the TESS Science team).

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).