* 1713108
* Inference for Dynamic Objects
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Wolfgang Polonik, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 125,000.00

Modern data collection techniques result in a steady stream of complex data. The
field of statistics has an obligation to develop tools for their analysis,
allowing users to draw meaningful and correct conclusions. In view of the
complexity of the collected data, this is a challenging task. This project will
tackle these challenges by not only constructing relevant novel methodologies,
but by also analyzing these methods in order to establish a thorough
understanding of their strengths and weaknesses. This, in turn, will facilitate
an honest evaluation and interpretation of practical data analysis results. One
instance of a complex data type considered in this project is network data. A
relevant real-world example is the world trade network, consisting of trading
indices between pairs of countries. Countries can be grouped into trading
blocks, and this project will develop methodology allowing the analysis of the
dependence structure between the trading blocks. This will help to identify
factors that are driving this dependence, and how they change over time. More
generally, the outcomes of this project are expected to impact the field of
statistics and various fields of application. This will be achieved by widely
disseminating statistical insight, methodologies and theory developed in this
project through publications in international statistics journals, presentations
at national and international conferences, and by developing relevant
software/code to be made available to the community. Moreover, this project will
directly contribute to the training of both graduate students and undergraduate
students in modern fields of statistics. It is expected that there will be
mutual benefits and synergies between this project and the ongoing NSF Research
Training Grant in Statistics at UC Davis.

This project seeks to develop novel statistical methods for the analysis of
dynamic object data, in particular, networks and functional data. More
specifically, this project will (i) study dependence structures in hierarchical
time-varying block models for stochastic networks, and apply the resulting
methodologies to the analysis of economic network data such as trade networks;
(ii) develop a class of continuous-time point process models for random
networks, allowing for a flexible model and analysis of the corresponding
maximum likelihood estimators in these models; (iii) develop empirical
likelihood based inference methodology for functional time series. The project
aims at developing methodologies that, on the one hand, are flexible enough and
computationally feasible to be useful for complex real-world applications, and
that, on the other hand, result in methodologies that allow rigorous statistical
analyses providing insight into, and understanding of, their behavior.