* 1713547
* Bridging the World of Work and Informal STEM Education
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Perla Myers, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

To reach its full potential in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM), the United States must continue to recruit, prepare and maintain a
diverse STEM workforce. Much work has been done in this regard. Yet,
underrepresentation in STEM fields persists and is especially pronounced for
Hispanic STEM professionals. The Hispanic community is the youngest and fastest
growing racial/ethnic group in the United States but comprises only seven
percent of the STEM workforce. More evidence-based solutions and innovative
approaches are required. This project endeavors to address the challenges of
underrepresentation in STEM, especially among individuals of Hispanic descent,
through an innovative approach. The University of San Diego will design,
develop, implement, and test a multilayered STEM learning approach specific to
STEM learning and workforce development in STEM fields targeting Hispanic youth.
The STEM World of Work project will explore youth STEM identity through three
mechanisms: (1) an assessment of their individual interests, strengths, and
values, (2) exposure to an array of viable STEM careers, and (3) engagement in
rigorous hands-on STEM activities. The project centers on a youth summer STEM
enrichment program and a series of follow-up booster sessions delivered during
the academic year in informal contexts to promote family engagement. Paramount
to this work is the core focus on San Diego's Five Priority Workforce Sectors:
Advanced Manufacturing, Information and Communications Technology, Clean Energy,
Healthcare, and Biotech. Few, if any, existing projects in the Advancing
Informal STEM learning portfolio have explored the potential connections between
these five priority workforce sectors, informal STEM learning, and identity
among predominately Hispanic youth and families engaged in a year-long,
culturally responsive STEM learning and workforce focused program. If
successful, the model could provide a template for the facilitation of similar
efforts in the future.

The STEM World of Work project will use a mixed-methods, exploratory research
design to better understand the variables influencing STEM learning and academic
and career choices within the proposed context. The research questions will
explore: (1) the impacts of the project on students' engagement, STEM identity,
STEM motivation, and academic outcomes, (2) factors that moderate these
outcomes, and (3) the impact the model has on influencing youths' personal goals
and career choices. Data will be garnered through cross-sectional and
longitudinal surveys and reflective focus groups with the students and their
parents/guardians. Multivariate analysis of variance, longitudinal modeling, and
qualitative analysis will be conducted to analyze and report the data. The
findings will be disseminated using a variety of methods and platforms. The
broader impacts of the findings and work are expected to extend well beyond the
project team, graduate student mentors, project partners, and the estimated 120
middle school students and their families from the predominately Hispanic Chula
Vista Community of San Diego who will be directly impacted by the project.

This exploratory pathways project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.