* 1713479
* Brains On!: Investigating the Impact and Reach of Informal Audio STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Amy Grack Nelson, Minnesota Public Radio
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. The project will fill a major gap in knowledge
regarding why children listen to science podcasts and what impact they have on
their STEM learning. Brains On! is an existing podcast for children 6-12 years
old that is produced by American Public Media. The podcasts are kid-driven. Kid
listeners send in questions and suggest the show topics. Every episode is co-
hosted by a different child, who interviews top scientists about their work,
sees research done first hand and helps shape the overall arc of the episode.
The project team collaborates with a wide variety of scientists to create
programming that is both appealing to kids and has scientific merit. Although
Brains On! has enjoyed more than 2.4 million downloads collectively of its
50-episode library little is known about why children are drawn to it, how they
are using its content, and what the impacts might be for those who listen to the
podcast. There has been no previous research to understand why children choose
to listen, or what impact it has on their learning. This Pathways project would
produce new episodes and collaborate with the Science Museum of Minnesota that
would conduct research to fill this large gap in understanding aural learning
through podcasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Brains On! project has the following
goals to create strategic impact: 1) explore and begin to develop knowledge
around what makes children's science podcasts, such as Brains On!, appealing and
what role they can play in impacting children and their families' science
curiosity, learning, and awareness of science careers, and 2) develop a theory
of action for the Brains On! podcast that could also inform the development of
similar kinds of children's science podcasts. A mixed-methods exploratory
research study will be carried out to address these goals. The three overarching
research questions are: Who is the audience for Brains On! and what are their
motivations for listening to science podcasts? How are Brains On! listeners
using the podcast and engaging with its content? What kinds of impacts does
Brains On! have on its audiences? The research results, including the theory of
action, from the Brains On! exploratory study will benefit the fields of
informal science education and public media by beginning to fill a gap in the
current knowledge-base around the potential for science children's podcasts to
contribute to a wide range of informal science learning outcomes for children
and families, as well provide insight into what features of children's science
podcasts can lead to those outcomes. The study results may also encourage other
public media and informal science education organizations to create their own
science podcasts for children, increasing the reach and potential impact of this
emerging STEM media resource.