* 1713866
* EAPSI: Identifying  Octocoral-Symbiont Associations in Okinawa, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Louis Buccella, Buccella                Louis          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Okinawa, Japan, is host to many diverse soft corals (octocorals) that by and
large rely on symbiotic algae for survival. These algae, known as Symbiodinium,
live within the tissue of the host coral. Okinawan octocorals are largely
understudied, and in some species, the host coral's associated symbionts have
yet to be identified. Corals are threatened by a variety of factors, many of
which induce a breakdown of this symbiosis (known as coral bleaching), which can
result in the death of the coral. Following the approximate 50% loss of all
Indo-Pacific coral cover since the 1980's, there is a greater need to identify
Symbiodinium diversity, as not all symbiont types are equally susceptible to
environmental threats. This study aims to examine unknown diversity by
identifying the Symbiodinium populations associated with these understudied
octocorals around Okinawa, a location of particular interest because it is the
northernmost distribution limit for many of these species. This work will be
done at the Molecular Invertebrate Systematics and Ecology Lab at the University
of the Ryukyus in Okinawa, Japan, in collaboration with Dr. James Reimer, whose
expertise with both Japanese octocorals and Symbiodinium will be a big
asset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the use of SCUBA and/or snorkeling, octocorals
from a range of genera will be identified and sampled from locations surrounding
Okinawa, specified by Dr. Reimer and his lab members. The endosymbiont
Symbiodinium communities will then be identified using a series of molecular
markers, beginning with analyses of the ribosomal internal transcribed spacer
regions (ITS2 types), using protocols in which Dr. Reimer helped develop. Since
it is predicted that these species will be dominated by Symbiodinium type C1,
chloroplast psbAncr and possibly microsatellite flanking regions will then be
analyzed to maximize the level of resolution within type C1. This survey will
serve as a guide for future research, where it can be used as a baseline for
comparisons and could even have the potential to aid in predicting certain
species distributions/survivorship under ongoing climate change impacts such as
global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific
Summer Institutes program ,supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.