* 1713965
* EAPSI: A Role for Microglia in Interhemispheric Remodeling of the Embryonic Forebrain
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Anna Kreutz, Kreutz                  Anna           L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The cerebral cortex consists of two hemispheres, which are largely distinct
structures, but are connected along the midline. This connection is necessary
for interhemispheric communication and information integration. The
interhemispheric connection is formed and remodeled early during fetal
development, but how this occurs is poorly understood. One candidate cell type
involved in interhemispheric remodeling is the microglial cell, the immune cell
of the brain. Microglia are spatially and temporally correlated with midline
development, and known to play a role in remodeling other regions of the
cerebral cortex. Understanding interhemispheric remodeling will aid our
understanding of communication between the two hemispheres and disorders of the
corpus callosum, the structure bridging the two hemispheres. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Linda Richards, one of the world's
leading experts on development of the cortical midline, at Queensland Brain
Institute in Brisbane, Australia.

Before the two cerebral hemispheres are fused, they are separated by a lining of
leptomeningeal fibroblasts. These fibroblasts are removed during midline
remodeling, but how they are eliminated is not well understood. To address this
question, tissue will be immunostained for markers of leptomeningeal cells,
microglial cells, and apoptotic cells. This research follows the hypothesis that
microglia are involved in midline remodeling based on their temporospatial
correlation and phagocytic nature. The project will assess a role for microglia
along the cortical midline through immunohistochemistry by analyzing microglial
phagocytosis of leptomeningeal cells, whether phagocytosed cells are apoptotic,
and the morphology of phagocytic microglia. This research will provide insight
into how the two cerebral hemispheres are fused, a potential novel role for
microglia, and could provide an explanation for the distribution of microglia
along the cortical midline.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.