* 1713225
* Public Participation in Scientific Research: Designing an Online Collaborative System for Research & Learning Using Live Bird Cams
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* David Bonter, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,686,458.00

The widespread accessibility of live streaming video now makes it possible for
viewers around the world to watch live events together, including unprecedented,
24/7 views of wildlife. In addition, online technologies such as live chatting
and forums have opened new possibilities for people to collaborate from
locations around the world. The innovation that the projects provide is bringing
these opportunities together, enabling real-time research and discussion as
participants observe and annotate live streaming footage; sharing questions and
insights through live Q&A sessions; and explore data with interactive
visualization tools. Scientists will support the community's research interests,
in contrast with traditional models of citizen science in which communities
support the work of scientists. This project will enable people from diverse
backgrounds and perspectives to co-create scientific investigations, including
participants who might not otherwise have access to nature. The evaluation
research for this project will advance the understanding of practices that
enable interconnected communities of people to participate in more phases of
scientific discovery, and how participation affects their learning outcomes. It
is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants. As such, this
project will advance a new genre of Public Participation in STEM Research
(PPSR). It will also advance scientific exploration using live wildlife cams and
establish a database for long-term research to understand how bird behavior and
reproductive success are affected by environmental change.

This project aims to deepen public involvement in science, building on knowledge
and relevance for STEM learning by creating an online learning environment that
expands on traditional crowdsourcing models of PPSR in which participants
collect data to answer questions driven by scientists. In this project,
participants are involved in co-created research investigations, including
asking questions, deciding what data are needed, generating data, looking for
patterns, making interpretations, reviewing results, and sharing findings. The
goals are to 1) create a system that involves the public more deeply in
scientific research; 2) develop participants' science skills and interests; 3)
increase participants? understanding of birds and the environment; 4) generate
new scientific knowledge about wildlife; and 5) advance the understanding of
effective project design for co-created PPSR projects at a national scale.
Through iterative design and evaluation, the project will advance the
understanding of the conditions that foster online collaboration and establish
design principles for supporting science and discovery in online learning
environments. Through scaling and quasi-experimental studies, the evaluation
research will advance the understanding of how learning outcomes may be similar
or different for participants engaging in different ways, whether they observe
the cams and read about the investigation, process data as contributors, provide
some input as collaborators, or join in most or all of the scientific process as
co-creators.

Despite the popularity of live wildlife cams, with millions of people watching
hundreds of cams around the world, little research has been conducted on the use
of live cams for collaborative work in formal or informal science education. The
infrastructure and open-source framework created for this project will expand
the capacity for online communities of people from diverse career backgrounds
and perspectives to collaborative on solving personally meaningful questions and
contribute to new knowledge. Using this project as a prototype, cam operators
from around the world could build networks of cams, enabling future studies with
broader scope for comparative biological studies and discoveries. Additionally,
it will serve as a model for use in classrooms or for online communities
exploring other scientific fields using live-streaming content in collaborative
research. By involving scientists and participants from across society as
collaborators and co-creators, this project can help increase public engagement
with science, technology, and environmental stewardship while advancing the
understanding of the natural world and informing public decision-making.