* 1713242
* Benchmarks for Membrane Biophysics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Roger Koeppe, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 717,524.00

This project addresses fundamental gaps in our understanding of lipids and
proteins in biological membranes. Biological function is governed by the
molecular properties of proteins and other biomolecules that operate within the
membrane micro-environment provided by and for living cells. As biological
understanding progresses, computational methods are becoming increasingly
important for predicting the properties of cell membranes. At the same time, the
computational methods need to be checked and validated by means of experimental
measurements that can serve as benchmarks for the calculations. This project
provides such an experimental framework to serve as a basis for advancing the
predictive power of computational biophysics. The overarching goal is to
understand the operational diversity of membrane proteins for the performance
and regulation of biological function. This project will sustain community
outreach, dialogue, and early involvement of undergraduate students in cutting-
edge research. This proposal will also expose young people to science and
recruit them to engage in research through the "Science Caf√©" program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses central issues in predictive
membrane biophysics, including molecular orientation, dynamic properties and the
ionization states of designated functional side chains of His, Lys, Glu, Asp and
Arg in membrane proteins. The key methods involve peptide synthesis, stable
isotope labeling, circular dichroism spectroscopy, solid-state magnetic
resonance (NMR) measurements, and collaborations with computational
biophysicists. The experimental approaches employ a novel "host" peptide design,
developed by the investigators, in which minimal numbers of interfacial aromatic
amino-acid residues serve to position a tilted transmembrane helix near a
"tipping point" in lipid bilayer membranes. Within this context, the systematic
incorporation of specific "guest" residues provides important insights
concerning ionization behavior and protein-lipid molecular interactions that are
essential for the biological functions of many classes of membrane proteins. The
experimental results from this project are expected to establish fundamental
benchmarks to aid the development and validation of computational methods for
addressing the molecular mechanisms that govern the functioning of specific
membrane proteins such as potassium channels, acetylcholine receptors or growth
factor receptors, amongst others. This project is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.