* 1713793
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting Sociolinguistic Variation in Diné bizaad (Navajo), a Native American Language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Marianne Mithun, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2019
* USD 18,897.00

Previous linguistic research has definitively demonstrated that an unvarying
speech community is an idealization. In fact, linguistic variation is an
important component of the documentation of a language. That variation
frequently carries social meaning, often below the level of consciousness. This
project documents and analyzes such variation as found in speakers' current
usage of a Native American language. The Native American Languages Act, passed
by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique
status and importance of Native American languages. Regional, generational, and
sociocultural diversity are all factors in the diversity of a given language,
but very little linguistic variation has been documented for this language. The
documentation will form the core material analyzed in a doctoral dissertation
produced by the CoPI. Broader impacts include recordings and descriptions of
variation, of value for language planning and the development of pedagogical
materials, and a publicly available deposit of the recordings and transcriptions
at the Alaska Native Language Archive at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks,
and locally at the Navajo Nation Historic Preservation Department.

Because much is already known about the sound patterns and word structure of
Diné bizaad (Navajo), and due to the relatively large number of speakers, the
language is a compelling candidate for a study of indigenous language variation.
The CoPI, a doctoral student at the University of California, Santa Barbara,
will record interviews including word lists, personal narratives, and
ethnographic background questions with participants from different regions, of
different ages, and with different linguistic backgrounds. The researcher will
collaborate with a team of Diné bizaad speakers to transcribe and translate the
discourse data for public archiving and in-depth analysis. These data will serve
as the basis for an analysis of specific linguistic variants and how they
correlate with social factors such as region, generation, and Diné bizaad usage.
Through analysis of connected speech, this project will investigate
morphological, syntactic, and discourse-level variation, and an acoustic
analysis of targeted phonetic/phonological variables will provide evidence for
ongoing sound change or sociolinguistically conditioned variation. Of particular
interest is how speakers variably use Diné verbal morphology, which is famously
complex. Sociolinguistic studies based on small indigenous communities are
relatively rare, though extant studies suggest that such communities offer
insights about socially meaningful patterns of variation. Further, this study
will contribute to scientific understanding of language change by analyzing
internally and externally motivated change at multiple levels of linguistic
structure. It will also shed light on variation within the Athabaskan language
family, which has figured importantly in theories of morphology and phonology,
and which includes members in the Southwestern U.S., like Apache, as well as
languages along the Pacific Coast, in Alaska, and in Canada.