* 1713638
* Street Smarts: Experiments in Urban Social Science
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Joshua Gutwill, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,944,738.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. To bring research on
social psychology to public urban environments, the Street Smarts project will
produce an outdoor learning installation in front of San Francisco City Hall
that will serve the diverse audiences that frequent the area. The outdoor space
will be populated with exhibits that engage this public in social observation
and participatory experiences, promoting learning about the science of social
polarization, social dilemmas, and social norms. These exhibits will not only
engage the public in third-person experience of social and behavioral sciences
content, but also create first-person engagement and reflection as visitors come
to examine their own participation in social dynamics. By adding exhibits and
digital content to social gathering places, Street Smarts will frame and augment
people's natural social curiosity with the perspectives and skills of social
psychology researchers. In the process, visitors will acquire new social
observation skills, reflect on their own perceptions and actions, empathize with
others of different social identities, and increase their appreciation for how
social behavior, emotion, and thought can be studied scientifically. This
project draws from a growing practice of creating informal learning spaces in
public environments. A renaissance of urban design in the public interest led by
groups such as the Project for Public Spaces, Gehl Design, and the
Exploratorium's Studio for Public Spaces aims to create human-scaled,
intentionally social, and increasingly educational gathering spaces in cities
across the world. The project will produce an online "Guide to People Watching"
for the general public, with additional materials to support professionals in
the creation of social science learning experiences.

Inquiry into social phenomena is not only critical to understanding
psychological mechanisms and principles, but is of fundamental importance in
maintaining a citizenry capable of meeting real life global challenges. The
project will build on and extend informal learning research into social
metacognition conducted by the Exploratorium and others. Street Smarts will
produce new research on how to design experiences that prompt structured, quasi-
scientific social observation skills and foster empathy for the social
experience of others. The research will address three questions: (1) Are public
exhibits about social phenomena more likely than public exhibits about physical
phenomena to engage people in interactions with strangers, particularly those
who appear different from themselves in societally important aspects? (2) What
types of social science exhibit designs for public spaces and the roles they
promote most effectively promote social scientific thinking skills? And (3) What
types of social science exhibit designs and the roles they promote foster
empathy for people who appear to be different from one another? To answer these
questions, a quasi-experimental research study will employ real-time
observations, interviews, and surveys with 240 randomly-sampled individuals (80
in each treatment condition). By comparing physical science exhibits in the
control condition to the social science exhibits in a treatment condition, the
project will determine which type of exhibit phenomenon best promotes stranger
interactions, holding user role constant. Comparing two treatment conditions
will support an investigation of the effect of user role on social scientific
thinking and empathy, holding type of exhibit phenomenon constant. In all
conditions, we will assess demographics and aspects of participant experience,
including awareness of roles, level of social scientific thinking, and degree of
empathy for other users. Analyses will include chi-square tests of independence
and linear regressions to determine relationships between exhibit designs and
user outcome variables. Through project development and research, Street Smarts
will build new knowledge about how the public learns about and reflects on
social phenomena as well as design strategies to facilitate that learning in
public settings.