* 1713801
* EAPSI: Using Phylogeny Reconstruction to Examine Origin and Diversification of Beardless Iris
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jennifer Rodriguez, Rodriguez               Jennifer
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Phylogenetic methods can aid for an understanding of evolutionary relationships.
The goal of this research is to advance our understanding of systematic and
biology of Asian Iris by creating a phylogenetic framework for taxonomic
revision, and testing species divergence and dispersal in Iris. This research
will focus on geographic origins and evolutionary relationships of Asian Iris.
The purpose this search is to construct a robust phylogenetic analysis of series
Chinensis and to resolve the placement of this series within subgenus Liminiris.
Using a phylogenetic approach, we will examine geographic origins of series
Chinensis, small irises that are distributed in Asia; China, Korea, and Japan.
We proposed to investigate which Asian species should be included in series
Chinensis; phylogenetic relationships among series Chinensis species; and the
origin, dispersal, and diversification of the series in Asia. We will apply
molecular marker to phylogenetic relationships and use these results to test
hypotheses about geographic distribution. The work will be carried out under the
supervision of Dr. Seung-Chul Kim, Professor and Curator, Department of
Biological Sciences at the Sungkyunkwan University in South
Korea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on geographic origins and
evolutionary relationships of Asian Iris. We propose to investigate which Asian
species should be included in series Chinensis; phylogenetic relationships among
series Chinensis species; and the origin, dispersal, and diversification of the
series in South Korea. Nuclear and chloroplast DNA makers will be sequenced for
phylogeny reconstruction using Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Statistical
methods. The resulting phylogeny will be used as a framework for testing
hypothesis on patterns of geographic diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.