* 1713857
* Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Michael Wiescher, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 6,361,995.00

This award continues the research program of eight faculty members and their
students in Nuclear Structure Physics and Nuclear Astrophysics at the University
of Notre Dame. The program focuses on direct measurements of nuclear reaction
and decay processes that determine the life of stars and the origin of the
elements in the universe. This program addresses key nuclear processes that
define the timescales of stellar evolution and explosion processes. Another
component is the study of low energy fusion reactions during the last days of a
stellar life prior to supernova explosion. The program also explores the nuclear
structure effects and weak interaction processes that are guiding large scale
nucleosynthesis processes. The research is performed primarily by using the
accelerators of the Nuclear Science Laboratory (NSL) at the University of Notre
Dame, which are uniquely designed to probe stellar reactions through a number of
experimental techniques. The experimental results expand our knowledge of the
fundamental structure of the nucleus as a multi-body quantum system; they also
provide new insight for the astrophysics community on the origin of the elements
and the chemical evolution of the cosmos from the Big Bang to the present. The
NSL is uniquely equipped for performing this kind of research in a university
environment. The award will support the training of a large number of graduate
(approximately 30) and undergraduate students (approximately 20) in experimental
and theoretical techniques to be ready to join the nuclear workforce of the
nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental program is based on the use of
two accelerators at the NSL. Intense stable ion beams from the single ended 5U
Pelletron are used for the direct study of low-energy capture and fusion
reactions. Heavy ion beams are used to investigate such reactions in inverse
kinematic technique using the St. GEORGE recoil separator. This separator is
unique and serves as blueprint for the design of the SECAR separator at FRIB.
The FN tandem accelerator is used as a multi-purpose instrument. It is operated
as a driver for the production of radioactive beams at the TwinSol facility, the
nationss first instrument for producing low energy radioactive beams. These
beams allow direct reaction measurements with and the trapping of light
radioactive particles at levels not possible at large national facilities. The
FN also serves the accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) program at the NSL,
testing geological and cosmological samples for long-lived radioactivities. A
large number of nuclear structure experiments is based on the operation of this
machine using a variety of particle and gamma spectroscopy techniques. A smaller
fraction of the program relies on the use of other national and international
facilities to take advantage of higher energy beams not available at the NSL.