* 1713552
* Polar Extremes: Enhancing Experiential Digital Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Hunter Gehlbach, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 01/31/2021
* USD 2,894,701.00

Polar Extremes: Enhancing Experiential Digital Learning is an integrated media
and research project produced by the PBS science series, NOVA, that will bring
polar science to informal learners through traditional storytelling and
experiential, digital learning environments. Stark, cold, and seemingly frozen
in time, the top and bottom of the Earth feel other-worldly, completely removed
from our everyday existence. Yet, nothing could be further from the truth. The
Arctic and Antarctic exert profound influence over our entire planet.
Disturbances in these icy realms can send transformative ripples around the
globe, altering the circulation of the atmosphere and oceans, and affecting
every form of life. And although the poles might seem constant and everlasting,
they--like our planet--are always changing, with a deep and complex past. NOVA
will provide informal science learners access to specialized research happening
at the ends of the earth, introducing them to today's scientists exploring the
major drivers of the climate, uncovering the deep history of past paleoclimates,
or perfecting climate and weather models. The project includes: a 2-hour
nationally broadcast PBS documentary (working title Polar Extremes); a NOVA
Polar Lab, an experiential interactive learning platform on polar science; and a
Polar Exploration Initiative consisting of a 10-part YouTube series, a
collection of 360 videos, virtual field trips, and social media reporting "on
location" from Antarctica, along with other polar-themed video, radio and
digital journalism. It also includes a research program conducted in
collaboration with the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) to study
how narrative-driven and experiential learning can foster informal learning in
polar science across a diverse array of audiences. NOVA, the most popular
science program on television, with a robust digital presence, will bring
current polar science to millions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOVA will use a range
of media to transport viewers to remote polar locations, to interact with polar
scientists, manipulate polar data, or vicariously explore the frozen tundra--
using a mix of learning approaches. This project will develop and test the
impact of two forms of informal learning: traditional narrative-driven
storytelling and active, experiential learning. Both components will be
developed through audience research, formative evaluation or pilot testing, and
experiments. The overarching goal is to determine the best way to combine and
leverage traditional and interactive media technologies to educate the public
about polar science. How can these modes enhance learning outcomes? The study
uses the Informal Science Learning "strand framework" developed by the National
Research Council in Learning Science in Informal Environments: People, Places,
and Pursuits (2009). Because different age groups and socioeconomic backgrounds
may engage differently with different types of learning materials and platforms,
the project components are designed to test a variety of different learning
approaches, with different audiences. This study will be one of the first to
address the relative efficacy of various forms of experiential education and
whether active versus vicarious experiential learning depends on the
characteristics of the learners. As engagement technologies continue to evolve,
this project will help inform how to best design and apply them effectively. The
project will apply these new lessons specifically to present polar research to
the public and to offer audiences an opportunity to explore and learn about
these remote regions in new ways that bring them to life, make them relevant,
and enhance learning outcomes. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and
evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and
developing understandings of deeper learning by participants. The project has
co-funding support from the Office of Polar Programs (OPP).