* 1713747
* KAUST-NSF Research Conference on Interactive Electronics; King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Huili (Grace) Xing, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 03/31/2018
* USD 14,000.00

After the outstanding success of the 2014, 2015 and 2016 KAUST-NSF Research
Conference on Electronic Materials, Devices and Systems for A Sustainable
Future, the KAUST-NSF Research Conference on Interactive Electronics 2017 will
be held from 30th January to 1st February 2017 at King Abdullah University of
Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. This award support the
travel expenses for seven excellent junior faculty members, researchers,
postdocs and graduating students from USA to attend this conference.

The purpose of the conference is to continue the positive momentum garnered from
the 2014 to 2016 assembly of the global scientific community at a common stage
to steer discussion towards scientific and engineering research progress in the
area of Interactive Electronics. The proposed symposium will again gather world
leading researchers, mid-career and rising stars, and the KAUST research
community to exchange ideas and to foster a collaborative platform to pursue
fundamental and applied research in the area of interactive electronic devices,
materials and systems. Disciplines like (i) Chemical and Biological Science and
Engineering; (ii) Environmental Science and Engineering; (iii) Marine Science;
(iv) Electrical and Computer Engineering; and (v) Material Science and
Engineering will be covered. Sensors, smart devices, energy harvesting, storage,
and cyber-physical systems will be some of the important topics that are planned
to be discussed in the conference. Some of the tangible outcomes are: a)
Establishing a culture of sustainability-focused high-tech research; b)
Attracting bright young minds from all over the world for exchange of ideas; c)
Promoting science-engineering education and research through collaboration; d)
Promoting the participation and contribution of women in science and
engineering; e) Promoting science, technology, engineering and math among the
K-12 students.