* 1713665
* EAPSI: Investigating the Development of Spatial Skills in South Korean children
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Daniel Suh, Suh                     Daniel         D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Children's early spatial skills (i.e., various abilities that involve mentally
representing and manipulating objects) relate to later school performance in the
math and sciences and entry into STEM careers. Striking cross-national
differences exist in children's math and science abilities, with children in
South Korea ranking in the top 10 in both subject areas. Already by
kindergarten, South Korean children outperform children from various countries
on tasks of spatial skill. These findings suggest the Korean advantage in
spatial skills, and later math and science, might be rooted in early home
experiences. Research is limited and needed on the development of children's
spatial skills in nations that rank in the top 10 in math and science. Such
research can inform educational practices and policy aiming to promote STEM
development in children. Therefore, this project will: 1) examine the spatial
skills of South Korean 3- and 4-year olds by developing and adapting new
measures and 2) investigate how children's home environments (e.g., spatial toys
like blocks and puzzles) and interactions with their parents relate to these
skills. The project will be conducted at Seoul National University, the most
highly ranked research university in South Korea, in collaboration with Dr.
Keumjoo Kwak, who has expertise in how parental practices and home environments
affect Korean preschoolers' academic success.

South Korean children surpass U.S. children in STEM areas by 7 and 8 years. To
date, STEM research on Korean children has focused on early number skills.
However, there is a dearth of research on the development of Korean children's
spatial skills, which may partially explain South Korean children's aptitude in
STEM areas. The first aim is to describe individual differences in spatial skill
among South Korean 3- and 4-year olds. The study will extend research to an
understudied population, age, and domain of cognitive development foundational
to STEM performance: spatial skills of mental translation, rotation, and so on.
A second aim is to examine South Korean parents? spatial language and spatial
activities with children (e.g., block play) and relate these practices to
children's spatial skill. The project will develop and adapt a battery of
spatial skill assessments for children; new measures and procedures for
assessing parent-child interactions around spatial concepts; and measures of
parents' attitudes and beliefs about STEM disciplines (through videorecorded
interactions, questionnaires, direct assessments of children). Findings will
advance knowledge on the practices that best promote the development of early
spatial skills and performance in STEM areas.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.