* 1713204
* Collaborative Research: Embedding Public Engagement with Science at Long-Term Ecological Research Sites
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sarah Garlick, Hubbard Brook Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 795,850.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will embed public engagement with science (PES) into the cultures
and practices of two Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites: the Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire and the Harvard Forest in
Massachusetts. The goals are 1) to build knowledge about the mutual learning
between scientists and adult stakeholders in face-to-face engagement setting and
2) to develop evidence-based practices in the content of place-based ecosystem
research. This is a collaborative project of 3 universities (Michigan State
University, Harvard, and CUNY) and the two LTERs.

Two primary research questions guide this work. First, how willing are
participating scientists to take part in PES? What are their attitudes and
beliefs about whether engagement can be effective and whether they have the
necessary skills? Second, how willing are participating scientists to build
relationships with stakeholders using normed tactics? Both qualitative and
quantitative methods will be used to collect evidence including semi-structured
interviews and surveys. A general set of hypothesis include that there will be
positive changes in LTER scientists willingness to participate in PES,
attitudes, and efficacy beliefs.