* 1713954
* EAPSI: Investigating Giant Panda Population Dynamics through Extraction of Volatile Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Abbey Wilson, Wilson                  Abbey          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Giant panda populations have become isolated and fragmented throughout their
natural habitat in China, making it difficult to locate potential mates. Giant
pandas rely on chemical cues in order to communicate identity, kinship, and
reproductive status to other individuals. However, limited information exists on
the ability of giant pandas to communicate across a fragmented landscape.
Therefore, this study will collect compounds from the air throughout the natural
environment and analyze these components to assess individual movement, habitat
use, and communication across fragmented habitats. This research will be
conducted in the Sichuan province of China under the mentorship of Dr. Zhang
Zejun at China West Normal University. Dr. Zhang Zejun not only offers expert
knowledge regarding giant panda reproduction and habitat use, but also provides
access to field locations, cameras, and analytical equipment required to
implement this study. This research will develop a novel tool that will
potentially connect isolated populations and contribute to conservation efforts
of this iconic species.

The elusive giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) utilizes volatile chemical cues
to determine identity, gender, and sexual receptivity of conspecifics across
fragmented habitats. With isolated populations still at risk for extinction,
this study aims to identify unique volatile chemical profiles detectable in air
that vary with distribution and habitat in free-ranging giant pandas. Field air
analysis and solid phase micro-extraction (SPME) will be used to collect
volatile compounds from free-ranging giant pandas occupying the Sichuan province
of China. In collaboration with Dr. Zhang Zejun at China West Normal University,
volatile compounds will be captured from the environment by securing SPME fibers
along known giant panda routes and scent-marking stations. Extracted volatile
compounds will be analyzed with gas chromatography mass spectrometry in order to
determine differences in the volatile air profile relative to identity, gender,
and site location. This research will provide valuable knowledge of giant panda
population dynamics and communication across a fragmented landscape.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. Graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.