* 1713975
* EAPSI: Connecting Genes to Behaviors in Ostracod Bioluminescent Mating Displays
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Nicholai Hensley, Hensley                 Nicholai       M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400.00

An unresolved question in biology is how genes contribute to animal behavior.
Behaviors are important because they can affect animal survival and
reproduction. But with closely related species, similar behaviors can vary. So
how can behaviors integral to survival retain their functionality yet also
change across species? This project will investigate both the gene-behavior
relationship and how it changes using sea fireflies. Many species make glowing
displays to attract mates, but these displays differ between species. The gene
responsible for making light in these displays, called luciferase, was first
described by Dr. Yoshihiro Ohmiya, currently at the National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology in Tsukuba, Japan. He and his
colleague Dr. Yasuo Mitani will collaborate with the investigator on this
project to show how luciferase has changed across sea fireflies. Using
techniques developed by Dr. Ohmiya, the investigator will take luciferase from
different species and examine how they function to see if any differences can
describe changes in their glowing displays.

This project aims to connect genotype to behavioral phenotype using sea
fireflies. Sea fireflies create bioluminescent mating displays by secreting
globs of mucus where the enzyme luciferase oxidizes the substrate vargulin to
produce light. In a single bolus, the amount of light and duration of the
biochemical reaction varies between species. The investigator will learn
molecular cloning, plasmid construction, and protein expression assays from
collaborators who invented these techniques. They will characterize luciferase
from a suite of species and test if these enzymes have a differential ability to
produce light. These data will be combined with behavioral data to test for a
correlation between biochemical function and behavioral display differences
between species.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.