* 1713898
* EAPSI: Japanese Diversity and Ecological Survival Limits of the Fluffy Sea Anemone, Metridium Senile
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Heather Glon, Glon                    Heather
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

In the northern oceans, the distribution and diversity of species has been
heavily impacted by glacial maxima. Sea anemones in the widespread temperate
genus Metridium are benthic invertebrates that have been affected by past
glaciations. Recolonization histories post-glaciation can be constructed and
traced back to an originating refugial populations by studying the environmental
adaptations and population genetics of contemporary populations of Metridium.
This project will investigate the survival limits of Metridium to inform species
distribution models while providing a deeper understanding of their potential
and past distributions. The research for this project will be conducted at the
Akkeshi Marine Station (Hokkaido University) in collaboration with Dr. Masahiro
Nakaoka, an expert in marine benthic ecology.

This project will be focused on performing experiments of live Metridium senile
in aquaria with manipulated variables of temperature, salinity, and dissolved
oxygen. Populations that dispersed to Hokkaido from a southern refugium are
expected to tolerate greater higher temperature and to salinity fluctuations,
whereas populations originating from deeper water are expected to show lower
tolerance for fluctuations in temperature and salinity. Additionally, the
researcher will be collecting specimens of M. senile throughout their northern
range in Japan for molecular analysis, which, when compared with others
throughout the Pacific, will indicate as to whether Japan served as a refugium
for the Northern Pacific. These data will be applied to a wider study on the
North Atlantic and Pacific phylogeography of M. senile to examine how
distributional changes have proceeded and shifted as a response to atmospheric
changes and inform how they might respond to future shifting climate conditions.
This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.