* 1713160
* EAPSI: Exploring Newly Discovered Yeast's Potential Use in Biotechnology
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Matthew Winans, Winans                  Matthew        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research has the potential to advance biotechnology and fermented foods
that uses yeast metabolism to produce medicines or other important compounds.
The project will characterize a new species of yeast related to the bakers
yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae a key member of the biotechnology industrially.
This novel species named Saccharomyces arboricola, is only found in South East
Asia and few Pacific Islands. This research will be conducted at Saga University
under Dr. Hiroshi Kitagaki, a leading researcher on biotechnology and food
science in Japan. During the research, the new species will be evaluated for new
and expected compounds produced during its metabolism of sugar. Additionally,
the new species will be mated with yeasts currently used in industry. Their
offspring will be compared with parent yeasts to determine if the mating
improves performance of the industrially important yeasts.

This project will characterize a novel species of the industrially important
Saccharomyces clade, Saccharomyces arobicola. This newly discovered species has
at least 4 novel genes and the most complete genome assembly besides the
brewer's yeast (Liti, et al., 2013) which may have a significant impact on yeast
metabolism and products potentially important in biotechnology including
biofuels, biotechnology, and fermented foods. S. arboricola and the future
industrial yeast will be used to produce metabolic products in which gas
chromatography mass spectroscopy will be utilized. From the Saccharomyces clade,
there are seven species and several hybrids of those with S. cerevisiae that are
used in industrial fermentations, none of which include this highly divergent
species. This research will be conducted at Saga University under Dr. Hiroshi
Kitagaki, a leading researcher on biotechnology and food science in Japan.
Ultimately, because of the information planned to be gained in this research,
the Saccharomyces clade as a model system will be a more comprehensive tool
available for understanding yeast evolution and ecology. This EAPSI award
promotes international collaboration as this project is poised for continuation
of genomic investigations at the West Virginia University Genomic Core.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program ,supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.