* 1713589
* RUI: Collaboration to Enhance Participation of Minority and Undergraduate Students in Nuclear Science
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Paul Gueye, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 173,997.00

This award supports a collaborative nuclear physics research program that will
further our knowledge of nuclides with high ratios of neutrons to protons, which
are interesting because they exhibit behavior not observed in stable nuclides.
Experiments will be carried out at the National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory (NSCL) and be "day-one" ready for the upcoming Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams when construction is complete. The experiments include:
investigating heavy nuclei in excited states shortly before they fragment,
exploring and characterizing particular states of beryllium nuclei, measuring
separation energies of excited states of magnesium, as well as research and
development of a new particle detector. Undergraduate and graduate students will
collaborate with faculty at several US institutions to further this work and
learn valuable highly technical skills. The projects will be evaluated through
peer review and disseminated through presentations at national conferences,
Ph.D. theses, and journal articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs of this award
are members of the MoNA-LISA collaboration, and the experiments they have
planned will exploit the capabilities of the equipment that was developed at
NSCL by the collaboration (a modular neutron array and a large area
scintillation array). Neutron-rich nuclides are very short-lived and decay by
prompt neutron emission, making the MoNA-LISA system the ideal tool to
investigate these nuclei. Projects include analyzing data, implementing novel
techniques to identify better and resolve isomeric nuclear states, measuring
neutron-unbound states in neutron-rich nuclei, characterizing pre-fragmentation
dynamics after relativistic beams interact with targets, as well as research and
development toward a new gas electron multiplier based segmented target. Future
experiments focus on higher Z nuclides that are possible with the current
experimental setup. The students will learn valuable skills utilized in all
facets of research including detector construction, data collection and
analysis, and dissemination.