* 1713900
* EAPSI: A Comparative Study of Tick-associated Viromes from Japan and the US
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Elizabeth Fahsbender, Fahsbender              Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Globally, ticks are one of the most important blood-feeding arthropods in the
realm of disease-carrying vectors, since they are capable of transmitting a wide
range of pathogens between animals and humans. Their long life cycles, expansive
range, and propensity to feed on a variety of animals emphasize the importance
for surveillance of their associated pathogens. Although their bacterial and
protozoan communities are well described, their viral communities remain largely
unknown, highlighting a significant knowledge gap. The tick-associated virome
(all of the viruses associated with ticks) will be characterized as a means of
proactive viral surveillance. This project will be conducted at Hokkaido
University under the mentorship of Dr. Keita Matsuno, a tick-borne virus expert.

Since ticks feed on a variety of hosts, vector-enabled metagenomics
(characterizing the viral communities of a disease-carrying vector), will
provide an effective tool for surveying viral diversity circulating within an
ecosystem, in this case, Hokkaido, Japan and Florida, USA. The potential role of
an endosymbiont, Rickettsia, in shaping the tick virome composition will be
investigated by comparing Rickettsia-positive and Rickettsia-negative viromes. A
targeted approach will explore tick-borne phleboviruses (TBPV), a genus of
emerging human pathogens in Asia and the United States. Determining the
prevalence and diversity of phleboviruses will provide insight into the
evolution of this group of viruses. Through these approaches I expect to
identify a diversity of viruses due to the expansive and diverse host range of
ticks over their long life cycle, and hypothesize there is a core virome
associated with the tick endosymbiont Rickettsia, that is not observed in
Rickettsia-negative ticks.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.