* 1713684
* Mapping Proton Quark Structure using Petabytes of COMPASS Data
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Naomi Makins, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 05/31/2020
* USD 46,592.00

More than 99% of the mass of visible matter in the universe is nuclear matter.
Protons and neutrons are the building blocks of atomic nuclei. Nuclear fusion
processes at the core of our sun are the source of the vast energy flow that
sustains life on earth. Fission of nuclei provides about 20% of the electricity
consumed in the United States and propels many naval vessels. The knowledge of
nuclear forces and instrumentation developed for the atomic nuclei and its
constituents have important applications, such as x-ray and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), radiation therapies for cancer treatment, materials science,
x-ray lithography, as well as propulsion and power generation.

This project will use Blue Waters to understand the strong force governing the
fundamental structure of nuclear matter in nature. Specifically, the project
will use Blue Waters to analyze data from the COMPASS experiment at CERN. The
COMPASS experiment at CERN uses high-energy particle beams to explore the quark
substructure of the proton. The experiment constitutes a powerful microscope
that can look deep inside the proton. A precise measurement of the dynamics and
arrangement of quarks inside the proton will provide experimental input needed
to improve the quantitative understanding of the strong nuclear force. COMPASS
produces enormous amounts of experimental and Monte-Carlo simulation data. With
its massive data storage capabilities and petascale processing capabilities,
Blue Waters will turn the COMPASS data into unique images of quark position and
motion inside the proton and will thus refine the theory, Quantum Chromo
Dynamics, describing the strong nuclear force.