* 1713154
* EAPSI: Measurements of Collective Vibrations of Exotic Nuclei using Radioactive Ion Beams
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kevin Howard, Howard                  Kevin          B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The Rare Isotope Beam Facility (RIBF) at RIKEN in Japan is one of the leading
institutes for studying the properties of nuclei which quickly undergo decay.
This award will support the study of bulk properties of the tin nucleus which,
for example, undergoes substantial radioactive decay within a minute of its
production. RIBF is extremely well-suited to measure these properties. These
measured values will then serve to aid other researchers in formulating and
better constraining models to describe the conditions under which a given
nucleus may form, exist, and if applicable, subsequently undergo radioactive
decay. This fundamental understanding is of great importance in several
applications, not limited to: the application of heavy-ion therapy for nuclear
medicine in cancer treatments; developing methods for the appropriate disposal
of radioactive waste; and further improving the domestic profile of clean and
safe nuclear energy infrastructure. The research will take place under the
mentorship of Dr. Tomohiro Uesaka, Chief Scientist at the Spin-Isospin Lab at
the RIKEN Nishina Center for Accelerator-Based Science.

The nucleus being investigated (tin-132, an isotope of tin with atomic mass of
132 units) is highly asymmetric in proton and neutron numbers and as a result,
has great effect in constraining the asymmetry component of the nuclear
incompressibility in the nuclear Equation of State (EoS) and determining the
symmetry energy. The EoS is the fundamental description of bulk nuclear
properties, and the incompressibility of nuclear matter represents the amount of
energy required to change the density of nuclear matter from its equilibrium
value. At RIBF, an experiment on tin-132 has been performed in Spring 2016, and
this award will support the on-site extraction and analysis of the data, as well
as optimization of the time projection chamber to further probe the nuclei in
this region.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.