* 1713780
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Winds in Dust Disks Around Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Uma Gorti, SETI Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 163,160.00

Planets formed from material in disks of gas and dust that once surrounded the
stars they orbit. The way that these disks form and how material is spread
throughout the disks affect both how quickly material is added to the stars
themselves and what types of planets can form in the disks. Disk winds play a
major role in the way this material is dispersed. In this study, the
investigators build on their earlier work where they observed the disk winds in
33 disks. They observed two parts to the winds: a wind driven by
magnetic/electric interactions and a wind driven by temperature differences.
With this grant the investigators will extend their study to include a large
number of much older disks with the goals of measuring how much the
magnetic/electric process drives with wind and how much the thermal heating
drives the wind. This project serves the national interest as it expands our
understanding of the science behind the formation of planetary systems around
other stars. A graduate student, a postdoc, and at least three undergraduate
students will participate in this study. The investigators will also participate
in a K-12 teacher workshop at The University of Arizona, reaching Hispanic and
Native American communities. A two-week long astronomy class will be taught to
high school girls from around the world in the annual Smith Summer Science and
Engineering Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of optical [OI] emission
lines for the 33 disks in Taurus reveals two low-velocity kinematic components,
one of which (broad component) likely traces a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)-driven
wind while the other (narrow component) might be associated with a thermally-
driven wind. The investigators will establish empirically how disk winds evolve
by measuring the relative proportion of MHD-driven and thermally-driven winds.
They will also measure wind mass loss rates through the main stages of disk
evolution and dispersal. They will extend their analysis of the [OI] lines to a
sample of more evolved disks, including more disks with dust cavities, and
analyze one of the blue [SII] transitions to clarify the thermal contribution to
the [OI] emission.