* 1713671
* Microscopic and Macroscopic Aspects of High Harmonic Generation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mette Gaarde, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Short pulses of coherent light in the extreme ultraviolet (XUV) spectral region
can be used to investigate the ultrafast dynamics of atomic, molecular, and
condensed-phase processes, which typically occur on the few-femtosecond time
scale, and can be important in a wide range of scientific applications. A
process known as high harmonic generation (HHG), resulting from the interaction
between an intense laser pulse and a nonlinear medium, has proven to be a
versatile source of such XUV light pulses. In this project, mechanisms
underlying HHG will be studied through theoretical modeling and calculations
that consider both the microscopic and macroscopic laser-matter interactions.
Some of these studies will characterize the properties of the XUV light
generated by HHG, whereas other studies will probe the inherent dynamics of the
strong-field interaction with the nonlinear medium. The majority of the work
will be directly relevant to ongoing collaborations with several experimental
groups in the US and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the source development
studies associated with this project, the LSU group will concentrate on
characterizing and optimizing the HHG process from transparent crystals. It is
only recently that such crystals have been shown to produce harmonics, and this
has generated a lot of excitement due to the potential for increased yield and
ease of manipulation of the generated light. However the mechanism by which
harmonics are generated in condensed phase materials is still not well
understood. In this part of the project, the group will expand on their current
microscopic, quantum mechanical model for the laser-crystal interaction, which
links the emitted light to the band structure of the crystal, as well as build a
large-scale model describing the process of generation, propagation, and
absorption of the XUV light in the macroscopic medium. In a separate part of
this project, the LSU group will probe the dynamics of the strong-field laser-
matter interaction itself, primarily through the investigation of HHG in the
vicinity of excited states in atomic gases. In particular, a search will be
conducted for signatures of these excited states in the spatial, temporal, and
spectral properties of the emitted XUV light.