* 1713609
* Fostering Interest in Science through Interactive Exploration of Astronomy What-If Simulations
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Neil Comins, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 331,949.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This project will advance knowledge in the
design of interest triggers for science in immersive digital simulation learning
games. When learners are interested in a topic, it can have a profound impact on
the quality of their learning. Although much is known about how informal
learning experiences can promote interest in STEM, much less research has
addressed links between technology use and interest development. This
Exploratory Pathways project will investigate (1) the impact of entertainment
technology use by middle school learners on STEM interest development, (2) the
design of interactive educational technologies created specifically to trigger
interest in astronomy, and (3) informal learning resources for sustained
interaction with STEM content over time. In particular, learners will have the
opportunity to interactively explore the scientific consequences of considering
alternative versions of Earth via "What if?" questions, such as "What if the
earth had no moon?" or "What if the earth were twice its current size?". While
using the simulations, learners will be invited to make observations and propose
scientific explanations for what they see as different. Given recent discoveries
of potentially habitable worlds throughout the Galaxy, such questions have high
relevance to public discourse around space exploration, conditions necessary for
life, and the long-term future of the human race. Studies will occur across
three informal learning settings: museum exhibits, afterschool programs, and
summer camps, and are driven by the following research questions: What
technology-based triggers of interest have the strongest influence on interest?
Which contextual factors are most important for supporting long-term interest
development? And, what kinds of technology-based triggers are most effective for
learners from audiences who are underrepresented in STEM? This research will
result in an empirically tested approach for cultivating interest that will
allow educators to leverage the "What if?" pedagogy in their own work, as well
as downloadable materials suitable for use in both informal and formal learning
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned studies will identify features that are
effective in triggering interest, with an emphasis on groups underrepresented in
STEM, and elaborate on the importance of engaging learners in explanatory
dialogues and in service of interest development. It is hypothesized that
interacting in such novel ways can act as a trigger for interest in astronomy,
physics, and potentially other areas of STEM. Design iterations will also
investigate different forms of learning supports, such as guidance from
facilitators, collaboration, and automated guidance available within the
simulations, and identify how features vary with respect to learning contexts.
Data collected will include interview and survey data to track interest
development, measures of knowledge in astronomy and physics, and log files of
simulation use to better understand how behaviors in the simulations align with
stated interests. Results of the studies will advance the theoretical
understanding of interest development and its relationship to interactive
experiences, and will also have practical implications for the deployment of
technology in informal settings by identifying features critical for triggering
the interest of middle school learners. This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.