* 1713041
* Group Travel to Attend 7th International Symposium on Advances in Computational Heat Transfer (CHT-17), Naples, Italy, May 28 - June 1, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Yogesh Jaluria, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The 7th International Symposium on Advances in Computational Heat Transfer
(CHT-17)is part of a long and traditional series of events focused on the
advances and future trends in numerical heat and mass transfer and fluid flow.
Located in Italy, the symposium will naturally attract participants from Europe
and surroundings, propitiating interactions between upcoming and established US
and foreign researchers. Plenary and keynote presentations will review existing
information, present the current state-of-the-art and discuss future needs in
different areas, providing an excellent mechanism to guide future improvements
in existing and new academic programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics covered
in the symposium are very broad, including fundamentals (algorithms, coding,
software developments, validation, data analysis and visualization, etc.) and
applications (engineering based efforts involving numerical simulations, such as
in biological systems, manufacturing, environmental heat transfer, combustion,
cooling of electronic systems, data centers and energy systems). The broad range
of applications covered by the Symposium has been an additional attractive
point, especially to young researchers interested in numerical thermal transport
processes. The presentations will be disseminated broadly, not only through the
preparation of a proceedings, but also through the publication of selected
papers in top-quality journals.