* 1713359
* Informal science learning at biological field stations
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Michelle Lawing, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2021
* USD 182,200.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal Science Learning program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This Exploratory
Pathways project brings together scientists and science curriculum experts with
field station leaders to study informal science learning at biological field
stations. The objective is to understand and evaluate the unique qualities of
field stations as centers of informal and enduring science learning for the non-
science community. There are over 400 field stations and represent a science
communication mechanism that if available to most US citizens. This project is a
collaboration between Texas A&amp;M University and Colorado State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field stations typically engage in informal
science learning. While there are great examples of informal learning through
outreach activities at field stations, little is known about what is happening
in the aggregate at these establishments. This project documents the outreach
work of field stations and explores the connections between how the outreach
activities engage learners, incorporate science topics, and address science
learning. By creating an Outreach Ontology, a multidimensional framework around
the outreach activities, this work provides a valuable resource and reference to
informal science researchers who seek to understand what informal learning
projects are undertaken at field stations, and how these activities fit into the
broader context of informal science learning. This project will help field
stations collaborate on improving informal STEM learning activities by bringing
them together to discuss their efforts and by developing a publicly available,
searchable database detailing their activities. A particular benefit to
advancing informal STEM learning by investigating field stations is the broad
range of people and communities that are involved with and affected by field
station outreach activities.