* 1713928
* EAPSI: Earthquake Probability Assessment Using Slow Slip Events
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Ryan Yohler, Yohler                  Ryan           M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The research will focus on an important aspect of earthquake science called slow
slips events (SSEs). SSEs are similar to earthquakes, but occur more slowly and
do not cause damage. Recently, SSEs have been discovered in areas where large
earthquakes happen (the Western United States, Japan, and New Zealand are all
examples). The goal of this research is to improve our knowledge of how these
events change the probability of future large earthquakes in New Zealand. The
results may be applicable to a similar region on the west coast of the U.S. New
Zealand is an excellent study site because it has known SSEs, a dense network of
GPS stations used to study SSEs, and world experts in the field. Another goal is
to further engage the public with earthquake science to eliminate barriers
between scientific research and the public. Public understanding of earthquake
hazards is the first step in saving lives and reducing response time of local
rescue authorities. The project will be conducted at GNS Science under the
mentorship of Dr. Laura Wallace, an expert on Hikurangi plate locking models.

The main question of this project is "how do SSEs change time-dependent large
earthquake probabilities?" First we will place bounds on the size of earthquake
events in New Zealand. Then we will use delayed failure models to study how the
stress from SSEs changes large earthquake probabilities in a time-dependent
sense. By utilizing these two separate techniques of moment-bounding and
estimation of time-dependent large earthquake probabilities, we hope to develop
a systematic way to relate SSEs to large earthquakes, especially in areas where
extraordinarily large earthquakes are plausible.

This project funds a new research collaboration between a U.S. Graduate student,
Ryan Yohler, and a prominent earthquake scientist, Dr. Laura Wallace, and her
colleagues at GNS Science in New Zealand, jointly funded by NSF and the Royal
Society of New Zealand.