* 1713393
* Embodied Physics: STEM Learning for Under-Represented Youth
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Lawrence Pratt, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,868.00

A collaboration of TERC, MIT, The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and
community-based dance centers in Boston, this exploratory project seeks to
address two main issues in informal science learning: 1) broadening
participation in science by exploring how to expand science access to African-
American and Latino youth and 2) augmenting science learning in informal
contexts, specifically learning physics in community-based dance sites. Building
on the growing field of "embodied learning," the project is an outgrowth in part
of activities over the past decade at TERC and MIT that have investigated
approaches to linking science, human movement and dance. Research in embodied
learning investigates how the whole body, not just the brain, contributes to
learning. Such research is exploring the potential impacts on learning in school
settings and, in this case, in out of school environments. This project is
comprised of two parts, the first being an exploration of how African-American
and Latino high school students experience learning in the context of robust
informal arts-based learning environments such as community dance studios. In
the second phase, the collaborative team will then identify and pilot an
intervention that includes principles for embodied learning of science,
specifically in physics. This phase will begin with MIT undergraduate and
graduate students developing the course before transitioning to the community
dance studios. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this pilot feasibility study is to build resources for science learning
environments in which African-American and Latino students can develop
identities as people who practice and are engaged in scientific inquiry. Youth
will work with choreographers, physicists and educators to embody carefully
selected physics topics. The guiding hypothesis is that authentic inquiries into
scientific topics and methods through embodied learning approaches can provide
rich opportunities for African-American and Latino high school-aged youth to
learn key ideas in physics and to strengthen confidence in their ability to
become scientists. A design- based research approach will be used, with data
being derived from surveys, interviews, observational field notes, video
documentation, a case study, and physical artifacts produced by participants.
The study will provide the groundwork for producing a set of potential design
principles for future projects relating to informal learning contexts, art and
science education with African American and Latino youth.