* 1713453
* EAPSI: Evaluating the Psychometric Properties of a Measure of Mathematical Mindset Attitudes Across Cultures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Breanna Morrison, Morrison                Breanna
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research is focused on evaluating the Dweck Mindset Instrument. Mindset
involves how one views the idea of intelligence, namely whether one views
intelligence as something that can grow or if one views intelligence as
something more unchanging. Mindset has been linked to academic achievement and
while much of the research involving mindset and achievement is very promising
the most popular measurement tool for mindset, the Dweck Mindset Instrument, is
lacking in some areas in showing that it is a valid and reliable instrument to
use. One area in particular is if this measurement can work across cultures.
This project will work on collecting and evaluating data from the Dweck Mindset
Instrument and related constructs in both American and Japanese students in
order to better evaluate if this measure is valid. The researcher will be
working with Dr. Ayumi Tanaka who has been studying mindset theories at Doshisha
University.

One specific psychometric evaluation will determine if the scale has measurement
invariance, which gives support to it measuring the same construct in both
cultures. If the scale is not measurement invariant it cannot be used to
compared scores across cultures. Additionally many researchers using this scale
have been modifying the scale, using only one subscale, and even scoring the
measure differently. This project will determine if these different ways to
interpret the scale will have a sizeable impact on the results of the
statistical tests used. Since some researchers have been modifying the Dweck
Mindset Instrument to focus on certain attitudes, this project will evaluate if
that modifications can be valid using a mathematically focused mindset scale.
Additionally, a focus on mathematical issues is of interest due to both a
mediocre math performance in United States students as compared to other
countries and an increase in need for STEM educated citizens.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).