* 1713840
* EAPSI: Linking Grazing Management and Gully Erosion to Water Quality in the Great Barrier Reef
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Hennessy Miller, Miller                  Hennessy       F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The Great Barrier Reef (GBR) off the coast of Queensland, Australia, is the
world's largest and most biodiverse coral reef system, but its health and
survival is threatened by a number of external factors. This project aims to
investigate one threat--decreased water quality in the GBR lagoon--by linking
the impacts of long-term grazing management with sediment export and erosion in
the Burdekin Basin. Though the impacts of land-cover on gully erosion have been
well documented through small-scale, plot-based experiments, there is little
knowledge of the long-term effects of historical grazing management to gully
activity and rate of expansion. This research will be conducted in collaboration
with Dr. Scott Wilkinson, an expert in gully erosion, at the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) in Canberra, Australia.
By comparing historical records and vegetation surveys, this research will
provide a quantitative analysis of gully erosion in upland rangelands, aiding
CSIRO and the Australian government in the effort to improve water quality and
preserve the Great Barrier Reef.

Seawater temperature rise, ocean acidification, and decreased water quality in
the GBR lagoon are causing considerable degradation and mortality to the GBR.
CSIRO attributes 40% of all fine sediment imported to the GBR lagoon to
rangeland gully erosion in the catchment basins. Erosion is directly linked to
land-cover; studies in the GBR have shown that a 5-15% increase in vegetation
cover can reduce sediment erosion by 35-60%, thereby decreasing sediment yield
and improving water quality in the GBR lagoon. However, there is little
knowledge about the long-term effects of grazing management and gully activity.
For specific gully-prone soil types, this project will evaluate the long-term
effects of different grazing management and stocking rates on gully stability by
comparing historical remote sensing imagery of vegetation cover to surveys of
gully stability at 10-20 different properties. This research project aims to
provide a quantitative assessment of grazing and erosion and determine criteria
to identify zones exceedingly vulnerable to over-proportioned sediment export
for priority preventative management.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.