* 1713831
* EAPSI: Investigating the Distribution and Diversity of Anaerobic Ammonium Oxidizing Bacteria in a Geothermal Hot Spring Ecosystem
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jennifer Lawrence, Lawrence                Jennifer       E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400.00

This project will investigate the abundance, distribution, and functional
capabilities of anaerobic ammonium oxidizing (anammox) bacteria in a geothermal
hot spring ecosystem located on the North Island of New Zealand. Anammox
bacteria play an important role in removing reactive nitrogen (i.e., nitrogen
species that directly or indirectly support growth) from both natural and
engineered ecosystems, but their role in removing reactive nitrogen from
geothermal hot spring ecosystems is not well understood. Increased knowledge of
anammox bacteria is particularly valuable today, because most of the world's
industrialized nations are struggling to manage elevated concentrations of
reactive nitrogen in their fresh and marine water bodies. The insights into the
distribution and diversity of anammox bacteria gained as a result of this
project will help scientists and engineers develop and apply more robust and
sustainable reactive nitrogen removal processes. This project will be conducted
in collaboration with Dr. Wei-Qin Zhuang, a noted expert in environmental
microbiology and biotechnology, at the University of Auckland in New Zealand.

Geothermal hot spring ecosystem samples will be collected from the One Thousand
Springs database, which has catalogued the 16S rRNA microbial diversity and
associated geochemical conditions of over 1,000 geothermal hot spring ecosystem
samples collected from the Taupo Volcanic Zone on New Zealand's North Island.
This database will be mined to identify samples that indicate the existence of
anammox bacteria. Further analyses will be performed on these samples to
elucidate the abundance and functional capabilities of anammox bacteria within
these samples. Abundance will be determined through quantitative polymerase
chain reaction analyses, and functional capabilities will be determined through
metagenomic analyses. Subsequently, these same analyses will be performed on
samples extracted from geothermal hot spring enrichment bioreactors operated by
the Zhuang Laboratory, in order to understand the impacts of the translation of
extremophilic anammox bacteria from a natural ecosystem to an engineered
bioreactor.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.