* 1713506
* Interface Control for Systems of Strongly Coupled Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Irena Lasiecka, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2021
* USD 328,594.00

Interactive systems are ubiquitous in technological applications and critical
for modern society. An important class of such coupled systems have components
with differing dynamic properties, whose coupling occurs at the interface of the
different media in which each component evolves. The role of a control action is
to force the system to behave in a desired, pre-assigned way: suppressing
flutter, suppressing turbulence, hitting a target, etc. One eloquent
illustration is flutter in aero-elasticity, a phenomenon that may occur when a
structure is subject to a surrounding gas or fluid flow. It results in a
periodic-like instability that can be fatal for structural stability due to
fatigue of the material, such as the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in
1940 during strong winds. In such flow-structure interactions, the control
action of flutter suppression can be used to avoid structural failure. Another
illustration of control is the suppression of turbulence arising in a fluid as
part of fluid-structure interaction. Examples include body fluids flowing within
arterial walls or veins and motion of a solid vehicle immersed in a fluid, be it
an aircraft flying in the air, a ship or a submarine moving in water, etc.
Another area of interest is non-linear acoustics, in particular high intensity
ultrasound, which has innumerable uses in medical and industrial technology:
lithotripsy, thermotherapy, ultrasonic cleansing, detection of cracks, concealed
weapon detection, etc. This project aims to extend and deepen the mathematical
underpinnings of control systems for these and other important
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is focused on the study
of control-theoretic issues for systems of strongly coupled partial differential
equations (PDE), where the (active, passive) control action is exercised in the
transmission conditions at the interface between two media. One example is a
hyperbolic-like/hyperbolic interaction: a von Karman plate (displacement of an
aircraft wing) sitting in the horizontal plane is immersed in, and interacts
with, a 3D-gas flow which occupies the upper-half space and moves over the
plate. The flow is mathematically modeled by a modified wave equation in terms
of the flow potential, allowing various types of boundary conditions. Couplings
occurs in each equation through the trace of the other variable. The normalized
constant speed of the passing flow determines regimes: subsonic, transonic and
supersonic. Mathematical studies of this system include: (i) well-posedness of
various models under various types of boundary conditions; (ii) stability and
attractors for the structure, to include control techniques for flutter
suppression at both subsonic and supersonic regimes. Another example is the
parabolic-hyperbolic interaction, which couples a fluid-gas equation inside the
vessel with the full vectorial Karman (shell) dynamical equation, describing the
external shell. Here again, mathematical studies of the system include (i) well-
posedness and (ii) stabilization by means of stabilizing controls acting on the
plate to transmit dissipation on the unstable fluid. In many acoustic
applications, only the external boundary is accessible, not the interior.
Control theoretic methods can also be applied to the acoustic equation, a third
order (in time) PDE with either Dirichlet or Neumann boundary controls. Specific
topics of study include: (i) optimal regularity from the boundary to the
interior and its trace (ii) exact boundary controllability, (iii) boundary
stabilization; (iv) optimal control and min-max game theory with quadratic cost
functional. The research involves a diverse set of tools including non-linear
functional analysis, micro-local analysis, and Riemannian geometry methods.