* 1713983
* Workshop on Additive Manufacturing (3D Printing) for Civil Infrastructure Design and Construction; Arlington, Virginia; July 13-14, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/29/2020
* USD 99,009.00

This award will support a workshop to facilitate a research agenda for additive
manufacturing (also known as 3D printing) for civil infrastructure design and
construction. Civil infrastructure includes buildings, residential homes,
underground structures, utility networks/equipment, and other structures that
comprise the constructed environment. This workshop will be held at the National
Science Foundation in Arlington, Virginia, on July 13-14, 2017. As a rapidly
growing technology, 3D printing is expected to fundamentally change the nature
of manufacturing and revolutionize many areas of research in the 21st century.
This workshop aims to explore a new research frontier for 3D printing in the
area of civil infrastructure design and construction. The workshop will provide
an interactive venue for researchers from communities of additive manufacturing,
architecture, geotechnical and structural engineering, construction, and
materials to address technological challenges and identify research priorities
to accelerate a wide adoption of 3D printing for civil infrastructure design and
construction. This, in turn, can help enhance U.S. competitiveness in
manufacturing, increase cost effectiveness of civil infrastructure design and
construction, prolong resilience in national infrastructure, and create jobs in
related fields in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
two-day workshop include: (a) review of the state-of-the-art of 3D printing in
different engineering sectors related to civil infrastructure design and
construction, (b) sharing of perspectives on 3D printing for civil
infrastructure design and construction from federal agencies, (c) identification
of gaps and challenges in using 3D printing for civil infrastructure design and
construction, and (d) formulation of recommendations for research priorities.
The workshop will be composed of three activities: (a) invited talks given by
experts who will present 3D printing case studies from different engineering
sectors and by representatives from federal agencies who will talk about their
agency's perspectives on 3D printing in areas related to civil infrastructure
design and construction, (b) panel discussions led by speakers addressing
technical challenges and potential technology transfer, and (c) idea sharing
presentations given by participants who will share insights about the state-of-
the-art and advantages of 3D printing for civil infrastructure design and
construction. The outcomes of the workshop will be made available in a workshop
report.