* 1713950
* Research in Quantum Field Theory: Anomalous Properties of Chiral Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Igor Shovkovy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 286,999.00

The properties of matter at extreme densities and temperatures are of great
interest in nuclear physics. The corresponding extreme conditions are realized
in the primordial plasma of the early Universe, in the fireballs produced by
heavy-ion colliders, as well as in the interiors of neutron stars. Such forms of
matter are relativistic because their constituent particles move with speeds
close to the speed of light. More importantly, the particles carry a quantum
characteristic, called chirality, that can give rise to very unusual macroscopic
properties of matter. In this project, the PI will study the underlying physics
behind a wide range of chiral properties of relativistic matter. The research
outcomes will be relevant also for recently discovered Dirac and Weyl materials
that have pseudorelativistic charge carriers and hold a great promise for new
technologies. The project will be a platform for training undergraduate and
graduate students, who will acquire deep knowledge of physics and mathematics,
as well as invaluable analytical and problem solving skills that will help them
upon entering the highly educated workforce of the future knowledge-based
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI and his collaborators
will study a wide range of chiral properties of relativistic and
pseudorelativistic forms of matter. A special emphasis will be placed on finding
macroscopic signature observables that are induced by the chiral anomaly. Using
first-principle quantum-field theoretical methods and techniques, and
supplementing them with methods of chiral kinetic theory and hydrodynamics, the
PI will investigate the following topics: (i) the properties of collective modes
and their anomalous features in various regimes of chiral (pseudo-)relativistic
plasmas, (ii) the role of nonuniform flow and inhomogeneities in chiral plasmas
and their implications for the evolution of the early Universe, (iii) the
limitations of the chiral kinetic theory and the ways of circumventing them by
using quantum field theory, and (iv) the observable consequences of the chiral
asymmetry and chiral effects in Dirac and Weyl materials. The outcomes of this
project will contribute to a deeper understanding of theoretical implications of
quantum anomalies, as well as of their macroscopic observable effects.