* 1713123
* Implementing the STEM Excellence and Leadership Program to Understand the Role of Local Agency in Broadening High-Potential, Rural Students' STEM Participation and Achievement
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Susan Assouline, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,979,221.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This Research in
Service to Practice project will address the issues around Informal Education of
rural middle school students who have high potential regarding academic success
in efforts to promote computer and IT knowledge, advanced quantitative
knowledge, and STEM skills. Ten school districts in rural Iowa will be chosen
for this study. It is anticipated that new knowledge on rural informal education
will be generated to benefit the Nation's workforce. The specific objectives are
to understand how informal STEM learning shapes the academic and psychosocial
outcomes of rural, high-potential students, and to identify key characteristics
of successful informal STEM learning environments for rural, high-potential
students and their teachers. The results of this project will provide new tools
for educators to increase the flow of underserved students into STEM from
economically-disadvantaged rural settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology predicts a rapid rise in the
number of STEM jobs available in the next decade, describing an urgent need for
students' educational opportunities to prepare them for this workforce. In 2014,
62% of CEOs of major US corporations reported challenges filling positions
requiring advanced computer and information technology knowledge. The project
team will use a mixed methods approach, integrating comparative case study and
mixed effects longitudinal methods, to study the Excellence program. Data
sources include teacher interviews, classroom observations, and student
assessments of academic aptitude and psychosocial outcomes. The analysis and
evaluation of the program will be grounded in understanding the local efforts of
school districts to build curriculum responsive to the demands of their high-
potential student body. The project design, and subsequent analysis plan,
utilizes a mixed methods approach, incorporating case study and longitudinal
quantitative methods to analyze naturalistic data and build robust evidence for
the implementation and impact of this program. This project will provide
significant insights in how best to design, implement, and support informal out-
of-school learning environments to broaden participation in the highest levels
of STEM education and careers for under-resourced rural students.