* 1713191
* Integrating STEM and Digital Literacies with Adolescents
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Blaine Smith, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 349,962.00

As part of its overall effort to enhance learning in informal environments, the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, seeks to advance new approaches
to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. In alignment with these aims,
the STEM + Digital Literacies (STEM+L) project will investigate science fiction
as an effective mechanism to attract and immerse adolescents (ages 10-13) from
diverse cultural backgrounds in environmental and human health content and
socio-scientific issues. This work is particularly novel, as the current
knowledge base is limited, and largely addresses the high school level.
Therefore, the results of the proposed effort could yield important findings
regarding the feasibility of this activity as an effective platform for science
learning and engagement for younger students. As such, STEM+L would not only
advance knowledge in the field but would also contribute to a growing AISL
portfolio on digital literacy and learning.

STEM+L is an early stage Innovations in Development project that will engage
thirty middle school students in out of school time experiences. Over a twenty-
four-week period, students will work collaboratively in groups in-person and
online with their peers and field experts to design, develop, and produce STEM
content rich, multimedia science fictions. The in-person learning experiences
will take place on the University of Miami campus during the summer and academic
year. Culminating activities include student presentations online and at a local
Science Fiction Festival. The research component will employ an iterative,
design-based approach. Four research questions will be explored: (a) How do
students learn science concepts and multimodal digital literacies through
participating in the STEM+L Academy? (b) How do students change their views in
STEM related subject matter and in pursuing STEM related careers? (c) How do
students participate in the STEM+L Academy? (d) How do we best support students'
participation and learning of STEM+L in face-to-face and online environments?
Data collection methods include video records, student-generated artifacts,
online surveys, embedded assessments, interviews, and multimodal reflections.
Comparative case analysis and a mixed methods approach will be employed. A
rigorous evaluation will be conducted by a critical external review board.
Inclusive and innovative dissemination strategies will ensure that the results
of the research and program reach a broad range of audiences including both
informal and formal STEM and literacy educators and researchers, learning
scientists, local communities, and policy makers through national and
international conference presentations, journal publications, Web2.0 resources,
and community outreach activities.