* 1713663
* EAPSI: The Impact of Web Based Tourist Education on Human-Tibetan Macaque Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* KiriLi Stauch, Stauch                  KiriLi         N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Tourist presence and noise levels impacts macaques stress levels and can lead to
potentially dangerous primate-human interactions if not handled properly. This
study will help determine if educating tourists with a site specific website
will change tourist behaviors towards Tibetan macaques, reduce tourist-macaque
aggressive encounters, and reduce macaque stress-indicating behavior. This
research will be conducted at Valley of the Wild Monkeys in Anhui, China, a
tourist destination, in collaboration with Tibetan macaque experts, Dr. Jin-Hua
Li and Dr. Dongpo Xia, from Anhui University. An educational website with site
specific information will be made available through QR codes for 30 days.
Researchers will record visitor-macaque interactions, and tourist noise levels
daily using sampling methods to record behaviors. The results will indicate
whether smartphone technology (website) can be used to reduce rates of stress
inducing visitor behaviors, assisting Huangshan Garden Bureau (HGB) staff in
their attempts to refine management of the monkeys.

Daily visitor-macaque interactions have negative impacts on macaques and
visitors such as higher rates of macaque aggressive and self-directed behaviors,
zoonotic disease transfer, and increased levels of stress. Tourists interact
daily with Tibetan macaques at Valley of the Wild Monkeys in Anhui, China. An
educational website with site specific information (i.e. guidelines for conduct,
park rules, conservation) will be made available through QR codes for 30
randomized days. Visitor-macaque interactions will be recorded using human and
macaque ethograms. Research shows a correlation between decibel levels and
macaque stress levels, so decibel levels will be recorded daily. Researchers
will compare frequency of macaque and human behaviors, average decibel levels,
and website "on" and "off" days. Researchers predict on "website on" days,
visitors will exhibit fewer antagonistic behaviors and lower decibel levels, and
monkeys will show lower rates of aggression and self-directed behaviors than on
"website off" days. The results will indicate whether smartphone technology can
help reduce rates of stress-inducing visitor behaviors, assisting Huangshan
Garden Bureau (HGB) staff in their attempts to refine management of the monkeys.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.