* 1713424
* Streamlining Embedded Assessment to Understand Citizen Scientists' Skill Gains
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Rachel Becker-Klein, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,975,598.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. The project will
collaboratively design, test and study effective and efficient ways to develop
embedded assessments (EAs) of citizen science (CS) volunteer scientific inquiry
skills in order to better understand the impact of these CS experiences on
volunteer scientific inquiry abilities. EAs are assessment activities that are
integrated into the learning experience and allow learners to demonstrate their
competencies in an unobtrusive way. The acquisition of scientific inquiry skills
is an essential, even defining, characteristic of citizen science experiences
that has a direct influence on data quality. Methods for assessing the direct
impact of CS on volunteers' scientific inquiry skills are limited. The project
will result in EA measures designed for use by diverse CS projects, strategies
that CS projects can use to develop EA assessment tools, and research findings
that document opportunities, supports and barriers of this innovative method
across a range of CS contexts. Findings and initial resources will be shared
with the broad array of stakeholders in CS through conferences, workshops, peer-
reviewed publication, community websites and other relevant venues. The results
of this work also have the potential to generalize to other informal science
learning experiences that engage the public in science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address two research questions: (1) What processes are useful for
developing broadly applicable EA methods or measures? and (2) What can we learn
about gains in volunteers' scientific inquiry skills when citizen science
organizations use EA? These will be addressed through design-based research
focused on two streamlining strategies. For the reframing data validation
strategy, six leaders from five established citizen science projects will
conduct secondary analyses of their existing databases to uncover the skill
gains of CS volunteers that are currently unexplored in their data. For the
common measure strategy, ten CS projects will collaborate to create and test
common EA measures of select identification-based skills. Data will be gathered
through meeting notes, participant interviews and action plans, and volunteer
skill gains to capture process and products of each strategy. Data will be
analyzed using grounded theory, multiple process techniques, multilevel models,
and repeated-measures analysis of variance. The design-based-research framework
will significantly expand project impacts by jump-starting evaluation of the
participating CS projects and by producing initial resources for two distinct EA
strategies that have the potential to dramatically alter practice and impact
citizen science efforts to ultimately enable more people to learn by
contributing to the science endeavor. The project will directly equip the 15
participating citizen-science projects with authentic performance tools to
assess the quality of their programing, which will expand their understanding of
CS volunteer skills and help them better recruit and support their varied
audiences (including rural, low-income and tribal communities).