* 1713537
* Virtual Ice Explorer: Immersively Experiencing Changing Glacial Landscapes
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jesse Fox, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,140.00

Glaciers around the world are undergoing dramatic changes. Many people, however,
have a limited understanding of the scope of these changes because they are
geographically distant and difficult to visualize. Although both digital
learning tools and online scientific data repositories have greatly expanded
over the last decade, there is currently no interface that brings the two
together in a way that allows the public to explore these rapidly changing
glacial environments. Therefore, to both improve public understanding and
provide greater access to already existing resources, the project team will
develop the Virtual Ice Explorer to encourage informal learning about glacial
environments. This web application will feature an immersive virtual environment
and display a suite of environmental data for an array of Earth's glacial
systems. An interactive globe will allow users to select from a collection of
sites ranging from polar regions to tropical latitudes. Each featured site will
offer users an opportunity to interact with (1) a 3D rendering of the landscape;
(2) a local map of the site; (3) historical and contemporary photographs of the
site; (4) background information text describing the location, past research,
and climate impacts; and (5) available environmental data. One of the most
original features of the application will be its realistic, immersive 3D
rendering of glacial landscapes by combining very high-resolution digital
elevation models and satellite imagery with the application's built-in
capabilities for immersive virtual environments. Although immersive environments
often require expensive equipment, we are maximizing accessibility by developing
the Virtual Ice Explorer to run in a web browser and function across various
devices. Thus, the application will be available to anyone with internet access,
and they can explore at their own pace.

As part of the successful development of Virtual Ice Explorer, the project team
will create a platform for digital elevation models to be visualized and
explored in 3D by users within the web application; curate digital elevation
models, maps, images, text, and environmental data for inclusion in the web
application for up to 11 geographically diverse glaciers/glacial landscapes;
iteratively user-test the web application with project partners; and design the
architecture of the system to readily scale to a larger collection of
glaciers/glacial landscapes. To extend dissemination of the final products, the
team has partnered with the U.S. Geologic Survey to showcase four benchmark
glaciers in their long-term Glaciers and Climate project. In addition to
improving understanding of glacier systems in informal learning environments,
the project team will explore applications for spatial learning, employment of
3D environments for educational interventions, and use of Virtual Ice Explorer
in formal learning environments. This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants. The project
also has support from the Office of Polar Programs.