* 1713750
* Impact of Stellar structure on Core-collapse Supernovae and their Ejecta
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* William Hix, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,120.00

Core-collapse supernovae (CCSN) are direct probes of stellar evolution and the
dominant producers of heavy elements. Significant advancement in our
understanding of the CCSN mechanism has occurred in the last decade, highlighted
by the understanding that the CCSN problem involves the complex interaction of
many physical inputs that can only be fully considered in three-dimensional (3D)
simulations. The number of 3D simulations, which include sufficient realistic
physics, that have been completed is still small and the simulations are
generally under-resolved. Recent observational surveys have greatly increased
the number of well observed CCSN and identified many of the pre-supernova stars,
establishing a more direct relationship between the characteristics and the
details of the explosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will survey the
range of the stellar mass of CCSN progenitors using the state-of-the-art CCSN
code Chimera on the Blue Waters system to understand how the variations in pre-
supernova structure affect the explosive outcomes. The simulations will begin
from progenitor stars that span the range of stellar masses from the lightest to
heaviest stars that might explode. The progenitor star models will be from the
first generation of stars formed from the primordial gas of the Big Bang as
there exists a class of second-generation stars contaminated by only the ejecta
of first-generation supernovae that offer a unique opportunity to measure the
ejected products of individual CCSN. This choice offers an important contrast to
prior studies which have focused on metal-rich stars. The project will compute
five 3D simulations over the course of 2 years with 1-degree resolution. This
surpasses the resolution of any current self-consistent, full-physics CCSN
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include the
engagement of local and visiting students (graduate and undergraduate) and post-
docs, providing training in both astrophysics and high-performance computing
that our students and post-docs carry with them to later jobs in academia and
industry. The project will also make frequent public lectures on supernova-
related topics to enhance public understanding.