* 1713991
* EAPSI: Wake Induced by a Group of Seal Whiskers: Implication to High-sensitivity Underwater Flow Sensors
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jodi Turk, Turk                    Jodi           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

High-sensitivity underwater flow sensors are critical for autonomous underwater
vehicles (AUVs) to navigate through dark, cramped, and unstable terrain where
vision-based and sonar sensors do not function well. Harbor seals are found to
be able to track their prey by capturing even minute disturbance of the ambient
water solely by using their whiskers. This is attributed to the exceptional
capability of seal whiskers to suppress vortex-induced vibration in the wake
flow. This project will conduct flow experiments of seal whiskers at Pohang
University of Science and Technology University (POSTECH) in South Korea, under
the mentorship of Professor Sang Joon Lee. The collaboration provides flow
facilities and equipment to obtain unique data that will enable new insights
into the wake structure of multiple seal whiskers and its implication to design
high-sensitivity underwater flow sensors.

Many researchers have studied the effects of key parameters of the whisker
morphology on wake structure with idealized whisker-like models. However, due to
the natural variation in length, size and twist along the length of seal
whiskers, it is not well understood how a real seal whisker changes wake flow,
in particular the vortex shedding. It is also unclear how a group of whiskers
with a certain configuration interact with each other to affect the wake
properties. Lack of knowledge of the wake structure generated by multiple seal
whiskers in a group hinders the capability to design whisker-inspired high-
sensitivity underwater flow sensors. The goal of this research is to understand
the wake of multiple seal whiskers of various configurations at the Reynolds
number similar to which harbor seal whiskers are subject to. Experiments will be
conducted in a water tunnel using Particle Imaging Velocimetry (PIV). The
results will provide insights of how individual wakes interact with each other
and if the interaction is beneficial to suppress the vortex shedding. This
research will fill the gap of understanding the wake structure that multiple
real seal whiskers create. Ultimately knowledge will be used to develop high-
sensitivity underwater flow sensors for AUVs operating in a complex environment.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.