* 1713940
* EAPSI: The Impact of Atmospheric Pollution on the Quality of the Runoff from Storm Events
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kristen Wyckoff, Wyckoff                 Kristen        N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

As the Human population increases, so does the demand for clean drinking water.
Rooftop runoff is largely underused, but has the potential to provide potable
water to communities where treated water is limited or unavailable. In order to
determine the potential for rooftop runoff to serve as a small-scale drinking
water source, research must be conducted on the impact of atmospheric pollution,
specifically smog, on the quality of the runoff from storm events. Many Chinese
residents lack access to potable water, and regularly face the additional
hardship of heavy atmospheric pollution. Professor Yungfeng Yang of Tsinghua
University School of Environment, an expert in environmental microbiology and
microbe mediated biogeochemistry, will serve as host and mentor. Results from
this project could assist in making rooftop runoff a viable water source for
people in heavily populated and polluted cities throughout the world, including
the USA.

A lack of access to water, complexes to store and treat water, and exposure to
excessive amounts of fluorine and arsenic in groundwater sources prevent many
Chinese citizens from acquiring clean drinking water. Utilization of rooftop
runoff has the potential to improve the accessibility of water sources. In
addition to lacking clean water, Chinese citizens' health is also heavily
impacted by atmospheric pollution which is influenced by industrial activities,
traffic, and coal burning. Particulate Matter (PM2.5) accumulates in the form of
smog, which has been proven to reduce visibility, contribute to acid rain, and
get trapped in lungs. Beijing, China and Los Angeles, United States both sit in
a bowl-like depression which can trap particulates that can cause smoggy
conditions; however, regulations have proved successful in preventing Los
Angeles from having serious smog problems. Poor atmospheric conditions
negatively impact rooftop runoff quality and produces bacterial contamination.
This study will investigate the impact of atmospheric conditions on rooftop
runoff quality in Beijing in order to develop rooftop runoff collection and
treatment techniques that could provide potable water to Chinese residents in
need.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. Graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.