* 1713694
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Simulations of Merging Black Holes and Neutron Stars
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 05/31/2019
* USD 5,016.00

The primary scientific objective of the research is to use Blue Waters to
theoretically underpin and improve the ability of NSF's LIGO experiment to
extract from observed gravitational waves the rich information that the waves
carry. More general objectives are to contribute to our understanding of
relativistic astrophysical systems, and contribute to the development of
numerical methods and computer codes capable of carrying out robust and accurate
simulations of highly dynamical curved space-time. This program will also serve
as a training ground for young physicists and astrophysicists. It will teach
them a wide variety of computational techniques. The research will include
developing a next-generation supercomputer code called SpECTRE that will use
radically new techniques. SpECTRE will be released as open source and simulation
outputs will be made publicly available. This will enable other research to
benefit from the work. Group members will vigorously pursue a wide range of
activities that reach out to the broader scientific community and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will consist of two components. In the
first, the researchers will run numerical simulations on Blue Waters using the
Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC) to produce gravitational waveforms for binary
black holes. These waveforms, which take weeks to months to produce, will then
be used to develop a numerical surrogate model that can evaluate a single
waveform in milliseconds while retaining the accuracy of full numerical
simulations; this surrogate model will be suitable for direct use in LIGO data
analysis. The second component will develop, and run on Blue Waters, the new
code SpECTRE for numerical relativity simulations with matter and radiation.
SpECTRE uses Discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods. It is designed for
high accuracy and high scalability on current and future supercomputers by
following a novel task-based parallelization paradigm. SpECTRE's initial version
already implements general-relativistic magnetohydrodynamics. It will be
upgraded to handle the dynamical spacetimes of neutron star-neutron star and
black hole-neutron star mergers and stellar collapse, including nuclear-theory
based hot equations of state and neutrinos. SpECTRE will be applied to compute
high-accuracy ultra-long neutron star inspiral simulations on Blue Waters to
predict gravitational wave signals and help LIGO constrain the nuclear equation
of state.