* 1713961
* EAPSI: Computationally Efficient Adaption to Data Irregularities
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Michael Spece Ibanez, Spece                   Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The PI and others have shown that in many interesting cases (e.g. in estimating
a linear regression model or learning to play a game well) learning from highly
irregular data (e.g. macroeconomic variables or the observed play of an
unpredictable opponent) is not much harder than learning from regular data,
provided exponentially high computational resources. The PI will therefore
investigate computationally efficient methods for learning from data with
minimal assumptions about its regularity. Though statistical machines are often
designed for specific forms of theoretical regularity, theoretical assumptions
are often violated in practice. In particular, it may not be known how
representative of the future data is. For example, macroeconomic data is highly
irregular yet is typically modeled as if it were. Fortunately, when learning
from highly irregular data is not much harder than learning from regular data,
methods optimal for irregular data will automatically be competitive with (if
not vastly superior to) methods designed specifically for regular data, even
when the data happens to be regular. Designing learners for irregular data is
therefore a statistically sound and flexible approach, but one which requires
computational advances, as is to be addressed by the proposed work. This
research is part of an international collaboration with Dr. Jian Li at Tsinghua
University, China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work relies on methods
from online regret-based learning, namely expert ensembles. In the experts
setting, learning takes the form of doing almost as well as the best expert in
hindsight, and is accomplished by mixing the experts' advice. The PI proposes to
attain computational efficiency by limiting the feedback from the ensemble, via
sampling a subset of experts every period of time. In that way, per period, less
resources are spent on computing expert advice and less read and writes on
updating expert weights; and the storage required for expert weights grows more
slowly over time. In particular, limiting feedback to one expert per period
corresponds to the bandits setting from the literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program award supports summer U.S.
graduate student research, and is jointly funded by the National Science
Foundation and the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.