* 1714038
* EAPSI: Investigating Public Experiences of Insecurity and Risk
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kara Griffin, Griffin                 Kara           B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

In 2020, Tokyo will host the Summer Olympic Games, a high-profile event of local
and global significance which will likely garner a great deal of media attention
and will represent a massive security undertaking. By most measures, Japan is
considered a relatively safe country with a very low crime rate. However,
violent crimes do occur, including a small number of mass killings in recent
years. Additionally, contemporary ethnographic research in Japan has highlighted
experiences of social and economic precarity in connection with economic
recession and the 2011 earthquake/nuclear disaster, among other factors. This
project will investigate experiences and perceptions of insecurity, specifically
in relation to crime and policing in Tokyo, Japan, in the lead up to the 2020
Olympic Games. This study will improve understanding of the experience of
insecurity, risk and policing within democratic societies, particularly in
contexts which require domestic security forces to prepare for large-scale
events that involve international tourism and the potential threat of terrorism.
The research will be conducted at Sophia University?s Institute of Comparative
Culture in Tokyo, Japan in collaboration with Dr. David Slater, an expert in
urban studies, disaster, social movements, and social media.

The main objective of this study is to gain a clearer understanding of how
insecurity is experienced, addressed and prepared for by residents, police, and
visitors in Tokyo, Japan, including how people construct narratives of
insecurity and risk and where or with whom they locate the source of that risk.
This study will utilize ethnographic research methods, including semi-structured
interviews, a survey instrument, and content analysis of print and digital
media. The researcher will visit a sample of local police substations in four
neighborhoods in Tokyo, to include three urban areas and one suburban area. In
each area, the researcher will seek to observe police-community interactions
within the neighborhood as well as at public events. The researcher will conduct
interviews and surveys with participants from each area. The researcher will
also collect and analyze media such as pamphlets, news stories, and digital and
social media pertaining to police-community interactions relevant to the
construction and experience of insecurity.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.