* 1714046
* EAPSI: Portable Smartphone-Based Detection of Vaspin Protein in Human Blood Serum
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Tiffany-Heather Ulep, Ulep                    Tiffany-HeatherT
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Vaspin, a protein secreted from fat tissue, has been shown in numerous studies
to be closely related to type 2 diabetes, insulin sensitivity, obesity, and
glucose metabolism. Aptamers, highly stable and specific molecular probes, can
be linked onto gold nanoparticles for its use in biosensor applications. This
project will explore the use of this vaspin targeting gold nanoparticle in a
paper microfluidic assay as a cheaper, disposable, and portable colorimetric
indicator. A smartphone-integrated capability will be designed, developed, and
used for image analysis to detect vaspin concentration in human blood serum. The
aim of this project is to fabricate a portable, low cost, point of care (POC)
system that can be used for diagnostics and monitoring for insulin-related
metabolism in areas of low resources and accessibilities. This research will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Man Bock Gu, a noted expert on aptamer
production, characterization, and analysis, at Korea University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In numerous studies Vaspin, an adipocytokine secreted from
adipose tissue, has been closely related to type 2 diabetes, insulin
sensitivity, obesity, and glucose metabolism. Aptamers, oligonucleotide
sequences that can specifically bind to certain molecules of interest, have been
a topic of interest in biosensors for its biocompatibility, low cost, and
chemical stability in comparison to antibodies. A newly-developed cognate duo
aptamer (V1 and V49) targets vaspin at two different binding sites, further
increasing specificity and affinity. Aptamer-gold nanoparticle (aptamer-AuNP)
conjugations were used as biosensors to detect and measure vaspin concentrations
in both buffer solutions and human blood serum dilutions via sandwich-type
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) gold chips. Using this vaspin targeting aptamer-
AuNP conjugate, a colorimetric paper microfluidic assay can be developed with
use of smart-phone-integrated capabilities and analysis. The aim of this project
is to fabricate a portable, low cost, point of care (POC), diagnostic system
that will be beneficial to areas of low resources and accessibility to
healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asian and Pacific
Summer Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student
and is jointly funded by NSF and the National Research Foundation of Korea.