* 1714000
* EAPSI: Using Natural Hydrology as a Benchmark for Urban Stormwater Management
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Charles Stillwell, Stillwell               Charles        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Hydrology is the study of water movement through land surfaces and the
atmosphere. Hydrology in cities is very different from natural landscapes.
Impervious surfaces, such as road and buildings, do not allow water to soak into
the ground, resulting in higher amounts of surface runoff. Surface runoff from
impervious surfaces, called stormwater, can cause flooding, pollute streams, and
degrade downstream ecosystems. The goal of this project is to determine the
flows of water in natural landscapes, then use these values as "benchmarks" for
managing urban hydrology. If urban hydrology is able to replicate natural
hydrology, the environmental problems associated with stormwater will be
minimized. Prof. Tim Fletcher and Dr. Matthew Burns from the University of
Melbourne will be hosting this research project. Prof. Fletcher and Dr. Burns
are both experts in urban hydrology and stormwater management, and their
research is well cited across the globe.

Hydrologists categorizes water movement into four general pathways:
precipitation (P), evapotranspiration (ET), infiltration (I), and surface runoff
(R). The water balance equation is defined as P = ET + I + R. The first
objective of this project is to determine the annual volumes of P, ET, I, and R
for multiple watersheds in southeast Australia. Then, these values will be
assigned as urban hydrologic benchmarks. For instance, the volume of water that
infiltrates in natural watersheds should be matched in urban watersheds. The
benefit of this project being conducted in southeast Australia is the semi-arid
climate, which contrasts similar studies that are being conducted in humid
regions. Understanding the different hydrologic patterns as a function of
climate will inform stormwater engineers, city planners, and environmental
regulators on how to set appropriate urban stormwater management goals for their
respective locations. This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by the NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.