* 1714083
* EAPSI: New Approaches to Ground-Truthing Economic Models for Energy Policy Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Cecilia Springer, Springer                Cecilia
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Validating the accuracy of economic models is particularly difficult for complex
policy questions, such as the question of how energy regulations affect the
labor force of regulated firms. Economic impacts on the workforce are a concern
for policymakers everywhere seeking to implement clean energy policies while
preserving jobs. This project seeks to explore the performance of a type of
economic model frequently used for policy to identify the environmental and
economic impacts of a proposed energy consumption regulation in China, where
clean energy and economic growth are top policy priorities. This research will
validate the model results using novel social science methods to incorporate
local knowledge and expertise. This project will be conducted at Tsinghua
University in collaboration with Professor Teng Fei, a noted expert on climate-
energy policy in China. The findings from this project will be useful for
economists and policymakers seeking accurate models and well-designed energy
policy.

China's prioritization of clean and efficient energy includes a recent effort to
establish an energy consumption trading system. Computable general equilibrium
(CGE) models are frequently used to simulate economy-wide policy effects,
including emissions and labor impacts. However, external validation of CGE model
predictions is understudied. To estimate the distributional labor effects from
China?s energy consumption trading scheme, this research will use a China-level
version of the Trade Integrated Global Energy and Resources (TIGER) model, an
existing global dynamic CGE model, to generate an initial set of results against
which the model can be validated. These results will inform a novel expert
elicitation process to generate subjective probability distributions for
sensitivity analysis. They will also inform discussion of the mechanisms through
which distributional impacts are predicted to occur and if these comport with
the model?s structure, enhancing ongoing efforts to improve energy policy and
modeling.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.