* 1714561
* Discovery of the mechanisms enabling morphological and functional integrity of the plant ER
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Federica Brandizzi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

In addition to providing commodity materials and fuels, plant cells are an
essential source of oxygen and nutrients to humans. Like all eukaryotes, the
life of plants depends on the function of specialized structures, known as
organelles that populate the subcellular environment. An essential organelle,
whose function and morphology are largely conserved across eukaryotes, is the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). This project seeks to understand how the ER
establishes and maintains its functional and morphological identity. As the ER
is at the core of the cell's biosynthetic machinery, and because significant
variation in ER biology exists among eukaryotes, studying the ER within model
plant systems provides an essential foundation to improve plants as primary
providers of useful biomolecules and to support life on this planet. This
project on the Arabidopsis ER will also provide new fundamental knowledge that
will influence the study of other organisms that share mechanisms underlying ER
biogenesis with plants. In addition, it will provide societal benefits through
education of the next generation of scientists, engagement of high-school
students and teachers in research, and by communicating discoveries in plant
science and their impact on the society through outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central question in cell biology is how
organelles establish and maintain their identity. Due to its rich, mutable
morphology, the ER is a wonderful model to explore this question. The ER adopts
an intricate web-like architecture via cytoskeleton-driven remodelling and
anchoring of subdomains to the plasma membrane (PM). However, the mechanisms
underlying ER shape as well as differentiation and function of ER-PM subdomains
are largely unknown, especially in plants. The research will capitalize on the
discovery of novel components of the Arabidopsis proteome that control ER
morphology and interaction with heterotypic membranes, including the PM. Using a
suite of advanced live-cell imaging approaches, functional genomics analyses and
mathematical modeling, the project will characterize a novel plant ER shaper,
define the molecular composition of the ER subdomains interacting with the PM
and determining how such subdomains influence the biosynthesis and deposition of
the extracellular matrix. The results will help create a new paradigm of plant
ER structure and function. Since ER integrity and function are inextricably
linked and the ER presents species-specific features, this research promises to
significantly advance basic understanding of plant ER architecture and function,
and provide a framework for comparative insights into ER biology among
eukaryotes.