* 1714267
* Solutions to the Core-Collapse Supernova Problem from Theory
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Adam Burrows, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2022
* USD 407,206.00

Core-collapse supernovae dramatically announce the deaths of massive stars and
the births of neutron stars and black holes. During this violent process, many
different types of physics come into play to determine whether and how the star
explodes. However, the precise mechanism of explosion has not been unambiguously
determined, and this fifty-year-old conundrum is one of the central remaining
unsolved problems in theoretical astrophysics.   A research team at Princeton
University will conduct three-dimensional computer simulations of core-collapse
supernovae with the goal of determining the explosion mechanisms, energies, and
the morphologies and masses of the residual neutron stars left after the
explosion.  The three-dimensional models of the core-collapse explosion process
will be among the most complete, detailed, and realistic ever performed and will
serve as crucial benchmarks for comparisons with observations of supernovae and
their products.  These simulations produce video products, which the researchers
will adapt into talks and displays for the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will conduct three-dimensional radiation/hydrodynamic simulations
of core-collapse supernovae using the newly-developed and published code FORNAX,
which incorporates state-of-the-art microphysics and methodologies.   The
research team has found that all their models with realistic physics explode by
the neutrino heating mechanism.  They will build on this result to further study
the effects of many-body corrections to neutrino-nucleon cross sections, pre-
collapse seed perturbations, general relativity, and inelastic neutrino-electron
and neutrino-nucleon scattering on the supernova explosions.  In addition, this
proposal supports the experimental nuclear physics program by exploring
nucleosynthesis in astrophysical explosions, the properties of the neutrino, and
the equation of state and phases of dense nuclear matter.  A synoptic version of
the numerical results derived will be made available on the web.