* 1714963
* Collaborative Research: Systematic Investigation of the Structure, Dynamics, and Energetics of Hydrogen Bonds and the Protein Interior Using Ketosteroid Isomerase and Model Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Jason Schwans, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 39,964.00

Proteins function by greatly accelerating specific chemical reactions
(catalysis), binding to proteins and other ligands, as well as via other
mechanisms; these actions are essential for all life processes. The physical
mechanisms used for enzyme catalysis, protein regulation, and protein
interactions, are fundamental to understanding protein function. Addressing
these physical mechanisms at the deepest level, requires understanding basic
forces and the interplay of structure, dynamics, and energetics within proteins.
Thus, such understanding will have widespread and profound consequences. As
understanding these underlying forces and the resulting macromolecular behaviors
has been enormously challenging and will require multidisciplinary, highly
integrated approaches, this project involves a multidisciplinary team with broad
and deep expertise that allows the use, integration, and innovation of
approaches encompassing structure-function and energetic probes. This proposal
will aid in training of a diverse and highly impactful group of young scientists
with scientific rigor and integrity. This project will also implement a novel,
highly impactful integration of research between graduate research universities
and underrepresented minority-rich undergraduate institutions, synergistically
enhancing research and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
the enzyme ketosteroid isomerase (KSI) as an exceptionally powerful system to
pose and dissect fundamental questions in protein function and energetics, and
will use KSI and other protein and model systems to understand hydrogen bond
structure and energetics and to determine the interplay of structure, dynamics,
and energetics throughout a protein scaffold. The hydrogen bond may be the most
fundamental interaction in biology and yet our understanding of and ability to
predict the structures, energetics, and dynamics of hydrogen bonds and hydrogen
bond networks are remarkably limited. In this research a quantitative and
predictive model for hydrogen bond structure will be developed that focuses on
factors that determine hydrogen bond length and coupling; hydrogen bond
energetics within protein environments. The wide array of approaches utilized
include site-directed mutagenesis and unnatural amino acid incorporation;
protein structure and dynamics via NMR and cryo- and room temperature X-ray, and
neutron crystallography; atomic-level energetics, dynamics, and catalysis via
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM); and assessment of small molecule
hydrogen bond (H bond) energetics and ligand association via 1H NMR, isothermal
titration calorimetry, small molecule neutron and X-ray diffraction, and quantum
mechanics. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.