* 1714534
* Precision RR Lyrae Distances for a Population II Route to the Distance Scale
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Massimo Marengo, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 279,321.00

The investigator will analyze the change in brightness of a special class of
variable stars, called RR Lyrae stars. These pulsating stars are very common in
the old stellar clusters found in the Milky Way and other galaxies. These stars
are important because they can be used as yardsticks to measure distances on
scales of thousands to millions of light years. Distances are measured using a
relation between their variability period (the time it takes these stars to
cycle through their brightness variations), and their intrinsic luminosity. This
"period-luminosity" relation makes them ideal "standard candles." The
investigator will better calibrate measurements of distances across the
universe, using RR Lyrae stars. Accurate distances are needed to better
understand the expansion rate and the age of the cosmos. They also hope to
achieve a better understanding of the physics of stars and of the stellar
clusters where RR Lyrae stars are found.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Iowa State
University Physics &amp; Astronomy department engages the local community with
numerous outreach activities. The student-run Planetarium shows, in particular,
draw large crowds of all ages, and are offered monthly to the public, as well as
to the local K-12 schools (over 40,000 students in Ames and nearby school
districts). This project will refurbish telescope equipment previously located
off-campus at the Fick observatory facility (now discontinued) making it
available to the public as part of a new in-campus, wheelchair-accessible,
observation site for outreach activity (e.g., star and Sun parties following
planetarium shows for the general public and K-12 students). They will also
prepare two new modules for planetarium shows based on the science of variable
stars and the cosmological distance scale as a way to communicate to the local
community an example of federally-funded research that is done at Iowa State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since Henrietta Leavitt discovered the Cepheid
Period-Luminosity relation in 1908, pulsating stars have been an invaluable
distance estimator. More than a century after this groundbreaking result,
Cepheids are still the cornerstone of an ever more intricate cosmological
distance ladder. Recent results from the Planck mission, however, reveal some
tension between the value of cosmological parameters derived from the study of
the cosmic background radiation with respect to "direct" measurements still
crucially relying on Cepheids. With this project, the investigators aim to
provide an alternative Population II stellar distance estimator based on the
newly re-discovered period-luminosity relation of RR Lyrae variables and the
availability of high precision parallaxes from the Gaia spacecraft. The
investigators will (1) calibrate the Period-Luminosity-Metallicity (PLZ) and
Period-Wesenheit-Metallicity (PWZ) relations for a large sample of Galactic RR
Lyrae at optical and infrared wavelengths; (2) use the calibrated RR Lyrae PLZ
and PWZ relations to precisely measure Galactic globular clusters' distances and
calibrate globular clusters' distance scale estimators, enabling new fundamental
tests of stellar evolution and stellar population models; and (3) validate the
observational PLZ and PWZ relations against recently developed nonlinear, time-
dependent, convective, hydrodynamic models of RR Lyrae stars calculated for a
broad range of metal abundances. The investigators have demonstrated their
ability to perform these measurements by completing the analysis of two of the
target clusters. The investigators have all the data and models crucial to this
project.