* 1714050
* EAPSI: The Temperature Sensitivity of Greenhouse-gas Producing Bacteria at High Latitudes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Grace Cagle, Cagle                   Grace
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The study to be conducted in this award will determine how soil bacteria that
produce the greenhouse-gas methane are affected by a long-term 1-2°C increase in
temperature. This project is a collaboration with the Northeast Institute in
Changchun, China, and will build upon a growing knowledge base on the impacts of
temperature increase on wetlands working with host researcher Dr. ChangChun
Song. The Institute has operated open-top warming chambers, which warm the
inside 1-2°C (comparable to what is forecasted for climate change over the
coming decades), for almost 10 years. By studying the effects of these chambers,
the researcher will determine how a long-term temperature increase impacts
different types of bacteria that produce and consume methane. High-latitude
wetlands store an enormous amount of carbon that could be released to the
atmosphere, and high latitudes are predicted to experience a greater temperature
increase than low latitudes in the coming years. However, there is some
uncertainty on how methane emissions from northern wetlands will be impacted by
a warmer climate due to changes in the methane-producing and methane-consuming
patterns of these bacteria. This field-based experiment is a unique opportunity
to better understand how greenhouse gas emissions from wetlands will be impacted
by climate change.

The quantity of methane production in high-latitude wetlands under elevated
temperatures is a matter of scientific uncertainty, but relevant to the global
carbon cycle. Understanding the fluxes and drivers of greenhouse gas emissions
is a goal of the Northeast Institute, which maintains the open top chambers, and
monitors greenhouse gas emissions, soil chemical properties, and vegetation
parameters. My experiment will utilize the experimental warming chambers, as
well as sampling and experimental protocols previously established by the group,
to determine the impact of 1-2°C warming on methane-cycling bacterial activity
during the summer. The 8-week study will include 1) collecting soil samples from
open-top warming chambers operated by the Northeast Institute of Geography and
Agroecology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and 2) analysis of the expression
of functional genes involved in microbial production and oxidation of methane
using the reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)
technique. Results will help predict future rates of methane emission from high-
latitude wetlands that are extremely sensitive to climate change. The data will
also further a comparative study on responses of indigenous microbial community
to global climate change in the Sanjiang Plain (cold and organic-rich) and
Mississippi River Deltaic Plain (warm and organic-rich) wetlands. The results
from this study will show how methanogen activity is affected by long term
warming under field conditions.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.