* 1714888
* Understanding the role of membrane environment on membrane protein association and function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Blake Mertz, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2021
* USD 394,846.00

Membrane proteins act as the gatekeepers of the cell, playing an intimate role
in most biological functions. A detailed molecular description of how the
membrane environment modulates association of membrane proteins will provide
fundamental insights into biological processes that are linked to fields such as
biomedicine, pharmaceuticals, and solar energy harvesting. Computational
modeling approaches will be utilized to determine the effect of the cellular
membrane on the association of membrane proteins. The advantage of computational
modeling is that it can characterize the dynamics of association and
dissociation of membrane proteins. The membrane protein to be studied is
proteorhodopsin (PR), a protein common to microbial life in marine ecosystems.
PR is a critical to survival of these microbes and their role in the carbon
cycle may directly affect the ability of the ocean to accommodate fluctuations
in the atmospheric environment. This project aims to model the effects of
changing cell membrane composition on the function of PR and its association
into multi-component complexes. Results will aid the biophysics community in
their understanding of the relationship between cell membrane environment and
protein function. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students,
the proposed research will involve professors and students from primarily
undergraduate institutions in West Virginia. These students are from Appalachia,
a traditionally underrepresented region in STEM fields. Thus, this project will
develop long-term relationships for increasing student involvement in scientific
research and encourage them to pursue careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this project are the
characterization of the structure-function relationship of proton pumping in
proteorhodopsin, the identification of key monomer-monomer interactions during
oligomerization of this protein, and, determination of the relationship between
membrane environment and oligomerization. Several molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation approaches will be used to pursue each objective. Determination of
conformational changes in PR activation will elucidate how proton pumping
occurs. Characterization of the relationship between membrane composition and
oligomerization will reconcile conflicting hypotheses on oligomerization of PR
in native-like and non-native membrane environments. This will also contribute
to knowledge of membrane protein interactions in systems such as bacterial inner
membranes. Insights obtained will provide a general framework for interpretation
and design of detergent-membrane protein experiments, since detergent
solubilization is the de facto method for these studies.