* 1714481
* Does Incorporating Choices into Motivation Interventions Increase Their Effectiveness?
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Emily Rosenzweig, Rosenzweig              Emily          Q
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship provides an
opportunity for an emerging scholar to extend innovative research in educational
psychology in order to improve students' motivation and achievement in science.
There is a shortage of qualified professionals with skills in advanced science
and mathematics, and one critical factor that impacts students' performance in
these fields is their motivation to learn. Two particular motivational issues
are students not believing they are capable to succeed in their courses (i.e.,
having low perceived competence) and students not thinking that what they are
learning is useful (i.e., having low utility value). Researchers have addressed
these issues by developing educational intervention activities in which students
write reflectively about topics related to their perceived competence and
utility value. These interventions have improved students' motivation and
achievement in many college math and science courses, and they require few
resources to implement. Thus they are efficient ways to target academic outcomes
at critical transition points in students? pursuit of mathematics and science
careers. However, research on reflective writing motivation interventions is
somewhat novel and it is possible that these interventions can be even more
impactful than they are currently. One way to make them more impactful might be
to give students choices while they are completing the interventions. Prior
research has found that students show higher motivation and achievement if they
are given choices about what to learn. The purpose of this postdoctoral
fellowship is to explore whether adding choices during reflective writing
motivation interventions strengthens the effectiveness of the interventions with
respect to college students' motivation and achievement in biology.

The fellowship provides support to assess this objective in three studies, which
utilize different types of choices. Study 1 uses secondary data analysis to
assess the effects of giving students a choice of task during an intervention.
Data analysis is based on a previously conducted intervention that aimed to
improve students? perceptions of utility value. Some students were assigned to
write a letter intended to increase utility value, other students were assigned
to write a personal essay intended to increase utility value, and a third group
of students chose between the two tasks. Study 2 examines the effects of giving
students a choice of type of reflective writing motivation intervention, using a
laboratory experiment. Some students are assigned to write an essay intended to
increase their utility value, other students are assigned to write an essay
intended to increase their perceived competence, and a third group of students
choose between the two types of writing exercises. Study 3 replicates the Study
2 design in a classroom setting. The objectives of all three studies are: (1) To
examine the effects of the intervention conditions compared to a control group,
as well as to compare the effects of the choice versus non-choice intervention
conditions, on students? perceived competence, utility value, and science
achievement; (2) To examine whether the different conditions benefit students
more who start the intervention with lower motivation to learn or lower prior
achievement; (3) To test whether three mechanisms (engagement, perceptions of
autonomy, or likelihood of choosing tasks that correspond to students'
motivational deficits) explain any beneficial effects of choice. These studies
contribute to prior literature by demonstrating whether different types of
choice strengthen the impact of motivation interventions, and by shedding light
on mechanisms and factors that might moderate the effects of these
interventions. More broadly, this work is important because it aims to improve
low-cost programs that can encourage more students towards careers in science
and mathematics.