* 1714032
* EAPSI: Finding Evolutionary Links and Genes in Adaptive Radiations of Gobies by Targeted Gene Capture
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kendall Johnson, Johnson                 Kendall        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Gobies comprise a very large, complex group of fishes found in nearly all
aquatic ecosystems. Species in this group can serve as models for ecological and
evolutionary specializations that have allowed them to radiate into many
different habitats. The relationships of gobies will be examined using a new
genetic technique that will also reveal the genes that enable adaptations of
these species to their environments. Additionally, it will advance understanding
of how organisms can change over time and radiate to fill new roles in nature.
This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Chenhong Li, who
developed the original technique, at his laboratory in Shanghai Ocean
University. Dr. Li is a leading researcher in systematics who has developed many
genetic and statistical tools for the field. His laboratory has access to all
equipment and technology needed for gene-capture in this project.

This project will investigate the deep phylogeny of gobies within the Gobiidae
using a new gene-capture method to identify signals of directional selection in
protein-coding genes across a broad suite of taxa. The ability to combine the
identification of loci under selection with the resolution of difficult
relationships via gene capture offers unprecedented opportunity to increase the
scientific community?s understanding of adaptive radiations and speciation in
general. The research funded by this award will accomplish this by creating a
high-resolution phylogeny of the Gobiidae using a large number of protein-coding
markers obtained by target-enrichment gene capture coupled with broad taxon
sampling.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.