* 1714490
* Analysis of Partial Differential Equations Arising in Population Genetics and Singular Stochastic Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Ru-yu Lai, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 129,858.00

The project is motivated by applications to population genetics and
optimization. The first objective of the project is to predict the changes of
the genic characteristics of a population, and to compute fundamental biological
quantities, such as the expected time before extinction and fixation of a gene
type in the genome. The successful implementation of this research program is
expected to have a direct impact on understanding medical disorders caused by
single-gene mutations in genetics and of evolutionary trees in phylogenetics.
The second objective of this research is centered on a family of open problems
in optimization with applications to communication networks, spacecraft control,
and economics, among others. A suitable framework to analyze such questions is
the theory of singular stochastic control, where the goal is to design a
controlled process that performs a task with minimum cost in a random
environment. This project will help to gain insight into the construction of
optimal execution policies and in the evaluation of minimal costs in networks.
The PI will continue to involve both undergraduate and graduate students in her
research program, to promote the visibility of women and underrepresented groups
in the mathematical community, and to organize conferences at University of
Minnesota and American Mathematical Society meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the first part of the research program is to build a comprehensive
regularity theory for a class of degenerate elliptic operators defined on
singular manifolds capable of taking into account a wide range of factors that
impact the genetic evolution. The PI aims to develop novel analytic and
probabilistic methods adapted to the particular degenerate features of these
operators and the geometry of the non-smooth manifolds, where such problems are
formulated. She expects that this research will have further implications in
harmonic analysis, mathematical finance, and in probability. The second topic of
the project seeks to develop the mathematical foundations to address the
questions of interest related to the identification of optimal execution
policies in singular stochastic control problems. The PI pursues a program to
advance our understanding of the regularity theory of a wide class of second
order Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations with gradient constraints. This research
will entail the development of novel techniques that forge into the theories of
nonlinear equations and nonlinear boundary conditions of oblique type, and
require careful boundary estimates adapted to the non-smooth domains appearing
in this framework.