* 1714809
* Structure of the Nucleon and Few-Body Nuclear Systems with Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Gerassimos Petratos, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 548,307.00

This award is to support a suite of nuclear physics experiments at the Jefferson
National Laboratory (JLab). Electrons from the JLab accelerator will be
scattered from light mass nuclear targets, the scattered electrons will then be
detected in instruments located in the experimental halls. By measuring the
number of scattered electrons at different positions in the detectors, the PIs
will be able to compare the experimental results to theoretical models that
predict the internal structure of the proton and neutron. Knowing this structure
plays a critical role in understanding the strong force, one of the four
principal forces that determine the structure of the universe as we know it. The
supported investigators will play a major, leading role in all aspects of the
project, namely the preparation of all experimental apparatuses to be used, the
acquisition of the experimental data, the data analysis, and the publication of
the results. The graduate students involved will be exposed to and gain
expertise with both hardware and software development. The project is expected
to make significant contributions to the advancement of basic nuclear physics
science, and to graduate education and training. The project will result in
doctoral dissertation topics on related science and instrumentation, which
provide the experience needed for careers in education, medical physics,
homeland security, technology, and research at national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported research will provide
fundamental information on the momentum distributions of the quarks inside the
proton and neutron, by using a novel method of directly comparing measurements
of inelastic electron scattering from helium-3 (3He) and tritium (3H) nuclei.
This method is complementary to that used in past experiments at the Stanford
Linear Accelerator Center, which showed the existence of point-like "partons"
inside the nucleons, by utilizing inelastic electron scattering from hydrogen
and deuterium (2H) nuclei. The new method will eliminate inherent theoretical
uncertainties present in the Stanford method. The results will test long-
standing predictions of the Quark Model of the nucleon, and of Quantum
Chromodynamics, the theory describing the interactions between quarks and
gluons. A secondary goal of the award is the improvement and re-submission of a
proposal to be submitted to the JLab Proposal Advisory Committee for a
measurement of the elastic charge and magnetic form factors of the 3H nucleus,
which will provide critical information for the development of a "standard
model" describing the structure and dynamics of the simplest, lightest nuclei in
nature.