* 1714925
* The consequences of early language experience and literacy for adult learning and brain structure
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Natsuki Atagi, Atagi                   Natsuki
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Bilingual adults who were exposed to two
languages in early childhood vary considerably in the ways in which they learned
the two languages and the skill they have as adults to speak and read both
languages. Despite the increasing presence of two languages in the US, there is
little known about the consequences of variation in early bilingual experience
for the minds and brains of adult speakers. With the support of the National
Science Foundation, PI Atagi will conduct postdoctoral studies at the University
of California, Riverside, a Hispanic Serving Institution that represents the
diversity of language experience required to investigate this issue. The planned
research examines bilingual college students with a wide range of language and
literacy skills to understand how childhood language experiences and literacy
shape language learning abilities, cognition, and brain structure. This project
asks whether learning to read in both languages in childhood has consequences
for later language learning abilities in adulthood and for the brain structures
that have been shown to be affected by bilingualism. The growing number of
heritage speakers in the US who grew up with a home language other than English
makes understanding the significance of these early experiences a high priority
for promoting the academic and economic success of a more diverse group of
learners. The planned research also contributes to the training of a diverse
group of language and cognitive neuroscientists by the inclusion of
undergraduate research students, most of whom are themselves bilingual. By
identifying how brain structure may vary for individuals who differ in their
early language and literacy experiences, the project will also inform our
understanding of how the brain adapts to experience.

The adult brain is far more adaptive to new language learning than previously
thought. Studies examining language processing show that learning a new
language, even as an adult, is a dynamic process that changes the way the native
language is processed. However, little is known about the long-term consequences
of early language experiences for adult language learning and cognition, and
even less is known about how different types of bilingual language experiences,
such as literacy in two languages, affect adult learning and cognition. The
proposed research exploits cognitive neuroscience methods to examine how early
bilingual language experiences and literacy shape later adult language learning,
cognition, and brain structure. This study examines and compares bilingual
college students who are heritage speakers to early simultaneous bilinguals and
English-monolinguals. Heritage speakers are a diverse group of bilinguals, who
vary in the skill they have as adults to speak and read both languages. In the
first year of the award, the planned research focuses on identifying the
language and literacy experiences that have the greatest impact on later adult
learning; thus, the planned research initially examines the behavioral
consequences of early language and literacy by using a battery of language,
literacy, and cognitive measures, as well as a new word learning task. In the
second year of the award, a set of structural imaging studies will examine adult
learners drawn from those groups and to determine the replicability of the
initial findings. Findings from this research will begin to identify the aspects
of early bilingual experience that may shape the mind and brain. Though
bilingualism has been found to be associated with structural differences in the
brain, particularly in cortical thickness, the structural correlates of
bilingual literacy are yet unknown. Additionally, by examining literacy, a
distinct type of language experience that exposes learners to more varied words
and sentence structures than speech, this research begins to disentangle what
cognitive and neural consequences early spoken language experience and literacy
have for adult bilinguals. If literacy in two languages is found to benefit
language learning and cognition in ways distinct from speaking two languages, it
may suggest that literacy in both languages should be better supported in
bilingual students.