* 1714183
* RUI: Probing QCD with a Magnetic Field
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Vivian Incera, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 02/29/2020
* USD 203,169.00

Normal matter is made of atoms consisting of electrons and nuclei, nuclei are
made of neutrons and protons, and neutrons and protons are made of up and down
quarks. In contrast, the cores of compact stars are so dense that a tiny box
containing neutron-star matter would have a mass of about 13 million tons.
Neutrons in such a dense medium get so squeezed that the quarks inside them
become liberated. Quite often this stellar dense matter will be also subjected
to very large magnetic fields. A special class of neutron stars, known as
magnetars, can have surface magnetic fields that are fifteen orders of magnitude
stronger than the magnetic field of the Sun and even much stronger fields in the
core. In this context, an important goal of the nuclear theory community is to
understand the phases of matter under extreme conditions in order to make
theoretical predictions that can then be compared with observational data and
experimental measurements made on Earth. In particular, this project will
explore the properties of matter under extreme conditions by studying results
from heavy-ion collision experiments carried out at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion
Collider (RHIC). Experiments at RHIC produce matter at temperatures a thousand
times hotter than the Sun and magnetic fields eighteen orders of magnitude
stronger than the Sun's magnetic field. Graduate and undergraduate students will
have ample training opportunities, and the skills acquired in this project will
serve them well in their future professional careers.

Despite the wealth of information gained in recent years about the properties of
the quark-gluon plasma (QGP) formed in heavy-ion collision experiments, much
still remains to be discovered. For example, it is known that the QGP formed in
these collisions is a perfect liquid, but the state of matter that replaces the
"liquid" QGP at higher densities and lower temperatures is yet to be understood.
This project will investigate some of these problems. The PI and his
collaborators will use nonperturbative methods in quantum field theory to
investigate the influence of a magnetic field on the transport properties of
quark matter at high temperatures and low densities (in the QGP phase); and at
high densities and low temperatures, where the spatially inhomogeneous phase
known as the Dual Chiral Density Wave phase and axion electrodynamics are
realized. To carry out this project, the PI will formulate the kinematics of
relativistic plasmas with anomalous transport associated with a Berry curvature
produced by quark quasiparticles with asymmetric spectra. In addition, the PI
will extend recent work on inverse magnetic catalysis in the weak-coupling limit
to the strong-coupling regime case to complete the analogy between analytical
calculations beyond the mean-field approximation and lattice QCD results. These
studies will give new insights on probing the microscopic physics of high dense
quark matter through macroscopically observable signatures. These studies will
help establish connections between nuclear physics, condensed matter, and
astrophysics.