* 1714931
* African American Adolescents' Daily Engagement at the High School Transition: Contributions of Classroom Experiences and Racial and Gender Identity and Stereotypes
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Olivenne Skinner, Skinner                 Olivenne       D
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2019
* USD 75,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Academic engagement is related to academic
achievement and other indicators of success in life, but there are noticeable
declines in academic engagement across adolescence. Understanding academic
engagement among African American youth is particularly important because, as
group, they are at risk for not reaching their full academic potential. The
purpose of this project is to contribute to theory and knowledge on academic
engagement among African American adolescents. Specifically, this work seeks to
illuminate the processes through which and conditions under which youth?s
classroom experiences are related to positive academic engagement for two
gendered academic domains: math and English. In addition to knowledge
contributions, the study also incorporates several methodological innovations
and will provide research training opportunities for minority and first
generation undergraduates who are interested in psychological research with
minority populations. According to self-determination theory (SDT), when youth
experience autonomy, competence, and relatedness in school, they also exhibit
stronger academic engagement. Thus, understanding African American youth?s
classroom experiences is a critical step toward promoting their academic
engagement. Most prior research on SDT has operated with the assumption that
these processes are universal, and an important step is to identify
characteristics of African American youth that may play a role in the links
between self-determination processes and academic engagement. Further, academic
subjects are gendered, with STEM subjects marked as stereotypically masculine
and verbal domains as feminine, a pattern that also highlights the importance of
moving beyond an assumption of universality to study self-determination
processes in the context of specific subject matter. Finally, this study departs
from the focus of prior research on individual differences in self-determination
experiences and achievement in its effort to capture the dynamic nature of
within-individual processes across time and
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the training period, the fellow will use a
daily diary method to test links between day-to-day variations in African
American youth?s classroom experiences of autonomy, competence, and relatedness
in math and English classes and corresponding within-person variations in
youth?s behavioral, cognitive, and emotional engagement and academic
achievement. Moving beyond universalistic approaches and using an ethnic
homogeneous design to capture sources of variation among African American youth,
results will add to research on academic achievement, an area in which many
adolescents are failing to reach their full potential. By focusing on both race
and gender, the fellow aims to contribute to understanding of how these social
categories may intersect for African American youth in ways that have
implications for self-determination processes and academic outcomes. Finally, a
daily diary design will provide novel insights into youth's academic engagement
by documenting how it varies as a function of daily classroom experiences, youth
characteristics, and context (math versus English class) and how it is linked to
longer-term academic outcomes like course grades.