* 1714195
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Inference for Spatiotemporal Climate Impacts on Complex Ecosystems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Erik Van Vleck, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2022
* USD 446,680.00

In many hierarchical dynamical systems, synchrony between multiple fluctuating
variables (i.e., correlations or other similarities in fluctuations between
variables through time) is more important than the individual variables
themselves. For instance, a neuron may fire only when all of its input neurons
fire synchronously, or the electrical grid may crash only when demands of
multiple users become synchronized, producing total-usage spikes. Ecosystems can
show this type of dependency on synchrony. Ecosystems include multiple trophic
levels, with population signals from lower levels often being spatially
aggregated to affect higher levels and human concerns such as fisheries. For
instance, a predator is only harmed if its prey are scarce over its whole
hunting area. And human fish exploitation is only reduced if fish decline
synchronously everywhere. For systems of this type, it is primarily the
synchronous components of signals that matter in the average signal that affects
the next hierarchical level - non-synchronous components tend to cancel in the
spatial average. Thus, spatial synchrony of population dynamics is very
important to ecosystem dynamics generally. Spatial synchrony of population
dynamics has been widely observed in organisms as diverse as mammals and
protists, at distances up to thousands of kilometers. Synchrony is closely
related to large-scale outbreaks and shortages. Synchrony has conservation
implications because populations are at greater risk of simultaneous extinction
if they are simultaneously rare. But in spite of the importance of synchrony in
ecology, possible impacts of climate change on synchrony are very little
studied. In this context, climate change constitutes not just warming, but also
changes in other statistical aspects of environmental signals. It is also
unknown the extent to which synchrony, and climate-change-induced changes
therein, can be transmitted through predator-prey interacts and hence throughout
entire food webs in complex patterns. The goals of this research are: (1) to
develop mathematical models and statistics to build understanding of how
potential changes in synchrony induced by climate change will ramify through
complex ecosystems; (2) and to develop mathematical models and use them to
understand the consequences of changes in synchrony for a widely observed
empirical pattern called Taylor's law, a phenomenon fundamental to spatial
ecology and applied in a variety of areas including fisheries management,
conservation, and agriculture. Researchers will also strive, as time allows, to
understand the consequences of changes in synchrony for species extinction
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet goal (1) above, the researchers will perform
stochastic-process modeling in a network context, to understand how changes in
synchrony should theoretically cascade through complex species interaction
networks; and will develop statistical methods combining wavelets and
statistical path analysis, to be used to help infer how synchrony cascades
through empirical interaction networks. A vector autoregressive moving average
modelling framework will be constructed consisting of multiple habitat patches,
with several species interacting within patches, migrating between patches, and
being affected by a stochastic environment in each patch. For each species
independently, dispersal and/or environmental synchronizing effects can be
independently set to act directly on the species as synchronizing influences, or
not. A given species may also be synchronized through its interactions with
other synchronized species. The primary utility of the models is to make it
possible to derive analytically, for each species, the relative importance of
these direct and trophically-mediated synchronizing effects, thereby
understanding the nature of trophic transmission of synchrony through the
network. To meet goal (2) above, researchers will use the theory of ergodic
stationary stochastic processes to represent population levels at different
locations. If time allows, consequences of synchrony for extinction risk will be
assessed through mathematical analysis within a classic stochastic matrix
modelling framework, expanded to represent multiple populations across space.