* 1714369
* Nonlinear Approximation in Geometric, Harmonic, and Anisotropic Settings with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Pencho Petrushev, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 162,941.00

1714369 Petrushev

Many areas ranging from physics, geodesy and geomagnetism to cosmology and to
data analysis require efficient representation and approximation of the
underlying functions in the natural topology of the targeted application. The
capturing of physical phenomena and data structure occurring at various scales
requires approximation from locally supported multiscale systems relative to the
application domains. Moreover, these approximation methods should be amenable to
fast and accurate computation. Thus project aims at increasing our fundamental
understanding of nonlinear approximation theory and its applications in three
main directions. The first objective is to develop nonlinear approximation
theory in various geometric and nonclassical settings from multiscale systems
that are well adapted to the targeted applications. The second aim is to study
the approximation of harmonic functions from shifts of the Newtonian potential,
with targeted applications to geodesy, geomagnetism, and physics. The third goal
is to approximate functions that are smooth on domains in space separated by
smooth curves or surfaces. Here the idea is to use adaptively anisotropic
multiscale dilations of the space, which enable the approximation tool to adjust
to curved singularities.

A core objective of this project is the development of nonlinear n-term
approximation from frames and other systems in various geometric and
nonclassical settings, such as on the sphere, ball, box, and simplex with
weights, as well as in the context of Lie groups and Riemannian manifolds. All
these settings are covered by the general framework of Dirichlet spaces with
heat kernel having Gaussian bounds. The key point of the approach is to give us
the freedom of dealing with (a) different geometries, (b) compact and noncompact
spaces, and (c) spaces with nontrivial weights, and at the same time to allow
for the development and frame decomposition of Besov and Triebel-Lizorkin spaces
with complete range of indices. The development of the underlying heat kernel
theory and nonlinear n-term approximation from localized systems are basic
aspects of this theory. Another goal of this project is the development of
nonlinear approximation of harmonic functions on the d-dimensional ball from
linear combinations of shifts of the Newtonian potential. This includes the
complete characterization of the rates of approximation and the development of
an effective algorithm that achieves the rates of best approximation.
Anisotropic phenomena appear in various contexts in analysis, partial
differential equations, and in applications. For instance, functions are
frequently very smooth on domains in space separated by smooth curves or
manifolds. The project aims at resolving this kind of singularity of functions
by using the framework of anisotropic multiscale dilations, which may change
rapidly from point to point at any level and in depth. The main strands of this
approach are (i) the development of an algorithm for rapid construction of best
or near best dilation matrices leading to optimal sparsity, (ii) the
construction of highly localized anisotropic frames and their use in nonlinear
approximation of functions.