* 1714569
* Role of Protein Methylation in Translation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Steven Clarke, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 09/30/2023
* USD 800,000.00

This project will investigate a novel aspect of stucture and function of the
ribosome - the main molecular machine in the cell that makes new proteins. The
ribosome itself contains several dozens of proteins, and it is only recently
that these proteins were shown to be biochemically modified by methylation.
Mutant yeast cells lacking those methylation enzymes usually show defects in
ribosomal biosynthesis and altered sensitivity to antibiotics. The project will
identify every enzyme that performs ribosome methylation reactions in yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and investigate the role these enzymes play in
modifying ribosome activity. The project will train undergraduates and graduate
students in scientific rigor and critical thinking prepare them as future
researchers, teachers, mentors, and leaders in science policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically investigate how the
translational apparatus responsible for cellular protein synthesis is enhanced
and regulated by modification of ribosomal and elongation factor proteins. It
will focus on protein methylation reactions using baker's yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae), where powerful genetic tools are available. Mutant yeast cells
lacking these enzymes display abnormal ribosomal biosynthesis, altered
sensitivity to antibiotics, and defects in the fidelity of protein synthesis.
Based on the initial success in identifying enzymes that modify cytoplasmic
ribosomal proteins in yeast, as well as the effects of the loss of these
enzymes, this research will determine how similar enzymes can work in
mitochondrial ribosomes in yeast. The newly discovered process of protein
histidine methylation in translation will also be studied. Finally, the role of
protein methylation in the elongation factors that not only ensure that the
correct aminoacyl-tRNA is matched to the mRNA codon but that guide the movement
of free and peptidyl-tRNA will be investigated. The majority of the work will be
conducted by undergraduate and graduate students. Senior graduate students
mentor undergraduates as well as junior graduate students, under the direct
supervision of the Principal Investigator. Another component of the broader
impact of this work is continuing development and teaching of courses in the
responsible conduct of research, including an intensive research integrity
course for both undergraduates and graduates that stresses experimental design,
data analysis and statistics, reagents authentication, and figure preparation.