* 1714755
* Collaborative Research: Subduction below extreme sedimentation - A multidisciplinary transect from the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta to the IndoBurma Backarc
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Doug Prose, EARTH IMAGES FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2021
* USD 184,984.00

This project involves a study of a poorly understood and unique geologic
setting: a subduction zone that has an exceptionally large amount of sediment,
the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta (GBD). The GBD is the world's most extreme example
of sediment accretion, with sediments up to 19 km thick in the Bengal Basin. The
region has little volcanism compared to other subduction zones and a large
seismic risk; recent GPS results indicate that this highly oblique plate
boundary is locked with the potential for a M8.2 earthquake that could affect
more than 140 million people. The project is motivated by the question of how
the extreme sedimentation affects subduction phenomena. The project will involve
a multi-institution, multi-nation collaboration involving scientists from
Bangladesh, India and Myanmar, Singapore, Norway, and the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will focus on three major issues: 1) Neogene
growth of the accretionary prism and earthquake hazard; 2) Crustal shortening
and deformation across the IndoBurma Ranges and Burma Basin; and 3) Incoming
fluid content and volcanism. To address these issues, they will deploy seismic,
GPS, magnetotellurics and gravity sensors in a transect from the deformation
front to the backarc in the Bangladesh-India-Myanmar Array (BIMA). Structural
geology, geochemistry and thermochronology will provide additional constraints.
They will use a broad program of numerical and laboratory modeling to integrate
and interpret the results from the multiple data sets. This end-member case of
extreme sediment subduction has broad implications for understanding these
issues at all subduction zones.