* 1714508
* CSR: Small: Enabling In-Network Computation for Datacenter Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 475,000.00

The emergence of programmable network devices, such as reconfigurable switches
and customizable network accelerators, along with the increasing traffic of data
centers, motivate the use of in-network computation. Today's latest
reconfigurable switches support configurable per-packet processing, including
customizable packet headers, customizable packet processing, and the ability to
maintain state inside the switch. Given this hardware trend, this project seeks
to offload computing operations onto intermediate networking devices for a broad
range of application services ranging from distributed storage to big data
analytics and distributed machine learning, thus optimizing the operations of
data center applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's primary goal is to
build a programming framework to enable in-network computing using programmable
networking hardware. In designing and implementing this framework, the project
addresses the following research questions: First, the project tackles how to
best integrate reconfigurable switches and network accelerators into a data
center network, as they both have limitations in terms of the operations that
they can execute. Second, a key project goal is to identify what is a simple and
yet powerful programming application program interface (API) for these
programmable devices to support a broad class of applications. Third, another
key challenge addressed is how to keep state and computations on these devices
consistent with that of application servers, and how to co-design data center
applications to take advantage of the performance benefits enabled by this
paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve the efficiency of
network-intensive data center applications that are used by literally billions
of people around the globe on a daily basis. By improving their efficiency, one
can dramatically reduce the cost of data center services as well as make it much
cheaper for new public services to be developed. Collaborators at various switch
vendors are equal partners in this effort, providing access to new technologies
as well as assisting in technology transfer to the industry. The project will
integrate undergraduate students as researchers, and material from the project
will be incorporated into both undergraduate and graduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key project goal is to publicly release
developed software and enable a rich set of high-performance data center
applications. All software will be made public as soon as they are developed,
hosted via GitHub at https://github.com/arvindkrish/incbricks and accessible
from the project website at the University of Washington. A mirrored version of
this repository will be maintained at the University for at least five years.