* 1714053
* EAPSI: Probing the Pre-Eruption Magmatic Record of the Youngest Toba Tuff through Titanium and Aluminum Diffusion Timescales in Quartz Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Casey Tierney, Tierney                 Casey          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Constraining how quickly the enormous magma reservoirs that feed volcanic
supereruptions can mobilize from a quiescent state to a state capable of
eruption is important for overall understanding of large magma systems and the
volcanic hazard they may pose. To probe the timescales of magma mobilization,
chemical information contained within crystals that were growing in a magma
reservoir can be extracted and used to gain insight into the timing of any
changes in the conditions and processes that occurred in the magma reservoir
before eruption. This project will investigate potential signals of magma
mobilization in the pre-eruption growth record of quartz crystals found within
the enormous (2800 km3) Youngest Toba Tuff (YTT), which explosively erupted
74,000 years ago from Toba Caldera in Sumatra, Indonesia. The research will be
conducted at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore under the mentorship
of Dr. Fidel Costa, a noted expert in applying chemical zoning and diffusion in
crystals to timescales of magmatic system processes.

Striking near-rim zonation present within YTT quartz crystals under
cathodoluminescence imaging is indicative of distinct of periods of growth for
these crystals, and often with a final stage under different temperature or
pressure conditions. The boundary between crystal zones represents a chemical
disequilibrium where, through time at magmatic temperatures, elements will
diffuse in the crystal to attain equilibrium. For this project, titanium and
aluminum concentrations will be measured across crystal zone boundaries to
determine the magnitude of diffusional relaxation that has occurred. The yielded
diffusion profiles will then be matched to numerically modeled time-dependent
profiles to determine the time elapsed between zone growth and eruption. The
coupling of titanium diffusional relaxation with that of aluminum in quartz is a
novel approach that should yield more robust temporal constraints and
interpretations than one element alone. The results will allow the researchers
to determine the onset of near-eruption quartz crystallization events, and the
potential relation of these events to YTT magma system mobilization and/or
alternative processes, such as syn-eruptive decompression.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.