* 1714923
* Hormones, social dynamics, and variation in responses to inequity in social group settings
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sarah Brosnan, Benitez                 Marcela        E
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. The current project allows for a
groundbreaking new way to study social behavior in intact, interacting social
groups, both in captive and wild social groups, while collecting information on
underlying biological mechanisms to these behaviors. Humans vary in how they
respond when receiving less than expected (e.g. contrast) or less than a social
partner (e.g., inequity). Inequity is almost ubiquitous in human society, and
negative reactions to inequitable circumstances can exacerbate already bad
outcomes. Thus, it is critical to better understand what causes humans to
respond to negative outcomes, and what factors can exacerbate or, ideally,
ameliorate, these reactions. Humans responses to violated expectations are
influenced by both individual factors, such as personality, dominance, and
hormone profiles, and social factors, such as societal norms, kinship, and
relationship quality. One of the weaknesses of human studies is that these
factors are often examined independently, with little regard for how social and
individual contexts influence one another. Part of the challenge is practical,
human societies involve so much complexity that it is nearly impossible to
follow all of each individuals' relationships over an extended time period and
to control all the circumstances that occur in freely acting social groups. Yet,
such a socially typical paradigm is necessary to fully understand how individual
differences and real-world group dynamics influence our decisions. This research
will address this problem, examining decision-making in a socially relevant,
group-level context in capuchin monkeys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capuchin monkeys
are an ideal species in which to study this question. Like humans, capuchins are
highly social, routinely cooperate, and systematically experience strong
negative reactions to inequity. Yet, all previous studies on inequity in
nonhuman primates have been conducted in captivity and the vast majority have
relied on how individuals behave when in pairs separated from their social
group. As a result, whether capuchins maintain their aversion to inequity in
more social and ecologically relevant environment remains unknown. This research
will examine response to inequity in intact social groups both at in captivity
at Georgia State University and in the field in Iguazu Argentina, allowing the
unprecedented opportunity to compare social decision-making in a controlled
laboratory setting and in a real-world context. This research has two main
goals. First, by implementing a novel, experimenter-free paradigm that allows
for remote group testing, this research will investigate how social factors and
group dynamics influence responses to inequity. Second, this study will examine
the biological mechanisms mediating response to inequity within a social
context. Recent research in humans has highlighted the importance of hormones in
influencing decision-making behavior. However, again, these studies have been
conducted outside of the context of a normal social environment. This research
will integrate noninvasive measures of fecal hormone analyses to assess how
individual differences in response to inequity may be mediated by hormone
levels, or an interaction between hormones and social context, that will be
insightful in uncovering the biological mechanisms driving individual
differences in decision-making behavior.