* 1714044
* EAPSI: Studying Hysteresis of Three-Phase Flow in Porous Media Using Dynamic X-ray Microtomography
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Douglas Meisenheimer, Meisenheimer            Douglas
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research will study the real-time fate and transport of three fluid phases
flowing together through a rock matrix. The visualization of these fluid-flow
experiments will be accomplished with fast x-ray microtomography which can
produce 3D images of the position of fluids within a rock while fluids are being
injected or drained from the system. The interaction between multiple fluids in
porous media is important to understand because it controls many environmental
processes (e.g. enhanced oil recovery, geologic CO2 sequestration, oil spill
remediation in an aquifer) which affect human and environmental health. This
project will be conducted at the Australian National University in Canberra,
Australia in collaboration with Dr. Adrian Sheppard, a pioneer in the fast x-ray
microtomography technique and a leading scientist in cutting-edge mathematical
techniques for 3D image processing. Few laboratories are equipped for fast x-ray
microtomography; therefore, the available instrumentation and expertise of the
collaborators provide a unique opportunity to accomplish this research.

This research will utilize advances in image visualization and processing to
collect unique data sets and calculate state variables relevant in modeling
three-phase fluid flow systems in porous media (e.g. concurrent water, air, and
oil transport in a contaminated aquifer). The project will use the Australian
National University's state-of-the-art lab-based x-ray system and advanced
mathematical reconstruction algorithms that utilize a priori information to
collect microtomography scans in real-time. State variables of capillary
pressure, fluid-fluid interfacial area, and Euler characteristic will be
calculated from 3D images which have been previously unobtainable for three-
phase flow systems under dynamic flow conditions. These state variables are
important in two-phase flow and will be correlated to better understand the
physics of three-phase flow and will also be compared with previous data sets
obtained under quasi-equilibrium conditions to understand the effect of flow
conditions on fluid topology and interfacial area generation.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.