* 1714322
* Collaborative Research: Deep-sequencing analysis of edited metabolic pathways to uncover, model, and overcome the epistatic constraints upon optimization
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Norma Martinez-Gomez, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 106,200.00

Biological systems are inherently complex, composed of many interacting
molecules. Even with knowledge of the properties of each individual component,
these interactions create a challenge for predicting how changing one enzyme
will affect the performance of the whole pathway and the growth of the organism.
While synthetic biology has the potential to address certain critical national
challenges, progress is hampered by a lack of mathematical models that can be
used to guide the optimization of complex biological systems. This project works
to optimize the mechanisms that incorporate carbon gas into cell material in
order to develop an efficient organism for generating products such as fuels or
pigments. The results of the experiments will then yield a computational model
capable of predicting the effects of novel combinations of genes. This project
will directly lead to specific improvements in an important biotechnological
platform, while simultaneously demonstrating a generic approach to using
computational biology to efficiently apply the power of genome editing to a
variety of synthetic biology challenges. The project also will develop and
disseminate computational tools via websites, publications, workshops, and
classes that will make it easier for students and researchers to simulate and
analyze metabolic networks to learn about fundamental quantitative concepts that
underlie their function, and provide interdisciplinary training for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows.

Epistasis represents a critical challenge to optimizing biological systems. When
mutational effects upon growth or product generation depend on the genetic
background, assessing performance across the entire parameter space of any
system of realistic size quickly becomes impossible. There is an immediate need
for two linked developments: empirical techniques that can rapidly generate and
assess rational, combinatorial variants, and kinetic modeling techniques to
incorporate these data and to make predictions. This project will use this novel
approach to optimize the function of the high-efficiency ribulose monophosphate
(RuMP) pathway that the team has successfully introduced into the model
methanol-consuming organism, Methylobacterium extorquens. In this project, gene
editing of a plasmid-encoded suite of enzymes will be performed along with deep
sequencing to rapidly assess the fitnesses of a quarter-million genotypes with
combinatorial variation in nine dimensions of expression. The resulting
epistasis data, combined with direct measurement of intracellular metabolite
concentrations for select variant combinations, will be used to infer the
numerous parameter values in the kinetic model, which then will be utilized to
predict which regions of parameter space would be more or less flexible. These
parameter spaces will be targeted and compared in a second round of editing,
experimentation and evaluation.

This project is funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.