* 1714003
* EAPSI: Counting Pointed Dynamical Systems Over Finite Fields
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Joseph Gunther, Gunther                 Joseph
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This award supports research to advance understanding of fundamental constraints
on dynamical systems over finite fields. Such systems play an important societal
role; for example, they are central to the elliptic curve cryptography currently
in use around the world. A dynamical system consists of an ambient space, along
with a rule for how points in that space move over time. Dynamical systems
constructed from finite fields are objects of fundamental mathematical interest,
both theoretically and for practical applications to modern cryptography, which
involves iterating a process that is hopefully hard to reverse. In studying a
dynamical system, one often tries to understand the points that are the most
well-behaved: fixed points, which do not move over time, and more generally
periodic points, which are eventually brought back to their original locations
after a finite amount of time. This project is a computational exploration of
quadratic dynamical systems over finite fields, which are the simplest
interesting examples, efficiently defined by a single quadratic polynomial. The
researcher will examine patterns in the counts, over different finite fields, of
how many systems having a given structure of periodic points there are. The
project will be conducted at University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia,
under the mentorship of Professor John Roberts. This provides access to their
uniquely strong group of researchers working in computational number theory
along with important high-performance computating
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These counts of pointed dynamical systems will
be conducted over 1) finite fields whose sizes are growing powers of a fixed
prime number, and 2) finite fields of prime size for different primes. The first
approach can be used, thanks to the Lang-Weil estimates, to examine the
irreducibility of reductions of dynatomical curves, important geometric objects
which parameterized the dynamical systems under consideration. The second
approach has been fruitful in recent years in uncovering unexpected geometric
structure in sequences of moduli spaces, in particular in the case of the moduli
space of curves of fixed genus with an increasing number of marked points. The
researcher will also apply recently developed closed-point sieve methods to
questions of how closely degree d polynomial dynamical systems can approximate
random d-to-1 dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award under the East
Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S.
graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of
Science.