* 1714654
* HIV Post-Treatment: Stochastic Modeling Insights on Rebound and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Jessica Conway, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 270,040.00

Antiretroviral drug therapy (ART) can effectively control HIV infection and
reduce plasma virus load from very high, to undetectably low, levels. Cessation
of ART is typically followed by rapid viral rebound (VR) to the high, pre-ART
viral loads. However, recent observations give nuance to this pattern. In 2013,
reports of the "Mississippi baby" emerged, a child born with HIV and treated
with ART shortly after birth. Taken off ART at 18 months of age, she appeared to
be cured, only for HIV to reappear and rebound after 27 months. The following
year, a study revealed 14 HIV+ individuals - "the VISCONTI cohort" - who
continued to control their HIV infection in spite of having stopped ART 4-10
years before study publication. These and other examples show that in some HIV-
infected individuals, there can be significant delays between the suspension of
ART and VR. Delayed VR and the potential for post-treatment control (PTC) are
poorly understood but suggest exciting possibilities for treatment of HIV
without ART, thereby avoiding side effects and high drug costs. Further, people
who control HIV to undetectable levels are unlikely to infect others, thus
reducing the possibility of HIV transmission in the population as a whole. The
goal of this project is to better understand delayed VR and PTC by analyzing the
following three questions: Under what circumstances will ART suspension lead to
delayed VR or PTC? If ART suspension leads to VR, when will it occur? Can one
predict when a patient can control infection off ART,
permanently?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to this project is the development of
mathematical viral dynamics models to investigate VR in HIV+ individuals
following cessation of ART. The models will make use of stochastic multi-type
branching processes, since viral populations in treated patients are small.
While stochastic methods have been used to model viral dynamics, the standard
approach is extensive simulation; in this project, the Principal Investigator
will emphasize the derivation of analytic results instead, thereby introducing
novel tools from applied probability to viral dynamics problems. The objectives
will be addressed by stochastic models that will increase in complexity and
realism through projects focusing on different biological aspects of HIV control
such as immune responses. These models will be validated using data on HIV
dynamics and VR from experimental collaborators and published data. The aim of
this modeling is to better characterize VR dynamics, make testable predictions
on times to VR, and gain insights into post-treatment control of HIV. In medical
settings, the models developed may inform clinical guidelines with regards to
ART suspension, lead to optimizing testing frequency during the ART interruption
to detect VR and predicting PTC or "HIV remission" where VR will be unlikely.