* 1714219
* Purine catabolites as inducers of bacterial gene expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Anne Grove, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2023
* USD 690,624.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand mechanisms by which bacterial
pathogens adapt to a plant host environment, an adaptation that is essential for
bacterial survival and virulence. Knowing such mechanisms is required for
efforts to control disease progression. When a bacterial plant pathogen infects
a host, a tug-of-war ensues in which the plant host aims to defend itself
against the pathogen; the bacterium in turn responds, often subverting host
defenses by utilizing host-derived signals to trigger expression of traits that
promote survival and virulence. This project focuses on mechanisms by which
bacteria detect and respond to such host-derived signals. In addition, the
program integrates research and teaching by offering the opportunity for both
graduate and undergraduate students to acquire research experience and
proficiency in modern molecular biology techniques. Graduate students will be
integral to developing these research projects and in disseminating results. For
undergraduate students, many of whom will be recruited from programs that
promote inclusion and diversity, the opportunities for independent research will
complement their regular course curriculum, prepare them for advanced studies,
and contribute to the development of a competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hosts produce reactive oxygen species as a
defense against a bacterial infection. One of the enzymes responsible for this
oxidative burst is xanthine dehydrogenase, which converts hypoxanthine to
xanthine and xanthine to urate. The first objective of this project is to
address the hypothesis that the xanthine and urate that are produced by host
plants during a bacterial infection function as diffusible signals to induce
differential gene expression in the bacterium. The second goal is to investigate
the role of the transcription factor PecS in sensing xanthine and urate and
controlling gene expression. A combination of RNA-seq and ChIP-seq will be
implemented to identify the PecS regulon, and phenotypes of pecS mutant strains
predicted from RNA-seq data will be determined. Focusing on the plant pathogen
Agrobacterium fabrum, the virulence of wild-type and pecS deletion mutant
strains will be compared. Defining host-derived signals and the mechanisms by
which these diffusible messengers trigger expression of virulence-associated
genes in plant pathogens will ultimately facilitate development of antibacterial
agents.