* 1714795
* Regulation of nutrient homeostasis by the CBL-CIPK calcium-based sensor-kinase network in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sheng Luan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

To grow, plants require a balanced supply of mineral nutrients, but today's soil
is often deficient in essential minerals such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potassium. To overcome this deficiency, crop production in the U.S. relies
heavily on use of fertilizers, but this practice is costly, endangers
environmental health and is not sustainable, because some essential minerals
(e.g., potash and phosphorus rock) are limited natural resources. An alternative
and more sustainable agricultural strategy is to breed plants with new traits
that allow them to grow in nutrient-imbalanced soils. To achieve this goal
requires better understanding of the molecular networks that allow plants to
respond and adapt to the constantly changing status of mineral nutrients in the
soil. This project addresses this need by studying how plants maintain the
proper balance of mineral nutrients when the soil contains too much or too
little of specific minerals, thus establishing the knowledgebase for breeding
crops with little need of fertilizers, thereby supporting sustainable
agriculture. The project will have educational benefits by providing
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to engage in research and
by reaching out to high school students, including those from underrepresented
groups, through workshops and other activities aimed at promoting interest in
biology research.

Plants constantly monitor nutrient status in the soil and maintain nutrient
homeostasis by controlling ion transport across the plasma membrane (for uptake)
and tonoplast (for storage). However, the signaling mechanism linking nutrient
status in the soil and membrane transport in plants is largely unknown. The
principal investigator's laboratory discovered the CBL-CIPK calcium signaling
network that functions in a number of cellular pathways including nutrient
sensing. In addition to the CBL-CIPK pathway that targets a voltage-gated
potassium channel in response to low-potassium status, their recent studies
further identified a complex CBL-CIPK network that regulates vacuolar transport
of a number of mineral nutrients. The findings have thus connected the CBL-CIPK
signaling mechanism to the regulation of transport activities at the plasma
membrane and vacuolar membrane, the two most important sites for nutrient
homeostasis in plant cells. The proposed research will test the major hypothesis
that a large network of "CBL-CIPK-ion channel" interactions couples the
environmental signals, e.g., changes in nutrient status, to the regulation of
membrane transport and nutrient homeostasis in plant cells. A combination of
approaches, including genetic, biochemical, and electrophysiological tools, will
be used to address connections of the CBL-CIPK network to potassium and
magnesium homeostasis with a focus on understanding the coordination between the
plasma membrane and vacuolar pathways in the regulation of nutrient balance.