* 1714730
* Investigating the immunological and life history consequences of early life adversity
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Noah Snyder-Mackler, Schneider-Crease        India
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship award
supports a rising scholar in the investigation of how early life adversity
triggers trade-offs in immunological development in a nonhuman primate model,
the gelada. Trauma during infancy, the most vulnerable period of life, affects
both immediate and long-term health. The negative consequences of adversity
during early life may arise, in part, from tradeoffs that occur when limited
resources are preferentially allocated to the most important developmental
processes. One such tradeoff is thought to be between investment in the two
primary components of the immune system: the innate and acquired immune
responses. Innate immunity is thought to be energetically cheap relative to
acquired immunity; thus, adversity in early life is expected to stimulate
increased investment in innate immunity. The prioritization of innate immunity
and the de-prioritization of acquired immunity may facilitate the immediate
survival of infants exposed to early life adversity, but may also make these
infants more vulnerable to certain diseases in adulthood. Understanding the link
between early life adversity and immune development is thus central to endeavors
to protect the health of vulnerable populations. Geladas are an exceptional
model species for this investigation because some infants are exposed to early
life adversity in the form of attacks from adult males during infanticide
attempts. This research fills critical gaps in the current understanding of the
mechanisms and evolution of human social experience and health, and thus
provides information that is imperative to efforts to mediate the consequences
of childhood adversity. Furthermore, this fellowship comes at an exciting time
in the development of powerful tools in genomics and eco-immunology that can be
applied in studies of wild populations. The funded research thus plays an
important role in advancing the use of these techniques for research on both
human and non-human animal populations.

Early life adversity plays an essential role in shaping the trajectory of
survival, health, and reproductive success in adulthood. The long-lasting
consequences of early life adversity may be due to trade-offs between
physiologically costly processes - often a zero-sum game in the face of limited
resources. The two arms of the immune response are prime candidates for trade-
offs given that immunity is both costly and necessary for survival, and such
trade-offs are expected to affect the ability of organisms to effectively combat
pathogens. Organisms may therefore react to adversity by prioritizing the
development of one component of the immune system at the expense of another. The
innate immune response, which acts as a generalized "first-responder" to
pathogens, is hypothesized to carry lower costs than the acquired immune
response, which acts in long-term pathogen recognition and combat. Cues of
adversity are thus expected to stimulate increased investment in innate immunity
relative to acquired immunity. The present research investigates the impact of
early life adversity on immunological development in geladas. Two
characteristics of geladas (Theropithecus gelada) make them an excellent system
in which to examine how early life adversity affects immune activation and
disease susceptibility: (1) A high percentage of infants experience early life
adversity in the form of the threat of infanticide from new immigrant males,
which should select for adaptive plasticity in infants that allows them to
preferentially allocate energetic resources to enhance immediate survival; (2)
Geladas are infected by two sets of pathogens, each of which triggers distinct
immune activity. The present study addresses two questions in this system: (1)
Are there tradeoffs between innate and acquired immunity for infants that
experience early life adversity? and (2) What are the long-term consequences of
immunological tradeoffs during development? This research takes an
interdisciplinary approach to answering these questions, using novel tools in
eco-immunology and genomics to non-invasively quantify immune activation and
disease risk in geladas under long-term study in the wild. These health data
will be paired with longitudinal life history data to evaluate the impact of
adversity in early life on immunological development and adult health and
fitness. By quantifying variation in components of health, immune function, and
reproductive success in these geladas, this research examines the evolutionary
basis of the physiological consequences of early life adversity.