* 1714153
* Beta-Decay Experiments along the R-Process Path
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Alfredo Estrade, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 239,999.00

Most of the chemical elements in the universe have been produced by nuclear
reactions in stars through a series of different nucleosynthesis processes. The
basic features of most of these processes are well understood. However, one of
the major open questions is the nature of the rapid neutron capture process
(r-process), which is responsible for the synthesis of roughly half of the
chemical elements heavier than iron, such as gold and uranium. Astronomical
observations indicate that the r-process has been active since the early stages
of galactic history, and takes place in explosive stellar environments, such as
supernovae explosions or mergers between two neutron stars, but the details are
not known. A major difficulty to understanding the r-process is that it involves
unstable isotopes. The main activities supported by this award are a series of
nuclear physics experiments to measure the radioactive decay properties of
isotopes directly relevant to r-process studies. The experimental setup combines
state-of-the-art radiation detectors for beta-decay measurements (BRIKEN), and
unstable isotope beams at leading accelerator facilities in Japan (RIBF) and the
US (NSCL). The nuclear data obtained in this experiments will allow for a more
precise comparison between astronomical observations and astrophysical models
for the r-process. Another objective of this proposal is to provide students,
especially at the undergraduate level, with opportunities to become involved in
research activities at the forefront of nuclear physics, and contribute to
expanding the number of students pursuing scientific careers in the US. For this
reason, the proposal includes research projects that will take place at the
campus of Central Michigan University (CMU), such as the development of
radiation detectors and computational work with astrophysical models of the
r-process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific outcome of this award will
be the measurement of beta-delayed neutron emission probabilities (Pn values)
with the new BRIKEN detector setup at the Radioactive Ion Beam Factory in RIKEN,
Japan. The BRIKEN setup consists of an active stopper detector for radioactive
ion beams, surrounded by a high-efficiency neutron detector composed of He-3
proportional counters. The experiments currently planned will measure Pn values,
as well as decay half-lives, for neutron-rich isotopes spanning the regions from
the N=50 shell closure up to the rare-earth elements. These experiments will
provide new nuclear data for r-process models in regions of the nuclear chart
relevant to address important questions of r-process nucleosynthesis, such as
the astrophysical conditions that lead to the formation of elements in the A=130
abundance peak. The award will also support the participation of CMU researchers
in r-process experiments at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory
(NSCL) at Michigan State University. This includes a project to develop
reaccelerated beams of heavy isotopes around the N=82 region, with the potential
to open new opportunities for r-process measurements.