* 1714479
* New Frontiers in Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* John Beacom, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2021
* USD 495,000.00

The visible universe is shaped by nuclear physics processes: stars are powered
by fusion reactions, supernova explosions produce and disperse chemical
elements, and the remnants of these explosions accelerate cosmic rays. A better
understanding of these processes will help us understand the origin, nature, and
fate of the universe. A new way forward is possible using neutrinos, tiny
particles with zero charge, almost no mass, and only weak interactions.
Neutrinos are abundantly produced in astrophysical systems. Detecting neutrinos
is extraordinarily difficult, but, when successful, it reveals physical
conditions of sources that are otherwise hidden by thick layers of matter that
neutrinos can readily stream through. The PI will lead a broad program of
theoretical work on neutrino astrophysics, closely coupled to experimental
physics and observational astronomy, designed to lead to breakthroughs in
understanding astrophysical systems and neutrino properties. Junior scientists
will be trained on cutting-edge research as well as the general skills needed
for career success. The PI and junior scientists will work to share results with
the public and to broaden participation by under-represented groups, including
the Deaf and Hard of Hearing.

The PI will lead a research program with four thrusts: solar neutrinos,
supernova burst neutrinos, the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB), and
the particle properties of neutrinos. These thrusts are closely connected.
Eventual outcomes could include sensitive new tests of solar-neutrino mixing and
first detections of certain solar-fusion processes; precise observation of a
Milky Way supernova and detailed probes of the hot proto-neutron star and
possible black hole formation; and unprecedented new tests of neutrino
properties plus the discovery of new neutrino sources. An especially important
goal is the detection and interpretation of the DSNB, the cosmic flux of
neutrinos and antineutrinos produced by the core collapses of massive stars over
billions of years. The latter is now within reach because Super-Kamiokande has
accepted the Beacom-Vagins GADZOOKS! proposal to add gadolinium to enable
neutron detection. Detection of these neutrinos will probe the cosmic star
formation history that shapes the visible universe and builds up chemical
elements, neutron stars and black holes, and cosmic rays. It would also probe
the neutrino emission per core collapse that reflects the physics of neutron
stars and black holes, and allows new tests of neutrino properties.

This project is co-funded by the Division of Physics and the Division of
Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate of Mathematical & Physical Sciences.