* 1714334
* SHF:Small:Scalable Spiking Neural Network Enabled by Probabilistic and Non-Volatile Synapses
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Samuel Pagliarini, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Scaling of integrated circuit (IC) technology for the past few decades has
enabled remarkable advancement of computing speed and power efficiency, as
evidenced by the cellphone computing that we hold in our hands today that would
have corresponded to room-size super computers not long ago. But as we reach
fundamental physical limits for scaling to smaller feature sizes at nanometer
scale, massive amounts of data can be stored, and super-fast circuits can
process the data, such that now the overall system performance is limited by the
bottleneck that forms with transferring the data between the memory and the
processor. For this reason, alternative computation models, particularly those
based on brain-inspired (neuromorphic) computation, have recently resurged as a
potential new computing paradigm for certain classes of computing applications
and problems. This requires advancements in devices, circuits and computing
architectures, along with creation of the education platform that will allow
future engineers and computer scientists to advance and exploit
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of this proposed work is the use of a
novel magnetic device that is combined with traditional integrated circuit
technology to enable a scalable and power efficient neuromorphic computer chip.
The design will be optimized to handle "big data" problems that require
extremely power efficient implementations, such as real-time processing of a
video stream for a medical imaging application. Such implementations are
challenging for various reasons, most notably the storing of values for a large
number of artificial synapse weights, and efficient methods to compute random
numbers that are needed to make artificial neuron spiking decisions. Carnegie
Mellon researchers are focused on addressing these two key challenges in the
proposed work.