* 1714030
* Quantifying thioarsenate formation constants to advance understanding of arsenic biogeochemical cycling in anoxic waters
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Karen Johannesson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2020
* USD 251,385.00

Arsenic (As) is recognized as the most common, naturally occurring carcinogen in
the environment and most people who are affected by chronic arsenic poisoning
are exposed to this element from consumption of drinking water with elevated
arsenic concentrations. Although in excess of 100 million people in South and
Southeast Asia are known to be exposed to high levels of arsenic in their
drinking water, leading to what some have referred to as the largest natural
disaster in human history, there are a number of locations within the United
States where local populations are also exposed to high levels of naturally
occurring arsenic in their drinking water. Consequently, understanding the
biogeochemical processes that mobilize arsenic from geologic materials to
natural drinking water sources is critical for both predicting where elevated
arsenic concentrations may be found or develop over time, and for designing
remediation strategies to ensure safe drinking water resources for current and
future populations. An important broader impact of the project is that it will
provide a means to accurately predict the speciation of arsenic in anoxic
natural waters, which is presently not possible. This approach will allow other
researchers to employ familiar tools like geochemical equilibrium and reaction
path models to better predict the direction that such processes involving
reactions between arsenic and dissolved sulfide are likely to take in low-
temperature, natural waters. The proposed research will involve a graduate
student and up to three undergraduates in 'hands-on' biogeochemical research
experiences, and develop close collaborations between academia and federal
agencies (USGS, US EPA). Outreach will include: (1) mentoring of at least one
undergraduate on the project through the Louisiana Alliance for Minority
Participation program; (2) presentations on career opportunities in
environmental biogeochemistry to 5th through 7th grade girls through Tulane
University's Girls in STEM program; and (3) engaging high school students from
the Louisiana School of Math, Science, and Arts in 'hand-on' research
experiences related to the project.

Arsenic mobilization in natural waters can occur by a number processes that
include indirect microbially mediated reductive dissolution of iron oxides and
release of associated arsenic to solution, direct enzymatic (microbial)
reduction of oxidized arsenic to more mobile reduced arsenic in the form of the
arsenite oxyanion, oxidation of arsenic-bearing sulfide minerals like pyrite,
and release from mineral surfaces by competition by more abundant anions. Until
recently, production of dissolved sulfide by microbial sulfate reduction was
thought to lead to arsenic removal from waters by precipitation of arsenic
sulfide minerals or other arsenic-scavenging sulfide minerals (e.g., pyrite,
arsenopyrite). However, arsenic can combine with sulfur in anoxic waters forming
dissolved arsenic-sulfur compounds (thioarsenates and thioarsenites), which
appear in some cases to be highly mobile and persistent (thioarsenates) in
solution. Despite the growing recognition that thioarsenic species are an
important aspect of arsenic geochemistry, the paths by which sulfidic conditions
affects arsenic cycling in natural waters are complex and poorly understood.
This poor understanding is apparent in the lack of equilibrium thermodynamic
data for many of the thioarsenic species, which prevents reliable predictive
modeling of their abundances and distributions in natural waters. The goals of
this study are to measure the equilibrium constants that describe the formation
of the four, homologous thioarsenate species (i.e., monothioarsenate,
dithioarsenate, trithioarsenate, and tetrathioarsenate), and develop a
geochemical model that can be used to predict the formation and abundances of
these arsenic-sulfur compounds in natural water.