* 1714539
* N6-methyladenosine-dependent regulation of bacterial development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Lyle Simmons, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2022
* USD 690,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to understand how naturally occurring
chemical modifications of DNA influence information processing and the
subsequent cellular response. All living organisms contain DNA, the genetic
material that serves as the blueprint for life. DNA from diverse organisms, such
as bacteria and humans, has chemical modifications that affect how the encoded
information is read. One such modification is methyladenosine. Methyladenosine
is commonly found in bacterial DNA and can change how cells process information
by altering the genes that are switched on, which in turn can help the cell
respond to changes in nutrient availability. This research examines a previously
unstudied protein that forms methyladenosine in bacteria. When this protein is
inactive and adenosine methylation is lost, cells undergo substantial changes in
gene activity that affect how the cells develop and behave. This research
benefits society by determining how methyladenosine influences bacterial
development, including the formation of multicellular bacterial structures and
distinct cell types that can affect antibiotic resistance. In addition to the
research benefits, further societal impacts of this project include teaching the
expanding field of computational biology to students from socioeconomically
disadvantaged backgrounds. The project's outreach initiative provides high
school students in rural Northern Michigan with the opportunity to learn
introductory bioinformatics using an online educational portal developed as part
of this research. Further, this project provides training opportunities for the
next generation of scientists at both the undergraduate and graduate levels with
specialized training in cutting edge sequencing approaches and methods of data
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genomes of organisms from all three domains
of life are known to harbor chemical modifications in the form of DNA
methylation. N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is a type of modification detected in
prokaryotic and some eukaryotic genomes. Although m6A methyltransferases, the
enzymes responsible for genomic m6A, are found in many diverse bacterial species
the function of m6A remains largely unstudied. The goal of this project is to
understand the effects of genomic m6A modifications in the Gram-positive
bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Initial experiments have shown that elimination of
m6A from the B. subtilis genome results in the expression of genes involved in
bacterial developmental processes. Moving forward, this research project will
investigate the mechanism by which m6A affects the expression of genes involved
in bacterial cell developmental transitions. Global genomics approaches will be
used to determine the differences in bacterial chromosome structure, genome-wide
protein landscapes, and gene expression upon loss of m6A. Further, targeted
biochemical approaches will be used to determine if m6A is necessary and
sufficient for differential gene expression and to identify the factors that
respond to m6A in DNA regulatory regions. Once complete, this project will
provide a mechanistic understanding for how m6A-dependent changes in gene
expression interface with bacterial developmental platforms.