* 1714556
* Microbial Dark Matter: Forging New Discoveries in Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Valerie Copie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 574,168.00

What factors allow single-celled microbial organisms to not only survive, but
actively seek out environments that humans consider highly toxic? Scientists
have learned much about how these tiny living creatures function, facilitating
breakthroughs in medical, energy, and bioremediation sciences. However, the
understanding of how microorganisms grow and thrive in harsh environments
remains largely cloaked in mystery. The ability to predict how microorganisms
will respond to environmental changes or the knowledge of the types of reactions
that occur inside and outside their cells is vastly under-represented. In a
large part, this is due to the limited ability to identify the small molecules
produced and consumed by microbes (metabolites). This unknown microbial
metabolite landscape limits the understanding of the microbial processes playing
key roles in the regulation of biogeochemical cycles, bioremediation, bioenergy
production, as well as the human microbiome. In this work, state of the art
techniques will be used to find and characterize metabolites that up until now
have been largely invisible to researchers. The work will result in excellent
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, especially from
under-represented groups such as Native Americans, as well as a series of
lectures at the Thermal Biology Institute that provide an opportunity for
effective outreach and give the public a view of the importance of microbes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the discovery of unknown microbial
metabolites produced by bacteria using the Gram-negative soil bacterium
Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain 5A as model. This bacterium is a model for
understanding how microbes metabolize arsenic, a critical environmental toxin
found in contaminated soils and water supplies, and a top priority for
bioremediation efforts. Focusing on how microbes metabolize arsenic is important
because microorganisms influence arsenic toxicity and bioavailability in every
environment thus far studied. Thus, characterization of arsenicals produced by
microbes are a focal point of this project that will employ state-of-the-art
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass spectrometry (MS) metabolomics
technology to identify unknown microbial compounds, including arsenicals (i.e.
methylated species, arsenolipids, arsenosugars). Importantly, the analytical
approaches developed in this project will be applicable to many facets of
biology. The project will greatly enhance researchers' abilities to probe the
richness of the metabolomes of microbes, and to gain a much better appreciation
for the diversity of microbial unknown small molecules. Focusing on A.
tumefaciens as a model system will enable the identification and structural
characterization of novel organo-arsenic compounds and arsenolipids. Results
from these studies will bring transformative knowledge to the field of microbe-
arsenic interactions relevant to scientific research aimed at predicting how
arsenic disrupts/alters bacterial metabolism in situ, with broader implications
for biogeochemical carbon and nitrogen cycling in nature when microbes must deal
with arsenic.