* 1714025
* EAPSI: Understanding the Earth's Crust during the Presence of Large Amounts of Pre-eruptive Magma Conditions at Volcanic Zones
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Lydia Harmon, Harmon                  Lydia          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The goal of this project is to understand the Earth's crust at a time when large
amounts of magma evolved and became primed for eruption. This project will
amalgamate fieldwork, lab work, and computer simulations to study the evolution
of the magma bodies that fed the Whakamaru eruptions. The Whakamaru group
erupted intensely and explosively; they evacuated hundreds of cubic kilometers
of magma in short episodes in the Taupo Volcanic Zone, New Zealand. Large
eruptions, like the Whakamaru, provide snapshots of the Earth's crust at times
when large amounts of magma are present, and their study yields insights into
the ability of the crust to generate eruptible magma. Understanding the
development and conditions of pre-eruptive magma bodies is paramount to assess
hazards and comprehend the magnitude of potential eruptions. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Darren Gravley at University of Canterbury,
New Zealand whose expertise in volcanology and knowledge of the Whakamaru
deposits will be instrumental for the work to be developed.

The project focuses on quantifying how magma was distributed in the subsurface
leading to the Whakamaru eruption sequence. Using erupted natural pumice
samples, we can quantify the pre-eruptive magma conditions using crystal-glass
thermodynamic equilibrium. Results will make it possible to distinguish
particular batches of magma stored at different crustal depths, and also provide
insight on the organization and potential interactions between discrete magma
bodies. The project also focuses on quantifying the heat flow between the magma
body and crust associated with the Whakamaru Group. Phase equilibria modeling
will quantify the heat needed within the upper crust to generate and store such
quantities of magma, and will assess the conditions of the crust during magma
storage. Both conductive and convective heat flow within the crust will be
modeled based on the constraints placed by the thermodynamics of crystallizing
magma.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.