* 1714389
* SHF:Small: Integrated Hardware-Software Power Regulation, Allocation and Isolation in Consolidated Servers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Anand Sivasubramaniam, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Multi-megawatt datacenters, while critical to our economy, can pose a severe
cost, scalability and environmental burden. Imposed/Voluntary demand response
programs, to address these concerns, mandate dynamic power regulation of a
datacenter. This requires each of its hundreds of thousands of servers to expose
and manage knobs for dynamic regulation. As datacenters resort to increasing
levels of application consolidation on high-end servers to reduce their Total
Cost of Operation, the co-located applications contend for the finite resources
at each server. While prior research has looked at solutions for alleviating
this contention for conventional computing resources, co-located
applications also contend for the dynamically varying power budget, which is
becoming an increasingly scarce resource. This project intends to elevate
power to become a first class citizen for explicit management, similar to other
hardware resources, in the context of current and next generation servers
hosting multiple applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
specifically investigate the following issues: (i) when should server power be
regulated? (ii) what amount of the regulated power should be allocated to each
application, and recursively to each of its computing resources? (iii) how
should power allocations be enforced and isolated? The project will develop
evaluation platforms to implement and validate the developed research ideas in
each of these "when", "what" and "how" dimensions, using real
datacenter/cloud workloads. The research contributions from this project can
transform the design of server hardware and software, which make their way
into large datacenters. The project proposes curricular enhancements
at undergraduate and graduate levels using this research, in addition to the
involvement of women, minorities and undergraduate students.