* 1714497
* SHF: Small: Molecular Classifier Circuits for Disease Diagnostics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Georg Seelig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 440,000.00

Changes in the levels of RNA and protein molecules are associated with a large
number of human diseases. Monitoring such changes enables clinicians to perform
diagnosis, evaluate therapeutic efficacy and predict disease recurrence.
Sometimes, detection of just a single molecular marker can be indicative of a
disease state, but more commonly it is necessary to interpret a combination of
markers via complex algorithms to obtain a reliable diagnosis. In a traditional
diagnostic workflow, markers of interest are first detected and quantitated
using tools such as RNA sequencing or microarrays. A computer is then used to
make a diagnosis, for example by comparing the measurement results to a
previously established benchmark. Despite their widespread use in medical
research, these methods remain cost-prohibitive for a large number of medical
applications where recurrent monitoring or regular screenings are necessary. To
overcome these limitations, this work introduces a novel type of diagnostic tool
where the computation and diagnosis is performed by a "molecular computer",
minimizing the need for complex instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is tightly integrated with an outreach program that has two main goals.
The first goal is to develop an educational program dedicated to teaching the
interdisciplinary skills that are necessary to be successful in molecular
programming. A second and longer term goal is to increase the enrollment of
women in engineering research. A key aim is to motivate students with
backgrounds in electrical engineering and computer science to engage in
molecular programming research by demonstrating that molecular systems can be
"programmed" just as we program electronic systems. To achieve these goals the
PI is participating in engineering outreach programs and systematically pushes
research results into the classroom, both through specialized classes (e.g.
synthetic biology) and by incorporating molecular programming modules in core
electrical engineering and computer science classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this proposal is to demonstrate that molecular computation could become
practically useful for disease diagnosis. The proposed approach integrates
computation in silico with computation in the test tube. The workflow begins
with the training of a computational classifier --- a support vector machine
(SVM) --- on publicly available gene expression data. Then, the in silico
classifier is mapped onto a set of DNA strands and complexes that realize the
same classifier at the molecular level, resulting in a novel kind of molecular
computation architecture. Finally, the molecular classifier is tested on
different types of molecular data. In preliminary work, PI has constructed a
molecular SVM that can, in principle, be used to distinguish between bacterial
and viral infections based on analysis of seven host transcripts. The goal of
the current proposal is to optimize and automate classifier design and testing
and to bring such technology closer to practical applications.