* 1714972
* CNH-L: Dynamic Impacts of Environmental Change and Biomass Harvesting on Woodland Ecosystems and Traditional Livelihoods
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Courtenay Strong, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,470,534.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine the combined effects of
environmental variation and firewood harvesting on woodland ecosystems to
determine the conditions that promote healthy forests capable of sustaining wood
fuel use into the future. While growing evidence suggests that forests are
threatened by droughts, extreme temperatures, and overharvesting, scientists
currently have difficulty predicting future forest conditions, and that
restricts capabilities to anticipate the energy security of one-third of the
Earth's people who rely on wood as a primary fuel source. To overcome these
limitations, this project will gather data about forest health, human harvesting
practices, and climate and other environmental conditions. The investigators
will use these data to examine the dynamics between people and their local
environment and to develop a model that can forecast future variation in this
coupled natural-human system. Project findings will provide more generalizable
insights for assessing the sensitivity of small-scale socioecological systems to
environmental transitions. This project will inform land management decisions
aimed at improving the sustainability of woodland health and human livelihoods
under variable environmental conditions. The project also will provide education
and training opportunities in the conduct of interdisciplinary research for
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest fuels comprise
about nine percent of the global primary energy budget, but data are limited
regarding the coupled forest-fuelwood-climate nexus, particularly the
sustainability of forests to provide firewood for subsistence populations in a
changing environment. This project will be conducted by an interdisciplinary
team of anthropologists, biologists, geographers, atmospheric scientists, and
engineers who will gather empirical data about woodland biomass and harvesting
demand across a variety of climatic conditions and land-management regimes. Data
generated from quantitative ethnography, field ecology, remote sensing, and
climatology will be used to create and validate a dynamic model capable of
predicting future conditions of this system under altered climate and harvesting
scenarios. While this project will focus on the pi√±on-juniper woodlands of
southern Utah where Navajo and Ute people rely on wood fuel, results will
provide a general framework capable of predicting diverse coupled natural-human
systems under varied environmental scenarios. This project is supported by the
NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.