* 1714157
* Collaborative Research: Function and Regulation of Thimet Oligopeptidase-Mediated Proteolytic Pathways in Plant Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Sorina Popescu, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2022
* USD 445,559.00

Plants are dynamic living systems in which external and internal signals are
integrated to facilitate and sustain growth and health. This research is
targeted toward understanding the understudied phenomena of how plants use
protein cleavage and degradation in response to stress signals. This knowledge
may lead to increased survival rates of crops, and a further understanding of
the adaptation and tolerance mechanisms utilized by these crops. A diverse
population of graduate, undergraduate and high school students will be trained
in modern methods of biochemistry, analytical chemistry, and systems and
computational biology. Undergraduates will have the opportunity to participate
in a summer exchange Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program
between Mississippi State University and University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill and the PIs will develop an exhibit with scientific demonstrations for the
NC Science Festival targeted to elementary and middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs the plant Arabidopsis as a model to
elucidate the contributions of the proteolytic pathways mediated by TOP1 and
TOP2 thimet oligopeptidases through integrated biochemical, proteomics, and
systems biology approaches. Unique methods have been utilized in the preliminary
studies to characterize the interaction of thimet oligopeptidases with the plant
stress hormone salicylic acid. Genetic and biochemical experiments uncovered
roles for TOPs in pathogen defense as possible "redox sensors". Fundamental
differences between TOP1 and TOP2 cellular functions have been revealed
experimentally and captured in a cell-level computational model. The research
will expand on these findings by addressing the following aspects: (i)
characterize redox-specific modifications mediated by and regulating TOP1 and
TOP2, (ii) identify the substrate repertoire of TOP1 and TOP2, and (iii) expand
and verify predictive models bridging molecular and structural characteristics
of TOP1 and TOP2 with the whole-cell response. Upon the successful completion of
the proposed research, a framework for TOP signaling in plants will be
established and provide critical insights into how the interplay between
proteolytic pathways and defense hormone signaling can be harnessed for the
benefit of adaptation and tolerance mechanisms of
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and by the NSF EPSCoR Program.