* 1714358
* Sociocultural Practices in Maternal Healthcare
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Adrienne Strong, Strong                  Adrienne       E
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2019
* USD 82,275.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. In this project, the Postdoctoral Research
Fellow will contribute to our global understanding of the causes of
disrespectful and abusive interactions that occur between healthcare providers
and pregnant women during labor and while giving birth. While this particular
research will take place in Tanzania, the problem of abuse in obstetrics care
has recently gained attention as a global problem and a significant challenge to
improving healthcare for pregnant women and newborns. This project will explore
the interactions between women, their relatives, and healthcare providers in
health facilities as the facilities implement a new birth companion program.
Policy makers and public health practitioners see birth companion programs as
one avenue for reducing abuse in maternal and reproductive health settings, and
improving the quality of care and women's experiences in health facilities. This
research will reveal underlying contributors to abusive behaviors, which can be
used to inform explorations of similar issues both in the United States,
particularly as minority women continue to experience worse maternal health
outcomes, and in countries across the globe. Through a collaboration between
public health experts, law and policy experts, and an anthropologist, this
project presents opportunities to directly translate social science research
findings into policy recommendations and programs that can be implemented to
improve women's health. Additionally, the collaboration includes the Tanzanian
Ifakara Health Institute (IHI) and the Fellow will engage in exchange of
information, as well as training IHI staff members to build research capacity in
Tanzania and promote scholarly collaboration between researchers in the Global
North and the Global South, with the collective goal of continuing to improve
maternal health globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In places such as Tanzania,
organizations working to implement birth companion programs say they are facing
challenges as the Euro-American versions of comfort, support, and choice during
labor and delivery fail to resonate with women. While, on the surface, program
failure appears to result from disagreement or conflict over terms and their
worth, this project proposes instead that the potential lack of success of these
programs is largely due to deeper incompatibilities between conceptions of self
and social connections, biological processes, and the hegemonic discourse that
has come to make biomedicine effectively the only option for pregnant women in
lower resource settings. In the context of a new birth companion program in
Kigoma, Tanzania, this project will inquire about forms of care and support
during childbirth to increase understanding of the diverse local constructions
of these topics. The overall research objective is to investigate sociocultural
and gendered concepts and practices of support, comfort, and care during
pregnancy and childbirth, through three sub-objectives: 1) to elucidate women's
and community member's perceptions of ideal birth experiences and how they enact
these ideals; 2) to document how biomedical personnel conceptualize the role of,
prioritize, and practice differing forms of care, comfort, and support during
labor and delivery; and 3) to document how the presence of birth companions, as
non-medical lay persons, influences the environment of maternity wards at health
centers. The Fellow will conduct mixed-method, ethnographic fieldwork which will
include interviews and cultural consensus analysis. The findings will provide
insight into gendered negotiations of access to authority and power within these
contexts and contribute to a more nuanced understanding of choice as it relates
to biomedical care seeking, collective decision-making groups, and women's own,
stated desires for care during childbirth. The project will also provide insight
into how inequalities are formed, enacted, opposed, or reproduced within
biomedical health facilities at the time of labor and childbirth, and how these
processes can lead to disrespectful and abusive interactions.