* 1714726
* Interactions between word learning and visual category development in infancy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Michael Frank, Long                    Bria
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. To learn a concrete noun (e.g., dog),
infants must learn how to generalize this word to multiple instances from the
same category (e.g., to both golden retrievers and Chihuahuas). How do infants
accomplish this feat? The overarching goal of this project is to broaden our
understanding of how infants learn the visual categories that words refer to.
Specifically, this project tests whether novel labels serve as social cues to
help infants form more specific representations of new visual categories. To
accomplish this, the project will fuse techniques from vision science and word
learning to examine the kind of visual information infants map to novel words
(vs. novel tones) during short eye-tracking experiments. Furthermore, the
project will model infants' behaviors using computational models of word
learning. Thus, this project will paint a detailed picture of the visual
information that infants map to novel words. The outcome of this proposal could
have implications for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD), who tend to
have difficulty processing social cues during word learning. Eventually,
performance on these short eye-tracking tasks could serve as assessments for
infants at-risk for ASD and as outcome measures in ASD intervention studies.
Finally, this project will also create new datasets and tools that will be made
publicly available using the Open Science Framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do
infants generalize from individual instances to learn the visual category that a
word refers to? Perhaps language plays a role in binding instances together.
Prior work suggests that when infants hear a novel label (versus a novel tone),
they expect to see objects from a new visual category. However, if infants treat
novel labels as strong social cues that they should form an object category,
Bayesian models of word learning predict that novel labels should also help
infants form a more specific representation of this category. This project tests
this hypothesis by combining eye-tracking behavioral experiments, computational
models of early visual processing, and Bayesian models of word learning. First,
the project will examine if labels help infants form tighter visual
representations of novel categories with respect to other, novel objects.
Second, the project will examine if labels change the kinds of visual features
(e.g., texture vs. 3D form) infants use to represent novel categories,
leveraging both texture synthesis models and 3D printing techniques. Third, the
project will examine if an optimal model of Bayesian word learning predicts the
behavioral results. This project takes a novel approach to studying early word
learning by incorporating modern tools from visual perception, and thus makes
new connections between the fields of language acquisition and visual cognitive
development while furthering our understanding of both.