* 1714662
* Collaborative Research: Solid Earth response of the Patagonia Andes to post-Little Ice Age glacial retreat
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Maria Beatrice Magnani, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2023
* USD 543,313.00

The goal of this project is to understand how the Earth responds to a
cryospheric mass imbalance on&lt;br/&gt;a time scale of centuries in a compact,
well-monitored region of Patagonia, a region of complex Neogene ridge subduction
and youthful volcanism. The problem of glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) is an
important problem and critical to understanding the viscosity and time-scales of
deformation in the upper mantle. The PI team will try to quantify and model the
isostatic response to ice and sediment loading and unloading. A primary driver
of modern rock uplift beneath and surrounding the Southern Patagonia Icefield
(SPI) is interpreted to be ice loss following the peak advances of the Little
Ice Age (LIA). Recent geodetic studies reveal remarkably rapid uplift rates (up
to 40 mm/yr and averaging ~20 mm/yr around the SPI). These rates are the fastest
modern geologic uplift rates; ones that demand a low viscosity mantle. In
Patagonia, the presence of a somewhat poorly understood slab window that
developed during Late Cenozoic time supports speculation that a low-viscosity
zone underlies the region where GIA is
very&lt;br/&gt;rapid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will explore the causes of
high rates and spatial-temporal pattern of the inferred GIA using: (1) a
regional broadband seismological array to delineate the crustal and upper mantle
structure and viscosity and observe seismicity (currently undefined) along the
subducting Austral slab; (2) shipboard reflection seismic data and sediment
cores to image and date the young pro- and subglacial sediments deposited in the
glacial troughs (now fiord-like lakes) carved by advancing ice with a goal of
defining both the geometry of ice and volume of deposited sediment through time;
(3) new mapping and dating of the subaerial morainal sequence to define the
time-varying spatial geometry of the SPI along its two largest outlet glaciers;
and (4) improved geophysical models of glacier and solid earth responses.