* 1714335
* State and Non-State Territorial Practices and Polycentric Governance in UK and US Large Marine Protected Areas
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Gruby, Acton                   Leslie         D
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields.This post-doctoral fellowship supports a
young scholar in examining the changing roles and influence of state and non-
state actors in large marine protected area (LMPA) governance. LMPAs greater
than 100,000 km2 have emerged as a high-profile conservation trend that has
spread rapidly around the world through global networks of scientists, non-
governmental organizations, foundations, governments, celebrities, and others.
Despite this rapid increase in LMPAs, little research has been published
investigating the varied actors and policy processes entangled in these new
governance regimes. This research addresses this gap by comparing interactions
between governance actors and institutional governance structures in two
recently announced or expanded LMPAs in the US state of Hawaii's Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ), and in the UK overseas territory of Ascension Island's
Exclusive Fishing Zone (EFZ). This project seeks to provide new knowledge about
the understudied political and institutional dimensions of LMPAs. It also
broadens the participation of women, people who stutter and native Hawaiians in
SBE sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project engages human
geography theory on territoriality and new institutionalist theory on
polycentricity to answer three research questions. First, how are state and non-
state governance actors (re)articulating ocean territory through the designation
of LMPAs in Hawaii and Ascension Island? Second, what are the mechanisms through
which existing polycentric governance enables and constrains decision-making
roles for state and non-state actors in LMPA designation? Third, how are new
governance actors reshaping existing ocean governance structures through the
implementation of LMPAs? To address these questions, the project employs a
qualitative comparative case study approach guided by constructivist grounded
theory. Data collection methods include interviews with governance actors, key
document collection, and participant observation at management planning and
policy-making meetings. Results will inform a rapidly growing and understudied
trend in US and international ocean governance and will enhance cross-site
learning between current and future LMPAs.