* 1714031
* EAPSI: Developing a Topical Therapeutic for Abnormal Scarring
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Adam Ponedal, Ponedal                 Adam
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Damage to the skin, such as from a burn or surgical incision, can result in the
formation of abnormal scarring. These scars can be painful, disfiguring, and
aesthetically unpleasant. Existing treatments have limited efficacy and are not
readily accessible. This project proposes to develop a lead compound that can be
used to topically treat abnormal scarring in a self-administrable fashion. This
compound will be developed from the Spherical Nucleic Acids (SNAs) platform,
which have been shown to penetrate the skin and regulate protein expression. The
researcher will use the SNA platform to target the major protein implicated in
abnormal scar formation and test the compounds in an animal model at Dr. Chenjie
Xu's lab, at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. Dr. Xu is an
internationally recognized expert who researches skin disease using animal
models. SNAs are made from a spherical nanoparticle core and dense shell of
oriented oligonucleotides (DNA or RNA) covalently bonded to the core. These
particles can readily enter cells. Once inside the cells, the oligonucleotides
on the surface of the nanoparticle can participate in antisense or RNA
interference pathways, giving the SNA the ability to knockdown the expression of
target genes by destroying intracellular mRNA before it can be translated into
protein. The oligonucleotide sequence can be tailored to specifically knockdown
any protein that is expressed in the cells where the SNAs are delivered.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.