* 1714043
* EAPSI: Vibration Reduction in Electromagnetic Actuators Based on Displacement Amplification
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Gerald Eaglin, Eaglin                  Gerald         G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The project seeks to improve the performance and accuracy of a specialized
electromagnetic actuator developed by Dr. Toshiro Higuchi and Dr. Hiroyuki Nabae
at the University of Tokyo. The actuator is capable of performing high precision
and high speed movements. However, the actuator also tends to exhibit unwanted
vibration when operated, greatly reducing its precision. The goal of the project
is to implement a command shaping method to eliminate the unwanted oscillation,
improving its precision. Potential benefits include developing a reliable
actuator that can improve performance in applications where piezoelectric
actuators are currently used. The project will be conducted at Tokyo Institute
of Technology during the summer of 2017 under the joint supervision of Dr. Gen
Endo and Dr. Nabae.

The project will involve vibration attenuation of electromagnetic linear
actuators capable of quick sub-millimeter strokes. In general, electromagnetic
linear actuators suffer a loss of thrust force as stroke distance increases due
to the gap between the electromagnet and the armature. The actuator developed by
Dr. Higuchi and Dr. Nabae utilizes an amplification mechanism that increases the
stroke distance while maintaining thrust force for the extent of the movement.
However, the actuators are prone to unwanted oscillation with amplitudes of
hundreds of micrometers, which results in significant residual error when
compared to stroke length. The goal of the project is to implement a command
shaping method to improve precision. The command shaping method to be used
utilizes a system's natural frequency and damping ratio to find impulses that
interact destructively to cancel residual vibration. These impulses are then
convolved with the system's original reference command to produce a command that
causes no residual vibration. Benefits of this project include developing a
reliable actuator capable of accurately performing high resolution movements
without the drawback of a significant loss of thrust force.

This award under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.