* 1714612
* Stochastic phenotype switching controlled by c-di-GMP in Vibrio cholerae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Yann Dufour, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2023
* USD 759,750.00

Microbes can form communities called biofilms that affect many aspects of human
activities. For example, microbes can be used to treat wastewater and improve
agricultural soil productivity. Understanding how microbes organize and persist
in different environments is important for promoting beneficial outcomes, as
well as mitigating harmful effects. This project will focus on an amazing
ability microbes have for surviving in changing environments--through a process
called phenotypic diversity--which enables them to produce progeny with a wide
range of behaviors or characteristics. Predicting phenotypic diversity behaviors
in microbes is a major unsolved problem. This project will use the environmental
bacterium and human pathogen, Vibrio cholerae, to investigate the mechanisms
used by bacteria to generate phenotypic diversity. The fundamental principles
learned from this project will be directly relevant to other microorganisms,
thus, facilitating the management and engineering of microbes for beneficial
outcomes. In addition, this project will provide research training for
undergraduate and graduate students, including individuals from underrepresented
groups. New knowledge will be shared with a broad audience through
collaborations with secondary science educators and Impression 5, a science
museum in Lansing, MI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
role of the second messenger bis-(3-5)-cyclic dimeric guanosine monophosphate
(c-di-GMP) in controlling phenotypic diversity in clonal populations of Vibrio
cholerae. c-di-GMP integrates environmental signals through a sophisticated
signaling network to control, among other factors, the transition between motile
and biofilm lifestyles. The hypothesis is that c-di-GMP signaling changes the
sensitivity of transcriptional regulation to stochastic fluctuations inherent to
molecular processes to control the proportions of different phenotypes. This
project will use a combination of mathematical modeling, quantitative
microscopy, and behavioral tracking to quantify the regulation of phenotypic
diversity under different experimental conditions. Cell tracking and
epifluorescence microscopy will be used to correlate signaling activity with
behavior directly in single cells. The transition rates between motile and
biofilm-forming phenotypes in growing cells will be quantified using time-lapse
experiments. Finally, a genetic approach will be used to manipulate c-di-GMP
levels and transcription regulation to test specific predictions from
theoretical models. Overall, this project will elucidate design principles that
allow signaling networks to integrate stochastic fluctuations with environmental
signals to generate and control advantageous phenotypic diversity in clonal
populations.