* 1714035
* EAPSI: Ice Nucleation Properties of Non-proteinaceous Biological Particles
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kimberly Cory, Cory                    Kimberly       M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Glaciation of atmospheric clouds by immersion freezing is an important
atmospheric process, affecting the formation of precipitation and Earth?s energy
budget. Currently, the climatic impact of ice-nucleating particles (INPs) is
uncertain due to increasing evidence of their nucleation efficiency, diversity
and abundance in the atmosphere. Recently, microcrystalline cellulose (MCC)
extracted from natural wood pulp has been identified as an efficient INP, which
may add crucial importance to quantifying the role of primary non-proteinaceous
biological INP in the troposphere. However, it is still uncertain if the ice-
nucleating activity is specific to MCC structure or generally relevant to all
plant structural materials. Answering those questions is the specific aim of the
project. The fellow will travel to the National Institute of Polar Research
(NIPR) in Japan, which offers rigorous experimental capabilities, and will carry
out in-depth characterization in ice-nucleating properties of cellulose-
containing particles with Dr. Yutaka Tobo and Dr. Kumiko Goto-Azuma, who are the
world-renowned scientists, to better estimate their effects on clouds and the
global climate. The fellow plans to investigate: 1) cloud seeding simulation by
using nano-crystalline cellulose-containing plant fibrous particles and 2);
regional and global climate change. The project is well conceived and organized
to create new collaboration opportunities for NIPR to promote scientific
immersion with West Texas A&M University beyond existing collaboration (i.e.,
Arctic Challenge for Sustainability Project, www.arcs-pro.jp/en. A newly-
developed Cryogenic Refrigerator Applied to Freezing Test (CRAFT) system and a
variety of existing plant fiber samples at NIPR will support the fellow's work
with assistance from NIPR faculty.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Sumer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.