* 1714067
* EAPSI: Investigating Stem Elongation as a Means to Increase Crop Productivity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Caitlin Jacques, Jacques                 Caitlin
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

As sessile organisms, plants need to effectively sense and respond to their
environment in order to survive. One way they accomplish this is through the
perception and response to light. A key group of proteins involved in modulating
light-mediated responses are the AHLs, a group of DNA-binding proteins that
influence stem elongation in seedlings. Stem elongation is among the first
crucial steps in plant development for many crop plants. As the climate
continues to change, it is increasingly important for us to gain a better
understanding of how stem elongation is controlled, as it will facilitate the
improvement of crop varieties that can cope with such changes. This EAPSI
fellowship will enable further investigation into the role AHLs play in stem
elongation, and how this elongation is further regulated by plant hormones. This
research will be conducted at the RIKEN Institute under the direction of Dr.
Keiko Sugimoto, a leading expert in plant cell research.

Using Arabidopsis as a model system, the overarching goal of this research is to
understand how light mediates seedling growth. One key group of genes involved
in this process is the AT-HOOK MOTIF NUCLEAR LOCALIED (AHL) gene family.
AHL29/SUPRESSOR OF PHYTOCHROME B-4 (SOB3) directly regulates the auxin-
associated genes YUCCA8 (YUC8) and members of the SMALL AUXIN UP RNA 19 (SAUR19)
subfamily during seedling development. SOB3 is able to modulate hypocotyl
elongation in seedlings, at least in part, by repressing transcription of the
aforementioned genes. Since YUC8 and members of the SAUR19 subfamily are
directly involved in phytohormone pathways, ChIP-Seq will be used to test the
hypothesis that SOB3 binds to the promoters of additional genes associated with
plant-specific hormone pathways, such as gibberellic acid, cytokinins, and
jasmonic acid. Additionally, hypocotyl elongation assays will be performed using
sob mutants and the aforementioned hormones to further investigate these
interactions.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.