* 1714061
* EAPSI: Mechanistic Understanding of Light Sensitive Proteins for Biomedical Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Sean Tachibana, Tachibana               Sean           R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Optogenetics is a biological method that genetically modifies living cells in
order to use light to control molecular processes. Current biomedical and life
sciences have benefited from the applications of optogenetic tools such as
sensing analytes in the body (in vivo) like calcium, controlling ion channels
for communication, and genome editing in hopes of curing genetic diseases.
Optogenetic applications are currently limited by the specificity or accuracy in
binding targeted molecules and the rate it takes to turn the tool on and off.
Dr. Moritoshi Sato is one of the leading professors working on optogenetics at
the University of Tokyo. Under the guidance of Dr. Sato and his team, the Fellow
will receive hands-on experience in developing new photoswitches for optogenetic
control along with making published photoswitches.

Photoswitching proteins, naturally found in plants, fungi, and bacteria, have
allowed protein engineers to take advantage of the optogenetic methods. Natural
photoswitches are known to homodimerize and exhibit slow switch-off kinetics
which decrease the efficiency of optical control and limit their applications in
optogenetics. Dr. Moritoshi Sato at the University of Tokyo has created novel
photoswitches named Magnets that were derived from a photoreceptor named Vivid.
By engineering the cofactor-binding domain, the Sato lab was able to selectively
induce fast heterodimerization and tune the switch-off kinetics from hours to
seconds. These Magnets were implemented into a genome editing protein named
CRISPR-Cas9 which was originally developed to be controlled chemically. The
incorporation of Magnets led to a photoactivatable Cas9 (paCas9) which enables
optogenetic control. The overarching goal of this project is to synthesize
photoswitches (Vivid, Magnet variants, and paCas9) using Dr. Sato's protein
engineering facility so the samples can be later analyzed using the ultrafast
laser spectroscopy facility at Oregon State University. We will exploit the
wavelength-tunable femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy (FSRS) technique to
track the photocatalytic reaction pathways around the flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) chromophore in different Vivid mutants including the slow and
fast Magnets. This work will provide a fundamental understanding of how the
current mutations within the Vivid cofactor-binding domain give rise to specific
changes in the protein function, aided by the sulfur-containing amino acid
residues in the vicinity of FAD. As a result, structural dynamics basis for the
Magnet light sensing efficiency, dimerization, and switch-on and off kinetics
can be elucidated. The optimization of optogenetic tools will allow for advanced
applications in neuron modulation, drug delivery, bioimaging, and biosensors.
The integration of bioengineering and biophysics enables a bottom-up approach to
fundamentally understand photochemistry at the chemical bond level for
photoswitchable proteins, and to rationally design and effectively achieve the
desired protein functionality.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.