* 1714325
* Probing the Standard Model and Nuclear Structure with Parity-Violating Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mark Pitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 380,000.00

This project supports research that seeks to answer a fundamental question about
matter. What is the nature of any new physics not described by the Standard
Model - our current understanding of how particles and forces interact? This
question will be addressed by precision measurements of the weak charges of the
proton and electron at two large collaborative experiments at the Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport News,
Virginia. The proton and electron's weak charges are the weak force analogs of
the common electric charges of these particles. The weak charges are precisely
predicted in the Standard Model. Any deviation of measurements from these
predictions could be evidence of yet undiscovered massive particles that
represent new physics beyond our current understanding. The program will support
graduate and undergraduate students and a postdoctoral fellow, who will form an
essential part of this project. The anticipated activities cover a range of
hardware and software tasks that will provide excellent training for these
individuals. This training in fundamental research provides a strong basis for
careers both in basic research and in more applied research and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds provided by this project will support activities
on three parity-violating electron scattering experiments at Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF). The Qweak experiment will measure the
proton's neutral weak charge via parity-violating electron scattering at very
low momentum transfer. The proton's weak charge has a well-defined prediction in
the Standard Model; a precise measurement of it is sensitive to many popular
scenarios for extending the Standard Model. During the period of this program,
the group will primarily be contributing to a complete analysis of the weak
charge result as well as finalizing analyses to extract physics results from the
Qweak data for two other topics - a probe of hadronic parity violation in the N
to Delta transition and a measurement of the transverse asymmetry in Moller
scattering. The MOLLER experiment is an approved TJNAF experiment intended for
the upgraded 12 GeV TJNAF. It will measure the electron's neutral weak charge by
making a precision measurement of the parity-violating asymmetry in the elastic
scattering of polarized electrons on unpolarized electrons at a very low
momentum transfer. This will result in a determination of the weak mixing angle
at low energy with a precision comparable to the best determinations from high-
energy colliders. It should have excellent sensitivity to many beyond the
Standard Model scenarios. During the period of this project, the group will make
important contributions to this experiment by working on beam charge and
position monitor upgrades, luminosity monitor and background detector
development and construction, scanner detector development, and simulation
design studies. Neutron radii in neutron-rich nuclear provide an important test
of nuclear structure with applications to neutron star structure and heavy ion
collisions. The PREX-II and CREX experiments are anticipated to run in this
period and determine the neutron radii in lead-208 and calcium-48. The group
will provide large angle scattering monitors and a setup for linearity testing
and will contribute to the analysis of beam monitoring and modulation data and
data-taking shift support.