* 1714303
* A Mixed-Methods Investigation into Underrepresentation in STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Lydia Bentley, Bentley                 Lydia
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. The present research project is undertaken
to explore the experiences of undergraduate engineering students who identify as
members of under-represented minority (URM) groups. While several influences on
URM students' post-secondary STEM experiences have been identified, there remain
multiple under-explored aspects of URM engineering students' first two years in
their programs. For example, there is an urgent need to deepen our understanding
of what URM students are going through, as they are going through it, rather
than simply in retrospect. In addition, there is room for further investigation
into how multiple influences on their engineering experiences may be intertwined
and may combine to impact students' development over the first two years of
their college life. The current project helps to fill in these gaps in the
existing knowledge base and will implicate ways to better support the success
and wellbeing of URM engineering students in the future.

This project, entitled, Engineering in process: A mixed methods investigation
into URM undergraduate engineering students' first two years, will advance
knowledge within the field of post-secondary STEM education in general, and
engineering education in particular, by exploring potential influences on URM
engineering students' experiences and trajectories during their first two years
of college. These influences include the following: pre-college influences;
interactions with college faculty and peers; social cognitive factors; and
engagement with STEM learning opportunities and structures. This study combines
ethnographic and longitudinal survey methodologies in order to uncover (a) the
details and mechanisms of complex social and individual processes as they unfold
in real-time in URM engineering students' academic lives and (b) the change over
time in important influences on students' success in their engineering program.
Research findings will illuminate the challenge of underrepresentation in STEM,
specifically engineering, by providing a more holistic understanding of the
experiences of URM students during their first two years in an engineering
school and relating certain characteristics of URM students and their
experiences to their persistence in, or exit from, this engineering program by
sophomore year. Results of this study will also implicate potential next steps
to create new (or enhance existing) structures that promote not only the
persistence of URM engineering students but also their wellbeing and holistic
success as measured by supportive social interactions, social cognitive factors
(e.g., their sense of self-efficacy), and their engagement with learning
opportunities.