* 1714136
* AF:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Personalized Environmental Monitoring of Type 1 Diabetes (T1D):  A Dynamic System Perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Yuhao Zhu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 157,999.00

The progression of many chronic diseases, such as Type 1 diabetes (T1D),
manifests dynamic processes that can be modified by environmental exposures.
Modeling of the underlying disease progression holds critical values for better
understanding of disease development, effective monitoring, and prevention.
While the emerging big data studying these diseases provide great resources,
current pace for translating these data into effective monitoring and
intervention strategies has been slow due to the analytic challenges caused by
potential multi-layer characteristics of disease progression processes, the
high-dimensional exogenous factors, heterogeneous biomarker signals, and the
complexity of continuous-time stochastic processes. To mitigate these challenges
with the development of new models and computational algorithms, this research
will provide the desired personalized monitoring and risk factor identification
capability, which is crucial not only for increasing the situational awareness
of the individuals who are at risk, but also for providing evidences for design,
validation, and deployment of intervention strategies. Its generic nature will
also help effective monitoring of many other dynamic systems in engineering and
life sciences. The interdisciplinary nature of this research across data-driven
risk monitoring, dynamic systems, high-dimensional variable selection, and
healthcare, will prepare students with a diversified education background.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to create a generic suite
of computational approaches that can be applied for modeling, learning, and
monitoring a set of dynamic diseases, whose progression processes may be
modified by exogenous factors such as environmental exposures. Several
methodological contributions are expected, including: (1) a novel rule-based
monitoring methodology to convert high-dimensional complex biomarkers into
disease risk evaluation, via the development of an efficient screening method
for high-throughput rule discovery and an optimal design method for risk
monitoring; (2) a multi-layer dynamic model that can investigate how the
exogenous risk factors regulate the disease process, with integration of sparse
multi-task learning to mitigate the high-dimensionality of exogenous factors;
and (3) a high-dimensional robust risk factor identification framework that can
identify exogenous factors with integration of knowledge learned from historical
data, new measurements, and clinician's prognostics. These proposed methods will
be evaluated with a practical example studying T1D in partnership with The
Environmental Determinant of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) study.