* 1714955
* Preparing for the DKIST Era:  Numerical Modeling of the Lower Solar Atmosphere
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Juan Martinez Sykora, Bay Area Environmental Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 09/30/2021
* USD 281,040.00

The Sun's magnetic field plays a critical role in connecting the different
layers and powering the various regions of the solar atmosphere, as well as in
driving "space weather." Detailed observations with a new generation of ground-
based telescopes could help us better understand the Sun's magnetic field. To
interpret these observations, we need to develop a more complete knowledge of
the physical processes occurring in the solar atmosphere. This research project
will use advanced computer models to identify key processes in the lower solar
atmosphere that influence the Sun's magnetic field. The project will thus enable
the effective use of telescopes built with public investment. It will also
provide science enrichment and research experience to K-12 students and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will perform
three-dimensional numerical simulations of the solar chromosphere to help
interpret sensitive high-resolution observations from telescopes such as the
Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST) and the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). The team will employ the numerical code
Bifrost for the simulations, which will include a realistic treatment of
physical processes such as ambipolar diffusion and non-equilibrium ionization,
as well as their effects over a wide range of size scales. The simulations will
also yield synthetic observables that can be compared to data from DKIST and
ALMA to identify processes that drive the dynamics and heating of solar
chromosphere.