* 1714048
* EAPSI: The Effect of Seasonal Hydrological Loading on Vertical GPS Time Series
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kathryn Materna, Materna                 Kathryn
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400.00

Continuous GPS time series have recently enabled the study of a variety of
ground deformation sources. One non-tectonic deformation source, particularly
important for vertical GPS time series, is seasonal changes in elastic loading.
For example, this can occur when water reservoirs annually cycle between empty
and full. If the contributions of water loading to the GPS time series can be
modeled and understood, it is possible to make timely, accurate, and locally
useful estimates of surface water storage simply from GPS measurements. To that
end, this study aims to identify the components of surface water loads in the
continuous GPS measurements from Myanmar. The vertical GPS signals in this
dataset are known to contain some of the largest annual oscillations in the
world, likely due to the Asian Monsoon. However, the degree to which changes in
surface water storage can explain the GPS oscillations remains unknown. This
work will be completed with Professor Emma Hill, a leading researcher in GPS
geodesy at the Earth Observatory of Singapore. This research will also benefit
from collaboration with the many researchers in Dr. Hill's research group who
are working on a large-scale study of geodetic data from Myanmar.

This project will decompose the GPS time series into components from elastic
loading and other sources through a loading model. Gravity measurements from the
GRACE satellite mission will be used to constrain surface water loads. The
elastic deformation will then be modeled for each GPS station using a reference
earth structure. It is hypothesized that much of the seasonal variation in the
vertical GPS time series, which can reach 5 cm/year in amplitude, is due to
hydrologic loading. This project will produce a specific model of the seasonal
loading effects on the deformation field. The correlations between the GPS and
GRACE time series should also provide locally specific estimates of water
storage levels at each continuous GPS station in Myanmar.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.