* 1714564
* Uncovering Design Principles of cis-Antisense Transcription to Build Robust Genetic Switches
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Anushree Chatterjee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract: Biological systems have the immense potential for regulating
themselves in response to their environment. This is achieved by the intricate
gene regulatory circuitry wired over years of evolution. A relatively less
studied but predominant form of gene regulation involves cis-antisense
transcription that is found across all kingdoms of life. This includes thousands
of cis-antisense gene pairs found in the human genome, many implicated in life-
threatening diseases. cis-antisense transcription occurs when two genes on
opposite strands of DNA have partially overlapping DNA. Such a configuration can
give rise to gene products that can potentially silence expression of each other
via a mechanism called cis antisense RNA regulation (cis-AR). Further the
movement and traffic of proteins on the DNA in this region can also influence
gene expression via a mechanism called transcriptional interference (TI). This
project uncovers the design principles of gene regulation by engineering the
mechanisms of cis-AR and TI, and examines their combination in advantageous ways
to explore design of novel genetic devices for higher-order biological
computing. The genetic devices built in this project can address important
applications in biotechnology and biomedicine including gene therapy, cell fate
control in cell therapy, and event-triggered protein expression during biofuel
production, and creation of novel antibiotics against superbugs. This project
will also cultivate a program to expose K-12 and undergraduate students to
research opportunities, provide graduate students with mentorship, training and
experience, and both groups to an improved awareness of applying their
engineering education to solve biotechnological problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to develop a
fundamental understanding of functional role of cis-antisense transcription, and
uncover the design principles of tunability and biological robustness as a
result of gene regulatory mechanisms occurring during cis-antisense
transcription. The project will explore different mechanisms of TI and cis-AR to
identify and characterize novel sensory and regulatory elements to create novel
synthetic genetic circuits and devices using biological parts. Firstly, genetic
circuits will be built bottom up by engineering TI mechanisms of RNA polymerase
collision, Sitting Duck interference and DNA roadblock to create novel
biological parts. Secondly, novel synthetic genetic modules will be built by
engineering cis-AR mechanisms of translational inhibition, transcriptional
attenuation, and transcript co-degradation. Thirdly, TI and cis-AR based
synthetic genetic modules will be combined to develop sophisticated and
versatile logic gate devices that can achieve higher order computation. Finally,
by combining positive and negative feedback loops based on TI, cis-AR, and
feedback from proteins regulated by TI and cis-AR, robust synthetic bistable
memory switches will be developed with fewer biological parts. This project will
provide answers to the question whether cis-antisense transcription based gene
regulation can give rise to a highly tunable system output, ranging from a
simple-first order response to biologically complex higher-order response such
as bistable switches. The outcomes of the proposed research will also lead to
fundamental understanding of robustness and tunability of biological switches
regulated by cis-antisense transcription, which will be of interest to
biologists as well as engineers investigating complex biological gene networks.
The educational goals will include development of mentorship program to train
high school students, workshops for freshman and sophomore students to expose
them STEM careers, development of research screencasts utilizing available
technological tools, as well as performing assessments to promote diversity and
increase enrollment of women in science.