* 1714144
* Collaborative Research: Plasma Physics At Small Coulomb Logarithms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/07/2016,08/31/2018
* Michael Murillo, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This collaborative research project will advance fundamental understanding of
how groups of high speed ions crash into and interact with each other. One can
measure just how violent a collision is by comparing the energy of the crashing
high-speed ions with the electrical force between them. The most violent ion
collisions, the ones that are most important both for extending our scientific
knowledge and for developing technological applications, are very difficult to
measure or calculate. They occur in extremely hot and very dense gases of
charged particles called plasmas. In this project, new ideas will be used to
measure and understand these collisions. Lasers will be used to slow atoms from
speeds of nearly 1000 meters per second to a crawl of about an inch per second;
and then to turn these slow atoms into ions. Additional lasers will then be used
to measure how these ions crash into each other. The ions in these slow-motion
collisions have the same amount of crash energy compared to the ion-ion
electrical force, which means that the collision results can be directly
compared to similar collisions at any energy. This project will use state-of-
the-art large-scale computer simulations to make movies of the ion-ion
collisions and compare these to the experimental measurements. When the
computations are proven to be sufficiently accurate, approximations will be
gradually introduced and tested in order to speed up the computations. These
results will then set the standard for accurate and fast computations of ion
collisions in plasmas. Several students will work on this project: Undergraduate
and graduate students and post-doctoral scientists will work closely with expert
scientists at Willamette University (Oregon), Brigham Young University (Utah),
and the New Mexico Consortium (New Mexico).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
collaborative research project will investigate energy relaxation in a system in
which the value of the Coulomb logarithm is small. This is typical of high-
energy-density systems, where violent small-impact-parameter collisions result
in large particle deflections. Understanding these collisions is a priority for
advancing fundamental plasma physics and for accurately modeling small impact
parameter collisions in high energy density plasmas. The proposed work will
generate high quality data in plasma regimes where traditional diagnostics are
limited. The proposed work will combine data from a new dual-species ultracold
neutral plasma experiment and state-of-the-art simulations to study temperature
equilibration in moderately coupled plasmas, in which classic plasma assumptions
are invalid. The dual-species plasma will be generated by resonantly photo-
ionizing laser-cooled Yb and Ca atoms in the same magneto-optical trap. Laser-
induced fluorescence measurements will be used to measure the time-evolving ion
velocity distribution for each ion species simultaneously. By delaying the
ionization of one species relative to the other, the time scale for full energy
relaxation can be determined. State-of-the-art molecular dynamics simulations
will be performed that match the density, stoichiometry, and geometry of the
experiments. The calculations will provide a first-principles description of
collision processes by directly integrating many-body trajectories. Arbitrarily
complicated orbits will be computed self-consistently with dynamical many-body
screening. The many-body phase dynamics will be inverted to yield highly
accurate effective Coulomb logarithms, providing important information back to
the high energy density community. This project will support one graduate
student per year for three years at BYU, two undergraduate students per year at
BYU, two undergraduate students per year at WU, and one post-doc per year for
two years at NMC.