* 1714617
* Bayesian Inverse Problems and Model Uncertainties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Erkki Somersalo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 216,634.00

The traditional and very natural paradigm in science is to build predictive
mathematical models that move from causes to consequences. However, it often
happens that observations of consequences are available, and one needs to
identify the causes that made the observations possible. The latter type of
problems are known as inverse problems. Inverse problems are characterized by
their high sensitivity to errors in the measurements and the models used, the
existence of not just one but several possible solutions, and their
computational complexity. This project focuses on one particular but central
aspect in inverse problems: Assume that a very detailed and complex predictive
model exists, known to be able to produce predictions that match well with
observations. Furthermore, assume that the model is computationally very
demanding, and it contains numerous parameters whose values are unknown or
poorly known. To solve the inverse problem in the required time frame, it may be
that a simplified, or reduced model, needs to be used. Given that inverse
problems are sensitive to errors in the model, it typically happens that the
model reduction introduces an uncontrolled error, or discrepancy between the
model and reality, that may render the solution of the inverse problem
completely useless. The investigator and his colleagues have proposed a general
methodology to handle the modeling error problem in the statistical framework,
and in this project, the aim is to develop the methodology further so that it
allows a reliable way to find a useful solution with limited computational
resources, and to quantify the reliability of such solution. The main
applications in this project are in the field of medicine, including mapping of
the brain activity, identification and localization of stroke using a portable
equipment, and development of fast and portable computing tools to model blood
flow, but the results also have applications beyond medical applications.

The technical difficulty in handling the modeling error in an inverse problem is
that it depends on the unknown cause that the inverse problem is seeking.
However, the Bayesian statistical paradigm provides a very natural solution to
this problem. In the Bayesian context, the unknown of primary interest is
described as a random variable that has an a priori probability distribution,
and therefore, it is possible to estimate a probability distribution of the
modeling error and include it as part of the likelihood model. This basic
observation has been shown to lead to algorithms that dramatically improve the
estimates compared to results that ignore the modeling error. In this project,
the methodology will be developed further, by carefully following how the
inclusion of the modeling error distribution affects the Bayesian posterior
distribution of the unknown, and conversely, how the modeling error distribution
can be updated after the data is used to update the prior density of the
unknown. Such tracking will hopefully lead to a computationally efficient way of
quantifying uncertainties in the inverse solutions in the presence of modeling
errors. One family of problems the project addresses is multi-scale inverse
problems, in which the unknowns of primary interest are describing fine-scale
behavior of the system, while the observation represents a macroscopic, coarse
scale quantity. These types of problems often appear in biological applications,
where the high-fidelity microscopic models are often stochastic in nature, and
cannot be handled directly in the standard Bayesian framework.