* 1714647
* III: Small: Extracting Data and Structure from Charts and Graphs for Analysis, Reuse and Indexing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Maneesh Agrawala, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,419.00

Charts and graphs are ubiquitous forms of data representations, appearing in
scientific papers, textbooks, reports, news articles and webpages. These
visualizations leverage human visual processing to efficiently convey large
amounts of quantitative information, and to illustrate trends and differences in
the data. But, while people can easily interpret data from charts and graphs,
machines cannot directly access this data. Today, a vast trove of information is
locked inside data visualizations. This proposal will develop techniques for
extracting data and structure from such visualizations and thereby enable data
further analysis, reuse and new forms of indexing across the collection of
existing charts and graphs. Some of the applications will be specifically
designed to improve the accessibility of visualizations for visual impaired
users. The tools will provide a novel computational infrastructure for knowledge
integration and sharing and impact a broad range of users including scientists,
journalists, economists, social scientists, and educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Specifically this proposal addresses three main goals.
First, it develops computational models for interpreting visualizations to
extract the underlying data, graphical marks, and mappings that relate the data
to mark attributes. The approach will be informed by recent work on human
perception and cognition of visualizations. The aim is to build generalized
computational models that can accurately extract data from visualizations and
also mimic the way people decode information from visualizations. Second, it
supports development of a suite of applications that enable analysis and
repurposing of visualizations and data. Third, it applies automated
visualization interpretation techniques at Internet scale and develops a search
engine that indexes visualizations based on their underlying data and graphical
structure. The search engine will accelerate data-driven analysis and discovery
by facilitating browsing and retrieval of data that is currently locked in
computationally inaccessible visualizations. The project website will include
information on the project and provide access to resulting publications,
software and datasets.