* 1714151
* Functions of a novel noncoding RNA family
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Thomas Evans, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Candi Phoebe Lostroh
* 07/31/2020
* USD 355,989.00

This project seeks to understand how a new family of molecules controls how
genes are turned on or off. Unlike most known gene regulators, which are
proteins, these regulators are chains of ribonucleotides called noncoding RNAs.
These particular ncRNAs were discovered in the model organism C. elegans in
earlier work on this project, which also suggested they have functions during C.
elegans development. So, this study will reveal new insights into regulatory
pathways that are critical to animal development and gene regulation. In
addition, the project will develop new methods to detect and count millions of
RNA molecules from small amounts of material. These methods could have broad
applications including in medical diagnosis, new environmental survey methods,
or forensics investigations. This project will also provide scientific training
of a graduate student, who will conduct this research as part of their PhD
thesis, and will serve as the basis of a research training program for
undergraduate students interested in science or science-related careers.

Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) are rapidly emerging as surprisingly prominent and
diverse regulators. However, functions of most ncRNAs are a mystery. Preliminary
studies for this project discovered a family of novel ncRNAs that bind Sm rings,
relatives of ancient protein complexes found in all domains of life. In
eukaryotes, Sm rings are core components of snRNA complexes that catalyze mRNA
splicing. However, several studies suggest that Sm rings have a variety of other
poorly understood functions. Collectively, these findings suggest that multiple
Sm-bound ncRNAs control unknown RNA targets, thereby regulating a variety of
processes. This project will explore this idea using the nematode C. elegans as
a model system. Targeted gene disruption will be combined with unique high
throughput RNA sequencing strategies and established assays to determine how Sm
ncRNA mutations alter RNA profiles and other biological functions. Transgene
manipulations will test emergent models for how Sm ncRNAs control RNA targets in
vivo. This project will reveal functions of novel ncRNAs, which represent a new,
poorly understood paradigm of genetic control. Results may transform ideas for
the functions of Sm family rings and their ncRNA partners. In addition, this
project will help develop new genome scale methods and bioinformatic tools that
will have broad applicability to the many other families of ncRNAs emerging from
genomes throughout phylogeny.