* 1714005
* EAPSI: Engineering Nanocarriers to Penetrate Colorectal Tissue as Platforms for HIV Prevention
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Antoinette Nelson, Nelson                  Antoinette     G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Without a cure or vaccine for the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), one of the
most promising ways to slow down its spread is by focusing on prevention. In the
development of HIV prevention strategies, patient adherence has been a major
limitation. One factor that may cause poor adherence is prescribed drug regimen
that require frequent dosing. In addition, individuals may be burdened with
unwanted side effects that result from large doses and systemic toxicity.
Nanotechnology is of significant interest to help address these concerns. This
project will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Xing-Jie Liang at the
National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China. As an expert in
nanomedicine, Dr. Liang will provide guidance on the design and characterization
of dendrimers, a form of branch-like nano-carriers, to be administered to the
colorectum as drug delivery systems for HIV prevention. This work will establish
greater insights into nano-scale drug delivery and develop the framework to
produce more safe, convenient and effective pharmaceutical interventions.

Exposure to HIV through unprotected sexual activity remains the primary cause of
transmission worldwide. Currently, the only approach approved by the Federal
Drug Administration (FDA) for HIV prevention is orally administered pre-exposure
prophylaxis (PrEP) in the form of a combinational drug product. With oral PrEP,
relatively large dosages are required to achieve effective concentrations in
mucosal tissues. Additionally, the entire body is being exposed to
antiretrovirals, raising concerns of systemic toxicity. Together with a strict
once-a-day dosing regimen, these conditions contribute to overall poor patient
adherence behaviors that may result in ineffectiveness of treatment. Therefore,
significant research is currently being conducted to develop effective, safe,
and long-acting PrEP formulations. Based on the unique physicochemical
properties of nanomaterials, they show great promise in their ability to aid in
the development of these applications. Dr. Xing-Jie Liang is an expert in
nanomedicine with extensive experience in drug delivery and active cell and
tissue targeting to enhance drug safety and efficacy. The project will be guided
by the following aims: 1) engineer dendrimers labeled with established cell
penetrating peptides; 2) characterize dendrimers by imaging and spectral
analysis and 3) investigate cellular uptake in intestinal cells by flow
cytometry and confocal microscopy. The completion of this work will establish a
deeper understanding of nanoengineering and cell targeting techniques to
potentially serve as interventions for HIV and within other areas of biomedical
research.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China.