* 1714068
* Quark Matter and its Role in the Evolution of Proton-Neutron Stars to Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Fridolin Weber, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2021
* USD 269,988.00

Galaxies are filled with hundreds of millions of compact stellar objects known
as neutron stars. Neutron stars are more massive than our Sun, but are typically
only about 20 kilometers across. A thimble full of neutron star matter thus has
a mass of one billion tons. At such extraordinary conditions, atomic nuclei
collapse and neutrons and protons are squeezed so tightly together that even
their building blocks (quarks) may be released. The aim of this project is to
study the role of quarks for newly formed neutron stars and to identify possible
signatures in astrophysical observables. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in areas of physics that are richly interdisciplinary and enrich
their educational experience beyond what they learn in the classroom. Students
from local middle and high schools will benefit from the PI's research in the
form of public lectures and multimedia presentations. This research will support
the physics program at state-of-the-art astrophysical instruments, such as FAST,
skA, ATHENA, and NICER, that promise the discovery of tens of thousands of new
neutron stars at different stages of their evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal aim of this proposal is to study quark matter under conditions
characteristic to proto-neutron stars, using the non-local 3-flavor Polyakov-
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio (n3PNJL) model to describe hot and dense quark matter, and to
explore the role of quark matter in the evolution of proto-neutron stars to
neutron stars. The n3PNJL model is an effective model of quantum chromodynamics
that allows for a state-of-the-art modeling of quark matter. The model accounts
for the dynamical breaking of chiral symmetry and mimics quark confinement via
the Polyakov-loop potential. It provides a versatile and numerically-treatable
approach to quantum chromodynamics. The best available data from heavy-ion
collisions and neutron star observations will be used to constrain the equation
of state of (proto-) neutron star matter, which will be computed and made
publicly available online at CompOSE and StellarCollapse. Already existing,
fully general relativistic numerical 2D rotation and 2D cooling codes will be
used to study the rotational evolution of hot proto-neutron stars to cold
catalyzed neutron stars self-consistently. Both uniformly-rotating as well as
differentially-rotating systems will be considered and their role as possible
sources of gravitational radiation explored.