* 1714461
* RUI:   Precision Measurements of Free Neutron Decay Observables
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Alexander Komives, DePauw University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 90,000.00

This award will support the PI and undergraduate students working with him to
understand the ways in which neutrons decay and how long a free neutron will
exist before decaying. Neutrons which are not bound in an atomic nucleus will
decay in about 880 seconds into a proton, electron and an antineutrino. Studying
characteristics of this property of neutrons with increasing precision allows a
deeper knowledge about the framework upon which the cosmos was built. One
experiment, named aCORN, has collected data at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Center for Neutron Research to measure the correlation
between the emission directions of the electron and antineutrino more precisely
than ever before. Another experiment, UCNtau, is using magnets and gravity to
trap very low energy neutrons to measure the neutron's lifetime to less than a
second. Experiments trapping very low energy neutrons and subsequently counting
the undecayed survivors after a period of time are tending to give results
significantly different than experiments which involve a higher energy beam of
neutrons and the detection of protons produced in the decay. Finding the cause
of this discrepancy is of great interest as it has the potential of uncovering a
new feature of neutron decay. This award will allow the Principle Investigator
(PI) and DePauw University Undergraduate Researchers to make important
contributions to these two experiments. The aCORN experiment has been the
flagship project of the PI's research program, which in many ways has acted as a
training ground for his students to prepare them for research and teaching. The
students who participate in this research gain a broad range of hardware and
software skills that prepare them for careers in STEM fields or to pursue
graduate degrees also in STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivations for a
more precise measurement of the electron-antineutrino correlation include an
improved model independent test of the Electroweak Standard Model and a
measurement of the ratio of weak axial vector to vector coupling constants that
does not depend on neutron polarimetry. In addition, this measurement, along
with a more precise neutron lifetime, would allow a determination of Vud - an
element of the Cabbibo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix - solely from free neutron
decay and thus not complicated by nuclear structure dependent corrections. As
the CKM matrix is required to be unitary, this would provide a test of the
Standard Model. Knowing the neutron lifetime better also allows for a stringent
test of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis. The aCORN experiment depends on the
simultaneous detection of electrons and protons to infer the relative emission
direction of the antineutrino. The PI has developed a proton tracking simulation
that determines the efficiency of the aCORN proton focusing system for the first
data set which is important in establishing the size of the systematic error
that would result from imperfect proton detection. The PI will apply this
analysis to the second data set and fully analyze the NG-C data. The techniques
used in the aCORN proton simulation will be employed to design a proton detector
system in the UCNtau experiment to allow determination of the neutron lifetime
by observation of the protons which is closer to what the neutron beam lifetime
experiments actually measure. Such a measurement could be instrumental in
understanding the discrepancy between these experiments.