* 1714109
* Collaborative Research: Preliminary Design of BL3, A New Neutron Lifetime Experiment Using the Beam Method
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Fred Wietfeldt, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 11/30/2022
* USD 329,996.00

The neutron is a basic building block of ordinary matter and most of the Earth's
mass comes from neutrons. However, when freed from a stable atomic nucleus the
neutron decays into a proton, electron, and antineutrino with a mean lifetime of
about fifteen minutes. Neutron decay played an important role in the early
universe: it determined the relative abundances of light elements (hydrogen,
helium, lithium, beryllium) and their isotopes that were formed in the first
minutes after the Big Bang. Due to its simplicity, neutron decay is an ideal
system for studying details of the most basic forces of subatomic physics, in
particular the weak nuclear force. Such studies improve our understanding of
nature and may provide hints of new fundamental physical phenomena yet to be
discovered. The neutron mean lifetime has been measured with an uncertainty of
less than one second by individual experiments, but results from the two main
experimental methods, the beam method and the ultracold neutron storage method,
currently disagree by more than eight seconds. Resolving this discrepancy is a
matter of great importance. This award supports the preliminary design of a
next-generation beam neutron lifetime experiment called BL3. It will employ new,
powerful technical features to enable its goals of resolving the discrepancy and
providing a reliable measurement of the neutron lifetime to well below one
second of uncertainty. This project provides an excellent opportunity to train
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs in the methods and theory of
neutron science which are applicable to diverse scientific studies in physics,
chemistry, materials science, and biology at existing and emerging neutron
sources around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this project is a
preliminary design of the BL3 apparatus, a new experiment to measure the neutron
lifetime using the beam method. It is similar in concept and improves upon
previous beam neutron lifetime experiments. It will employ a significantly
larger superconducting magnet to accommodate a large area neutron beam and will
incorporate many technical improvements, such as much higher counting
statistics, a more uniform magnetic field in the trapping region; a large,
segmented, ultrathin window silicon proton detector; and a sophisticated neutron
time of flight spectrometer. BL3 has two scientific goals: 1) to investigate and
test systematic effects in the beam method that may contribute to the 8.4 s (4
sigma) discrepancy between the beam and ultracold neutron storge experiments;
and 2) reduce the total uncertainty of the neutron lifetime beam method to less
than 0.3 s. The value of the neutron lifetime has important consequences in
nuclear physics, particle physics, astrophysics, and
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.