* 1714468
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Systematic analysis of degrons recognized for nuclear protein quality control
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Richard Gardner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2021
* USD 595,765.00

Cell physiology and viability depend on proteins adopting precise 3-dimensional
(3D) structures that provide the correct architecture for protein function and
activity. Proteins can often become damaged and lose their correct 3D structures
thus making them more prone to aggregation and the formation of toxic
aggregates. Misfolded protein aggregation is a fundamental problem that all
cells encounter, either randomly due to errors in protein synthesis or as a
stress-induced phenomenon caused by exposure of proteins to damaging agents. To
counteract misfolded protein aggregation, eukaryotic cells have evolved robust
organelle-specific protein quality control (PQC) pathways that manage these
proteins. This project seeks to examine the mechanisms of targeting of misfolded
and aggregated proteins to different PQC pathways in the model organism,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast), using high throughput screening and
computational analysis. It will also reveal the key features of misfolded
protein toxicity in the nucleus. More broadly, the research will provide
numerous training opportunities for scientists at all levels of experience, from
high school and undergraduate students to graduate students and research
scientists. Publically available datasets will be created from the data
generated. International workshops will also be created to provide a global
means for education and information dissemination.

The focus of this research is to understand how the nuclear organelle in
eukaryotic cells protects itself from proteins that have become incorrectly
folded and form toxic aggregates by examining the mechanisms of targeting
misfolded proteins through the multiple ubiquitin-proteasome system protein
quality control (UPS PQC) pathways. The experimental system is designed to
maximize the probability of identifying the spectrum of degradation signals that
govern the UPS PQC degradation pathways in the nucleus. To this end, a library
of yeast cDNA fragments will be constructed and appended to a nuclear reporter
system. The resulting nuclear protein library will enable measurement of the
contribution of each individual fragment to protein stability. Specifically, to
sort the different UPS PQC pathways in the nucleus, the reporter library will be
expressed in yeast strains with single or combined deletions of specific nuclear
PQC ubiquitin ligases. Data analysis will rely on in-depth bioinformatics that
will correlate the destabilizing elements with their affecting pathway(s).
Subsequently, the destabilizing sequences (degrons) will be compared to
sequences identified by a complementary yeast 2-hybrid analysis as interaction
sequences of nuclear proteins with their cognate ubiquitin ligases. Once degrons
are classified by their cognate degradation pathways, further computational
analyses will discern structural features particularly degron sequence,
structure, biochemical and biophysical properties. Distinct features will be
tested experimentally. To better understand the relationship between a tendency
of a degron to aggregate and its contribution to cell toxicity, a combination of
cell-growth and fluorescent assays will be employed. Altogether, the
identification of novel UPS PQC degrons will enable systematic investigation of
misfolded protein quality control in the nucleus. This, in turn, will provide
new biological hypotheses about how misfolded proteins aggregates and its
consequences. This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US
National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science Foundation.