* 1714094
* Determining the Mathematical Principles of Daily Timekeeping
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Daniel Forger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Accurate circadian (daily) timekeeping is essential to the survival of almost
all organisms. A better understanding of circadian timekeeping is particularly
important for the millions of Americans who travel overseas or work on irregular
schedules. Recent research on circadian rhythms has discovered the complex
biological mechanisms that generate timekeeping in each of the thousands of
cells within the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), the region of the brain that acts
as the central circadian clock in mammals. Here, detailed mathematical models of
neurons within the SCN are developed based on data from many experimental
groups. These models are mathematically analyzed and simplified to determine the
key properties that govern timekeeping. New mathematical and numerical methods
are developed to allow for the study of complex neuronal networks and determine
how timekeeping emerges from the collective behavior of coupled oscillators.
These results should be applicable to many biological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circadian clocks are studied as a model system in cellular
biology and electrophysiology to determine design principles that can be applied
to other physiological systems, particularly those consisting of coupled
oscillators. Mathematical models of electrophysiology will follow the Hodgkin-
Huxley formalism. Mathematical models of cellular biology will follow the mass
action formalism. Recent experimental research on the mechanisms of circadian
timekeeping in individual cells will be incorporated into these mathematical
models. Understanding the dynamics controlling circadian timekeeping will be
extremely helpful for the field of circadian rhythms, which seeks to determine
how a large number of proteins, ion channels and neurons work together to form
the body's central clock. The general mathematical work in this proposal
includes studying the attractors of biochemical feedback loops through iterative
maps, a population density method for efficiently simulating large dimensional
neuronal oscillators, and a new ansatz that can reduce a model of a large number
of coupled oscillators to a two dimensional model. These mathematical approaches
will be tested using our models of circadian timekeeping.