* 1714291
* NSFSaTC-BSF: CORE: Small: Examining the Impact of Cybersecurity Shocks on Cryptocurrency Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Tyler Moore, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 445,792.00

Cryptocurrency platforms facilitate trade, currency exchange, payments and other
advanced financial instruments for Bitcoin and other emerging cryptocurrencies.
Although there has been an explosion of innovation over the past several years,
frequent security lapses threaten the viability of these new technologies. This
project investigates how cybersecurity shocks affect the operation of
cryptocurrency platforms. It has three main parts. First, the project collects
extensive longitudinal data on security shocks to the platforms, such as
distributed denial of service attacks, publicly announced security breaches, and
unplanned outages. These data are being combined with publicly available data on
platform operations, such as changes to trading volume, exchange rate
fluctuation, and currency exchange market share. The purpose is to measure any
impact the shocks have on the wider ecosystem. Second, the project seeks to
identify opportunities for malevolent actors to profit from security shocks, to
quantify the extent to which abuse is possible, and to identify cases where
malicious actions have been taken. Third, the project seeks to develop empirical
models of the probability of shocks and identify what factors, ranging from
platform size to security hygiene, affect the occurrence of
shocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to the nascent science of
cybersecurity by emphasizing empirical analysis of real-world threats. By
combining measurement of security shocks on these platforms with data on how
these shocks impact operations, this research has the potential to identify
several new categories of financially-motivated attacks on cryptocurrencies. For
instance, by tracking multiple currency exchanges, the investigators can
precisely quantify the negative spillover effects of insecurity, something that
has frequently eluded prior researchers studying the economics of information
security. Also, the unprecedented level of transparency adopted by these new
platforms could enable the researchers to learn more about the impact of attacks
than is possible when studying cybersecurity threats in traditional financial
markets. Moreover, the findings will aid regulators and exchange operators by
quantifying adverse impacts of different shocks, and potentially even yield
lessons far beyond cryptocurrency platforms, and help protect the broader
financial system from adverse contagion.