* 1714860
* Collaborative Research: Repurposing the translation apparatus for mirror image polypeptide synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Farren Isaacs, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 475,000.00

The translation apparatus is the cell's factory for protein biosynthesis,
stitching together amino acid substrates into sequence-defined polymers
(proteins) from a defined genetic template. The extraordinary synthetic
capability of the protein biosynthesis system has driven extensive efforts to
harness it for societal needs in areas as diverse as energy, materials, and
medicine. For example, recombinant protein production has transformed the lives
of millions of people through the synthesis of biopharmaceuticals and industrial
enzymes. In nature, however, only limited sets of protein monomers are utilized,
thereby resulting in limited sets of biopolymers (i.e., proteins). Expanding
nature's repertoire of ribosomal monomers could yield new classes of enzymes,
therapeutics, materials, and chemicals with diverse chemistry. In the short
term, this will expand the genetic code in a unique and transformative way. In
the long-term, knowledge gained will allow researchers to diversify, evolve and
repurpose the ribosome and the entire protein synthesis system to generate non-
natural polymers as new classes of sequence-defined, evolvable matter. This
proposal will also promote interdisciplinary education, including the specific
expansion of STEM education and career opportunities for underrepresented
minorities and women. Students will be trained to integrate principles from
genome engineering, systems biology, and synthetic biology. As a form of
outreach, the investigators will create experiential learning modules that bring
synthetic biology research to K-12 and undergraduate classrooms and connect
students to the science being done at our institutions. This new outreach
program will ensure that advances made in this project benefit a broader
community and will contribute to motivating and training young scientists and
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators seek to
repurpose the translation apparatus for making new proteins containing multiple
mirror-image D-alpha-amino acids. By seamlessly melding the integration of
bottom-up engineering design, genome engineering, and full-scale systems
optimization, the project will create a new framework for studying and
engineering translation and the genetic code. This framework will be
instrumental in sustaining the much-anticipated transformation in expanding the
range of genetically encoded chemistry in living systems, with the potential for
significant breakthroughs. For example, understanding the structural and
substrate flexibility of the protein synthesis machinery may provide insights
into life's origin and also lead to general rules for engineering protein
synthesis to meet societal needs. From an engineering perspective, the research
could enable scalable mirror image polypeptide synthesis, opening the door to
cheaper and more effective peptidomimetic enzymes, materials, and drugs, and
expanding the scope of synthetic and chemical biology. In sum, it is expected
that this project will provide new directions for academic and industrial
enterprises related to engineering translation, while simultaneously training
the next generation of scientists and engineers to be full participants in the
work force.