* 1714176
* GEOPATHS: IMPACT Geoscience Student Research and Ambassador Program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* John Bartley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,762.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Over the next decade, careers in geoscience are projected to
grow significantly nationally and in the state of Utah. To increase the number
and diversity of geoscience professionals, Salt Lake Community College (SLCC) is
collaborating with the University of Utah on curriculum-reforms to increase the
diversity and successful transfer of geology majors from SLCC to university. The
project will implement the proven practices of early undergraduate research,
university outreach, and transfer support with an innovative near-peer mentoring
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;Select geology majors at SLCC will be supported by a stipend
to conduct undergraduate research and visit two partnering universities for
outreach and feedback on research projects. In addition, SLCC participants will
serve as near-peer mentors to a few non-majors from the general education
geology classes by enlisting their help on research projects. The near-peer
mentoring component has the potential to advance our understanding of how to
expand undergraduate research at the community college level. For the university
outreach component, SLCC students will visit the two universities for outreach
activities and meet with the faculty advisory board for guidance their research.
In addition, this project will develop a Transfer Support Program in the geology
departments at both universities. The Transfer Support Program will connect
newly transferred SLCC geology majors to a near-peer mentor (an upper division
undergraduate geology major) to help integrate them into the university geology
majors program. &lt;br/&gt;This project is original and potentially
transformative because it extends the undergraduate research experience beyond
top-performing students to a larger audience and thus has potential for a larger
impact. If successful, this strategy could be employed in lower division classes
at universities and other STEM disciplines at SLCC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;Over the next decade, careers in geoscience are projected to grow
significantly but the STEM pipeline in higher education is leaking majors. This
?leaky pipeline? can be patched by implementing proven pedagogies early in a
student?s college career such as at the community college level. To achieve
this, Salt Lake Community College (SLCC) has collaborated with the University of
Utah to implement the proven practices of undergraduate research, near-peer
mentoring, university outreach, and transfer support. The goal is to increase
degree completions, retention, diversity, and transfer rates of geology majors
at SLCC. &lt;br/&gt;The project will support motivated and diverse SLCC geology
majors to serve as ?research ambassadors? who will conduct undergraduate
research projects with mentoring from university faculty and an upper-division
undergraduate peer. Underrepresented minority (URM) groups will be particularly
recruited as participants. Ambassadors will develop career-relevant skills
focused on soil and water sampling and mapping using current technologies such
as the hand-held x-ray fluorescence analyzer, water quality meters, and GPS
enable field-rugged tablets with ArcGIS mapping software. The participants are
called ?ambassadors? because they will recruit a few students from the general
education geology classes to assist with their research. Thus, this approach
brings the benefits of undergraduate research to the general education
population which could potentially amplify the effect of the project across the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, SLCC students will visit the two
partnering universities?the University of Utah and Weber State University?for
outreach activities and to meet with the faculty advisory board for friendly
guidance on research projects. Further, both universities will establish a
Transfer Support Program to support ambassadors after they transfer. The
Transfer Support Program will assign ambassadors a near-peer mentor (an upper
division undergraduate geology major) to help integrate them into the university
geology department and student organizations. &lt;br/&gt;The near-peer mentoring
component has to the potential to advance our knowledge on undergraduate
research at the community college level. Many studies demonstrate clear benefits
of undergraduate research, but the few top-performing students usually reap this
reward. This project is original and potentially transformative because it
extends this research experience beyond top-performing students to a much larger
audience and thus has potential for a larger impact. If successful, this
strategy could be employed in lower division classes at universities and other
STEM disciplines at SLCC.