* 1714587
* EAGER: Evaluating the Accuracy of Digital Compass Measurements on Mobile Devices
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Eric Pyle, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 36,875.00

Mobile devices are revolutionizing how geoscientists approach field-based
research, and new technologies are being developed that are significantly
different from methods used by previous generations. For example, hardware built
into many smart phones and tablets allow these devices to function as digital
geologic compasses. The ease of use and speed of taking digital measurements
seem to represent distinct advantages over using an analog geologic compass in
the field. However, preliminary investigations suggest that digital compass apps
may not provide the accuracy that a professional field geologist needs. To
address these concerns, this project will statistically evaluate the relative
accuracy of orientation measurements using digital compasses on mobile devices
as compared with analog compasses. This project will produce results that impact
all geoscientists that use geologic compasses to take orientation measurements,
and as such, the potential impacts across geoscience disciplines are
substantial. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will tap into students' facility
with mobile devices to make them the primary collectors of field data. Students
in upper-level geology courses will take orientation measurements with both
analog and digital compasses, which will then be used for statistical
evaluations of the relative accuracy of digital vs. analog compass measurements.
The researchers will assess statistical variation in their datasets to include
variation between platforms, variation within measurements by observers on
different locations in the field, and variation in repeated measurements on the
same surface. Statistical analyses, such as Fisher distribution and Watson-
Williams analyses, and Bland-Altman tests, will be applied to the field
datasets. The researchers will assess the magnitude of the discrepancy and
limits of agreement between types of measure and software; the existence of any
systematic trends in variation across measurements, platforms, and software; as
well as evaluate the consistency of measurement across the range of collected
field data. In addition to the practical aspects of the research, the project
will contribute to STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
education by the engagement of undergraduate students in the project.