* 1714858
* Identifying a common mechanism for phonetic learning and phonetic adaptation
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Vincent Gracco, Heffner                 Christopher    C
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship award
supports a rising scholar studying the psychological and neural underpinnings of
speech perception. The focus of this grant is on the flexibility that is
necessary to both learn new sounds and to understand people speaking a familiar
language with an accent or dialect. Some people are better than others at
mastering the new sounds of a language, just as some people are better than
others at understanding accented speech. But do these two different skills go
hand-in-hand? By answering this question, this project will unlock important
insights into human language abilities, thereby allowing for the creation of
better voice recognition technology, better foreign language training, and a
clearer sense of how the brain adapts to new language situations. The project
will also improve science communication through the dissemination of a novel
peer-to-peer science communication module and enhanced collaboration with a
local science museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on a critical
area of research within neuroscience: plasticity. In speech perception,
plasticity--the ability to change behavior based on input from the environment--
is required throughout the lifetime. There are substantial individual
differences in phonetic learning of new speech sound categories, as happens when
learning a new language, and also in phonetic adaptation of known speech sound
categories, as occurs when encountering an accented talker. Despite the
parallels between phonetic learning and phonetic adaptation, these two domains
remain only weakly connected. In this project, a series of studies are designed
to test whether a single, unified mechanism underlies plasticity for speech
sound learning of non-native categories and plasticity for speech sound
adaptation to unusual variants embedded in native language speech. The project
reflects a search for common behavioral and neural correlates of plasticity for
learning and plasticity for adaptation. This search will be undertaken using a
combination of (1) finding intercorrelations between two tasks of phonetic
learning and two tasks of phonetic adaptation that vary in task demands, (2)
probing for correlates of those tasks in structural MRI, resting-state MRI, and
DTI measures, and (3) assessment of causal mechanisms of phonetic plasticity by
way of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). These experiments will be used
to test a proposed model of phonetic plasticity with specific behavioral and
neural predictions.