* 1714082
* EAPSI: Investigating the Role of Peripheral Habitats in the Adaptive Potential of Coral Reef Fishes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* May Roberts, Roberts                 May            B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Coral reef organisms and habitats are faced with a growing number of stressors,
the effects of which are increasingly monitored and studied. Less is understood
about the underlying genetics, the evolutionary tools for species to adapt and
persist through some of these environmental changes. This study aims to identify
whether the potential for local adaptation differs across populations within a
species range by examining particular genetic characteristics in multiple coral
reef fish species. Researchers will compare between populations of fishes at the
center of their species range and those at the edges of the species range to
test whether peripheral habitats may serve as regions harboring populations with
greater adaptive potential. For this project, fish populations at their northern
range boundary in the temperate coral reefs of Japan will be compared to
populations at the center of their ranges in the tropical reefs of the
Philippines and Indonesia. This study aims to increase understanding about the
role of edge populations in local adaptation and speciation as well as to gain
information to better predict the vulnerability of these species to changes in
climate and environment. This research will be conducted under the mentorship of
molecular biologist, Dr. James Reimer at the University of the Ryukyus. Dr.
Reimer has valuable experience and insight on the population genetics of the
marine system in this region and provides access and instruction to key field
equipment and laboratory techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
consist of the collection of the edge population samples for eight reef fish
species in Japan, subsequent DNA extractions, sequencing and finally, analyses.
Study species were chosen in part, based on their distribution location and
size, reproductive mode, and pelagic larval duration. Researchers suspect that
these life history characteristics influence potential patterns in the targeted
genetic indicators of adaptation and speciation. Samples collected during this
study will be compared with previously collected Philippine and Indonesian
samples. Using information generated from RAD sequencing of both population
types, researchers will compare levels of genetic variation and the frequency of
genes under selection between center and peripheral populations of each species.
The findings from this research will help to answer whether these particular
indictors of adaptive potential differ between populations within a species
range in these reef fish. Further studies can then be conducted to better
understand mechanisms of speciation, local adaptation, rapid evolution, as well
as to improve the accuracy of future predictions for coral reef health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.