* 1714047
* EAPSI: Developing a Shape Changing Wing Design for a Bio-inspired Flying Robot
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Laura Matloff, Matloff                 Laura
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Birds nimbly shift their wings through aerodynamic shapes and can fly stably in
unpredictable environments, a feat that robots currently cannot replicate. This
project will leverage engineering advances in soft robotics and origami
structures to enable bird-inspired designs of robotic shape-changing wings. This
work will be done in collaboration with Dr. Kyujin Cho, head of the Biorobotics
Lab at Seoul National University in Korea, who specializes in soft biologically
inspired mechanisms and robots. His expertise combined with the PI's knowledge
of bird morphology and kinematics will allow a unique mixing of perspectives to
design and build a flying robot with morphing origami wings. Through this
project, new bio-inspired mechanisms will be developed to further understand
shape-changing wings in flight.

Bio-inspired design has been revolutionizing the robotics field, and has the
potential to further improve flying robots, especially small-scale, low Reynolds
number fliers. The objective of this project is to apply novel shape memory
alloy (SMA) actuators and flexible origami fabrication methods to create a
morphing wing for a bird-inspired robot with movements based on biomechanical
measurements of birds. After the design of a bio-inspired robot, high speed
video will be used to analyze robot kinematics and to benchmark flight
performance against current flying robots and birds. Flight performance tests
include flight time, glide ratio, and controllability. This study is an
important step to forward the field of bio-inspired design, bringing together
documented bird kinematics and morphology with state of the art engineering
actuators and manufacturing methods.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.