* 1714930
* Durable Change in Implicit Cognition through Retrieval-Based Memory Modification
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mahzarin Banaji, Mann                    Thomas         C
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields.This postdoctoral fellowship award supports
a rising scholar investigating the formation and change of implicit (i.e.,
relatively automatic) reactions to people and groups. The project will utilize
research across work in social psychology, neuroscience, and animal research on
memory updating to advance scientific understanding of how implicit social
impressions can be effectively and durably revised. Although many people hold
explicitly (i.e., self-reported) egalitarian and tolerant beliefs, implicit
measures of cognition have revealed far more negative impressions of stigmatized
or marginalized groups, such as those based on race, ethnicity, age, gender, and
sexuality. These implicit reactions can have a variety of consequences for
decision-making and interpersonal relations in many areas of society, but the
ways in which they can be reliably changed are not well understood. This project
seeks to fill that gap by testing various methods through which existing
memories about other people and groups can be reactivated and revised to
incorporate new information and become more consistent with explicit beliefs.

Although implicit reactions to socially meaningful groups often have been
difficult to revise, recent work on memory retrieval-based updating and
reconsolidation has shown that cognitive and affective reactions can be durably
altered by retrieval of the memories that underlie those reactions prior to
learning new information aimed at revising them. In a series of studies
employing diverse methods and target groups, this project will test the critical
role of identification and retrieval of memories that support negative group
impressions in moderating the success of interventions aimed at changing those
implicit reactions. Novel social targets (individuals and groups) will be
presented in conjunction with various types of initial learning, including
evaluative conditioning, behavioral descriptions, and general group information,
to allow a test of the effectiveness of subsequent memory retrieval and new
learning for modifying initial implicit reactions following diverse experiences
with the social targets. Using novel and real group targets, the project will
also assess the impact of different types of new learning on producing durable
revision after memory retrieval, including: mere re-presentation of the
target(s), reframing the meaning of specific event memories, connecting
participant thoughts about groups to the personal experiences of the
participant, and presentation of new factual group information. A further goal
of the project will be to test the characteristics of the memory reactivation
episode that produces the most effective revision, including an examination of
the type of memory that is reactivated. In particular, expectancy violation
during memory reactivation has been theorized to be of central importance in
enabling memory updating to occur. Studies in this project will examine the role
of expectancy violation in the updating of the memory representations that
contribute to implicit impressions and in so doing will extend and build upon
memory updating theory. The generalizability of the results will be promoted
through the use of community and online samples, and the results will be used to
develop computational models of implicit memory change to understand shifts in
implicit cognition in terms of basic processes of learning and memory.