* 1714168
* Collaborative EAGER project: Early Career Seismic Chief Scientist Training Cruise
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Masako Tominaga, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2018
* USD 88,997.00

Results of the recent UNOLS Marine Seismic Questionnaire (MSQ) demonstrate the
value of an early career scientist Multi-Channel Seismic (MCS) chief scientist
training cruise. Proposed, and awarded, are funds to carry out a MCS training
program that includes 4 days of seismic data acquisition to increase the number
of early career scientists experienced in marine seismology and to demonstrate
the value of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography portable MCS system, a
UNOLS facility. The training program consists of three parts: (i) Webinars prior
to the cruise to expose the participants to the fundamentals of active source
marine seismology, to provide the scientific background needed to plan the
upcoming survey effectively, and to introduce the participants to open source
processing and interpretation tools. The Webinars will include Proposal Writing
and Data Management training. Applications will be solicited, including a
maximum 2- page science proposal, after the webinar series. Once selected,
participants will discuss their cruise plans with the PI team prior to the pre-
cruise workshop via several telepresence meetings; then, during a 2-day workshop
immediately before the cruise, the participants will finalize the cruise plan
under the PI team's guidance; (ii) A training cruise. Each participant will
contribute to the entire team walking off the ship with post-stack time migrated
data, as well as writing a cruise report collaboratively; and (iii) a 2-day data
interpretation workshop with computer-based visualization software. Intellectual
Merit: The proposed survey regions are on the active continental margin of the
west coast of the United States, where a variety of sedimentary and tectonic
settings are available, providing targets of interest to a wide range of
participants. At the extended continental margin off the coast of Oregon, the
seismic reflection profiles acquired, processed, and archived from this cruise
can be used to image the subducting plate and the Astoria Fan, as well as
accretionary ridges hosting gas hydrate and pockets of hemipelagic sediment
containing paleo-oceanographic information. Targets have implications for
addressing important societally relevant questions, such as earthquake hazards
and paleoclimate records in basins. There will also be potential for using
seismic techniques to reveal real-time, fine-scale within the water column
around upwelling regions of the northeastern Pacific Ocean boundaries. Open
access data from this cruise can augment on-going and near-future science
conducted by a broader community. Broader Impacts: For this novel,
transformative project, early-career scientists will be selected from a wide
applicant pool. This science mission will be advertised on the MSQ and other
geoscience listservs, and encouraged participations of underrepresented
minorities and women by promoting the opportunity via organizations such as
Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Scienceand
Earth Science Women's Network. Participants will gain not only first-hand
seismic cruise experience but also experience communicating their research to
non-scientists. The proposed activities will be used to inform the public about
the unique and essential contributions of seismic research toward solving a
variety of important societal challenges. Results will be shared on the AGU's
GeoSpace blog and Instagram account. Important deliverables from the pre-cruise
and onboard activities to the community are to establish and provide "cookbook"
of the open source software used during this cruise; and make the data acquired
from the cruise open immediately as soon as they are archived at the publically
accessible archives. A post-cruise survey will be conducted in collaboration
with the UNOLS office to obtain feedback from the participants and encourage the
participants to write NSF proposals, the number of which will be the direct and
ultimate measurement of the success of this ECS.