* 1714402
* Applied Spectral Analysis in Population Dynamics, Biophysics, and Physical Chemistry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Boris Vainberg, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 232,636.00

This research project will carry out development and analysis of several
mathematical models. The first set of questions originates in biotechnology.
Fast progress in modern biophysics requires new theoretical results on protein
solutions (suspensions), particularly in the studies of protein diffusion and of
transitions between globular and diffusive states. Diffusion processes in
polymer solutions differ from classical diffusion -- while the diffusion
coefficient grows linearly with temperature in the classical setting, it
decreases near the critical temperature for proteins. A mathematical model for
phase transitions in polymers will be developed, allowing one to explain this
fact and to explore other near-critical phenomena. One of the possible
applications is the analysis of the diffusion of medications in living tissue.
The second part of the project concerns population dynamics. Some of the most
important questions in this area concern the description of states that are
homogeneous in space and time and the study of their stability with respect to
local and random perturbations of the environment. These questions will be
studied for a wide class of models, including cases with immigration and heavy-
tailed migration in the population. The project also includes a study of
nonlinear partial differential equations describing the evolution of wave
packets in liquids.

The research will be based mostly on the spectral analysis of non-traditional
Schrodinger type operators: nonlocal operators and operators on fractals and
fractal graphs. A general spectral theory of convolution-type operators and
their perturbations will be developed. New results on the inverse scattering
problem are anticipated as a result of the last part of the project.