* 1714816
* Understanding the Birth of Stars in the Orion Nebula
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Jessica Lu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 12/31/2022
* USD 431,945.00

This astronomy project aims at understanding how stars are formed. Most stars,
especially large ones but also stars like the Sun, form in clusters of thousands
of objects. One of the best-known clusters of young stars is found in the Orion
Nebula. This birthplace for stars can be viewed even with small telescopes. With
large professional telescopes researchers can distinguish the thousands of stars
in the cluster, most of which are only a few million years old. The team from
the University of California San Diego will study the Orion cluster in greater
detail than ever before. They will measure the movements of the stars using the
Keck Observatory and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). By comparing the motions
of the stars in Orion with computer models, the awardees will reach a better
understanding of how the stars were formed. While conducting this research, the
team will also develop a new, one day, hands-on workshop for the Better
Education for Women in Science and Engineering (BE WiSE) program. BE WiSE works
directly with 7-12th grade girls and hopes to encourage more of them to follow
careers in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The awardees seek to test models
of clustered star formation. They will focus on the Orion Nebula Cluster (ONC),
probing stars with masses spanning three orders of magnitude down to the brown
dwarf limit. The team propose to build a three-dimensional kinematic map of the
center of the ONC by combining precise proper motion measurements from HST and
Keck images with spatially-resolved radial velocity measurements from Keck
spectroscopic observations. The ONC is the nearest site of massive star
formation and provides a unique opportunity to study in detail how young pre-
main-sequence stars and clusters form and evolve. Depending on the physical
processes included in the model (e.g., turbulence, feedback, magnetic fields,
etc.) current theories of star/cluster formation yield very different
predictions for the internal dynamics and sub-structure within the cluster.
Thus, kinematic studies of the ONC are a powerful tool for distinguishing
between the models and will provide important constraints on star formation in
general. A graduate student at UC San Diego will be heavily involved in this
project.