* 1714882
* New Polymeric Biomaterial Inks for 3-D Printing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/27/2016,07/31/2020
* Murat Guvendiren, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2020
* USD 336,000.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Rutgers University is to design novel biomaterial 'inks'
for 3D printing applications. The proposed research is aiming to address key
challenges associated with current limitations in 3D printable biodegradable
materials. 3D printing could help in the preparation of patient-specific devices
with high structural complexity and design flexibility. At present, there is a
lack of diversity in 3D printable materials for different applications, and
hence limiting the widespread use, particularly in biomedical applications. This
project will focus on developing novel 3D printable biodegradable polymer 'inks'
for fused deposition, modeling and solvent-based printing. This study will
provide polymer 'inks' with tunable mechanical properties, degradation,
bioactivity and biocompatibility to develop materials for possible tissue
engineering applications and regenerative medicine. This project covers a multi-
disciplinary research area, providing opportunities in training of students at
all levels. In addition, projects tailored for undergraduate students will be
developed providing them with hands-on laboratory experience with this study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The overall objective of this proposal is to
create a library of new polymers with tunable functionality such as degradation
and mechanical properties that could be used in the preparation of 3D scaffolds
and devices. The proposal is composed of four major parts: (i) design and
synthesis of novel polymer libraries based on tyrosine-derived polycarbonates
and tyrosol-derived polyesters; (ii) characterize the properties and
printability of the new polymers; (iii) demonstrate tunable polymer properties
such as degradation, and mechanics that are controlled independently of each
other; and (iv) evaluate application of these biomaterials for 3D printing. The
proposed study will address major materials science challenges, and is expected
to result in a new class of printable polymers for biomedical applications. The
development of libraries of 3D printable, biodegradable polymers with tunable
functionality such as degradation and mechanics will extend the use of 3D
printing as a method for the preparation of bioactive materials for tissue
engineering.