* 1714519
* CAREER: Co-Design of Networking and Decentralized Control to Enable Aerial Networks in an Uncertain Airspace
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Yan Wan, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 540,704.00

Airborne networking, unlike the networking of fixed sensors, mobile devices, and
slowly-moving vehicles, is very challenging because of the high mobility,
stringent safety requirements, and uncertain airspace environment. Airborne
networking is important because of the growing complexity of the National
Airspace System with the integration of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). This
project develops an innovative new theoretical framework for cyber-physical
systems (CPS) to enable airborne networking, which utilizes direct flight-to-to-
flight communication for flexible information sharing, safe maneuvering, and
coordination of time-critical missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
an innovative co-design approach that exploits the mutual benefits of networking
and decentralized mobility control in an uncertain heterogeneous environment.
The approach departs from the usual perspective that views physical mobility as
communication constraints, communication as constraints for decentralized
mobility control, and uncertain environment as constraints for both. Instead,
approach taken here proactively exploits the constraints, uncertainty, and new
structures with information to enable high-performance designs. The features of
the co-design such as scalability, fast response, trackability, and robustness
to uncertainty advance the core CPS science on decision-making for large-scale
networks under uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technological advances
developed in this research will contribute to multiple fields, including mobile
networking, decentralized control, experiment design, and general real-time
decision making under uncertainty for CPS. Technology transfer will be pursued
through close collaboration with industries and national laboratories. This
novel research direction will also serve as a unique backdrop to inspire the CPS
workforce. New teaching materials will benefit the future CPS workforce by
equipping them with a knowledge base in networking and control. Broad outreach
and dissemination activities that involve undergraduate student societies, K-12
school teaching, and public events, all stemming from the PI's current efforts,
will be enhanced.