* 1714022
* EAPSI: Implementing and Analyzing 3-Dimensional Variants on Digital Neuropsychological Exams
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Raniero Lara-Garduno, Lara-Garduno            Raniero        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The field of clinical neuropsychology has placed increasing emphasis in early
detection of cognitively degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's. Existing research in digitizing the diagnosis process aims to help
specialists bring their services to rural areas where access to
neuropsychologists may be limited. This research intends to further explore new
kinds of clinical neuropsychology exams designed to enrich collected data for
computational analysis. The researcher will create a 3-dimensional variant of
the existing popular Trail Making Test in neuropsychology. Existing normative
data from paper-and-pencil Trail Making Tests show clear correlations between
age and average test completion time among cognitively healthy users. The
project will explore whether similar correlations can be found in this proposed
variation among a wide distribution of age ranges. This project will be
conducted at the University of Tokyo under the mentorship of Dr. Takeo Igarashi,
one of the field's leading researchers in 3D computer graphics and Human-
Computer Interaction.

The test will be constructed for use in touch-enabled tablet devices, where
patients will rotate a sphere comprised of labeled boxes and tap the next
correct box in pre-determined sequences. The data points of most interest reside
in the sphere manipulation behaviors as well as finger gesture data. Sphere
manipulation would be captured by creating an invisible trail placed directly at
the center of the screen's viewport. As the sphere rotates, the changing
coordinates of the viewport as a function of time are stored, effectively
recording where the patient was observing the sphere at any time. These
coordinates will then be mapped to a 2D plane as treated as a digitized sketch,
allowing machine learning techniques typically used in sketch recognition to be
used in this context, with the intent to help classify the user's behavior in
sphere manipulation per their cognitive function.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.