* 1714004
* EAPSI: Factors in Early Career Decisions by Women in STEM Academic Profession
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Crystal Noel, Noel                    Crystal
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Statistics show that women are underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. This research will address the
question of why women in STEM choose not to continue in academia during early
career such as graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, or new faculty. The
project will consist of an analysis of survey data and case study interviews to
identify common themes and potential areas for improvement. The research will be
conducted as part of the Science in Australia Gender Equity program (SAGE) at
the University of Sydney in collaboration with Dean of Science Trevor Hambley as
part of an Athena SWAN (Scientific Women's Academic Network) pilot program.
After 10 years of Athena SWAN operation in the UK, significant changes have
already been seen in terms of increased retention and satisfaction for women.
(5) As the program expands beyond the pilot universities, or into other
countries, this report may influence future similar endeavors. The results will
serve as a starting point to develop policies and practices to improve gender
equity. These changes will help to advance the position of women in STEM fields,
increase diversity, and encourage women in their early careers to continue in
academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Survey data collected by SAGE staff will be
analyzed in order to identify themes for more in depth exploration. A model will
identify dependent variables such as continuation to a postdoctoral or faculty
position in academia. Candidate predictors will be identified including
demographics, access to opportunities, and future career prospects. An analysis
of variance (ANOVA) test will be used to look for statistical significance in
the relationship between predictors and dependent variables. Predictors
identified as significant will be designated as possible factors to explore in
the second portion of the research. Interviews will be conducted with questions
centered around those themes in order to construct case studies and compare to
survey data. A constant comparative method will be used to analyze information
gathered in the interviews. This research will be conducted as part of the
University's report submitted in 2019 to be considered for accreditation. The
SAGE program at Sydney is supported by expert academics and consultants, with a
staff and infrastructure already in place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award,
under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports summer
research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Sciences