* 1714008
* Search For New Meson and Baryon Resonances
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Kenneth Hicks, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 494,322.00

It is now well-known that protons and neutrons, collectively called nucleons,
are made from more fundamental particles called quarks. The goal of this
research is to study the forces between quarks inside the nucleon. The project
looks at how the quarks form quantum states of the nucleon after being bombarded
by an energetic beam of particles, and studying how these quantum states release
the energy in the form of new particles. By comparing these measurements to
theoretical calculations, we can learn more about the forces between quarks that
are confined inside the nucleon. Two experiments are included in the effort. The
first one at the Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC) uses a beam
of particles called pi-mesons that impinge on a proton, resulting in a nucleon
resonance that decays into two pi-mesons. This new experiment will expand by a
factor of 100 the data for that reaction process. The last data of this type was
taken back in the 1970s, and now precise data for this final state are needed as
input to theoretical calculations of nucleon resonances. The second experiment
is at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, located in Newport
News, Virginia. This experiment uses an electron beam impinging on a proton to
create a nucleon resonance, with the final particles going into a large
acceptance spectrometer, called CLAS12. The nucleon resonance spectrum tells us
about how quarks interact with each other inside the proton. Early career
scientists, graduate, and undergraduate students play an important role in this
project, which provides them with unique opportunities to further develop their
training and education in leading research facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of this project is to understand the proton and how its valence
quarks can be excited into resonant states. This moment is an exciting time to
pursue this goal because we now have the theoretical tool of lattice gauge
theory to calculate nucleon resonances from basic principles (the non-
perturbative solutions to the equations of Quantum Chromodynamics, or QCD). As
an analogy, measurements of excited states of atomic hydrogen led first to the
simplified Bohr model, then to calculations using Schrodinger's equation, and
finally to QED. Similarly, measurements of the excited states of the nucleon
(N*'s) led first to the simplified constituent quark model, and then to
calculations directly from QCD using lattice gauge theory. The latter predicts
many more N* resonances than have been extracted from experimental data. Known
as the missing baryons problem, it continues to motivate research on N*
spectroscopy. The two experiments described above, one at J-PARC and the other
at CLAS12, will help to resolve the N* spectrum and ultimately provide a proving
ground for theoretical models of quarks.