* 1714855
* ACL 2017 Student Research Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Marine Carpuat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing. It
also is one of the primary application areas for researchers in machine learning
and artificial intelligence. The proceedings of its annual meeting provide the
foundation of the field; it is the most cited and most respected publication in
computational linguistics. Thus, it is also the most important gathering of
researchers in computational linguistics and natural language processing. This
project is to subsidize travel, conference and housing expenses of students
selected to participate in the ACL Student Research Workshop, which will take
place during the main ACL conference from July 31 - August 2, 2017 in Vancouver,
Canada. The Student Research Workshop helps create a new generation of
researchers with a more thorough understanding of their field, with connections
and collaborations across institutions, and with innovative and exciting
research programs. This contributes to America's pool of researchers with the
needed scientific and engineering knowledge and skills. The workshop encourages
a spirit of collaborative research and builds a supportive environment for a new
generation of computational linguists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Student Research
Workshop solicits two categories of submissions: research papers and research
proposals. The research proposal can have only one author who must be a student.
The research papers can have multiple authors, with the first author being a
student (at either the graduate or undergraduate level). The workshop is a venue
for students to receive constructive critical feedback on their work from
experts outside of their institution, and to connect with other students and
senior researchers in their field. The students gain exposure by presenting
their work earlier than they would otherwise (i.e., in a form not yet ready for
the main conference). This is particularly valuable for students from smaller
institutions and undergraduate students. In addition, the workshop is organized
and run by students. The student organizers gain valuable opportunities for
professional growth and interaction with the researchers on the organizing
committee of the main conference.