* 1714704
* CNH-L: Multiscale Dynamics of Coral Reef Fisheries: Feedbacks Between Fishing Practices, Livelihood Strategies, and Shifting Dominance of Coral and Algae
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Sally Holbrook, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,600,000.00

This project will address the role that fishing practices play in coral reef
ecosystems. It will consist of an integrated social, ecological, and modeling
research program centered on an island coral reef fishery. The investigators
will engage with fishers in their local communities to document the species that
are fished and the underlying social and economic drivers of the decisions
fishers make about where and when to fish and what to catch. Ecological studies
will document spatial distribution and abundance of key fish species as well as
the condition of the reefs using both direct field work and satellite derived
observations. Overall the research will contribute greatly to the understanding
of factors that influence the health of coral reefs. Integrative training will
be provided for six graduate students, two post-doctoral researchers and
numerous undergraduates who will gain experience in ecology, social science, and
modeling. Graduate students and post-doctoral researchers will attend and
participate in fisher community workshops. K-12 outreach activities will involve
partnerships with teachers, and multilingual curricula for elementary schools in
the United States and Pacific Islands will be developed. Collaborations with
citizen scientists will increase public awareness of the effects of fishing on
the reefs. The research findings will be of direct value to coral reef
conservation and management practitioners, yielding insights into sustainably
managing similar systems across the Pacific region and into the processes that
determine the spatial dynamics of coral reefs
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millions of coastal dwellers rely on coral reef
fisheries for food, income, and their personal and cultural identities, yet
reefs are under threat worldwide as corals are increasingly lost and replaced by
seaweeds. For a variety of reasons, fishing on tropical reefs often targets
species of fish that eat seaweeds, and it is thought that reductions in these
species can result in growth of seaweeds that eventually replace live coral. The
factors that drive fishing behavior are poorly understood, and can include
available livelihood opportunities to fishers as well as their knowledge of and
access to fishery resources. Understanding feedbacks between these components
requires accounting for the spatial dynamics of ecological interactions and
human behavior. By capitalizing on recent advances in satellite technology,
inexpensive smartphones, and innovative ecological, social network, and modeling
techniques this research program will reveal how fishing links the physical
landscape with the landscape of social interactions, and it will provide unique
insights into the dynamic interrelations of the coral reef system.