* 1714487
* Diffusion, Directed Movement, Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity in Population Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Wei-Ming Ni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,481.00

"Competition-exclusion" principle in evolution and ecology was first proposed by
Darwin. In modern era, understanding "biodiversity" has become a central theme
in plant ecology, and it has been observed that "spatial heterogeneity" plays an
important role in biodiversity. On the other hand, diffusion has been used
extensively and successfully in modeling various phenomena in nature and
science. In this project, the Principal Investigator and his collaborators in
ecology and biology, will continue to explore the effect of dispersal in
heterogeneous environment which has led to a re-examination of the fundamental
concept of "carrying capacity" and its relation to "intrinsic growth rates" in
population dynamics. Both mathematical theories and rigorous biological
experiments involving yeast will be used. Other related issues, such as temporal
variations, will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
main theme is to understand the consequences of interactions between diffusion
(dispersal of species) and spatial, as well as temporal, variations in
environment. An important element in this understanding is the intricate
relation between the fundamental concepts of "carrying capacity" and "intrinsic
growth rates". Those will be studied - first by biological experiments (which
have been inspired by mathematical theories) and then by new mathematical models
created to describe those experiments. The concavity or convexity of the
relation between the two quantities would play an important role in population
dynamics. Mathematically, what biological experiments suggest is to replace the
classical (single) logistic equation for a single species population by a system
containing an extra equation governing the "renewable" resources. This seems to
be much closer to reality, and will change the well-known Lotka-Volterra system
for two competing species to a much more challenging one, a new system of 3
equations with renewable resources. In this project, we will study these new
systems thoroughly.