* 1714006
* EAPSI: Investigating Historical Changes in Montane River Systems and Their Roles in Species Diversification
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kai Wang, Wang                    Kai
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Ancient geological events such as changes in river drainages and the formation
of mountain ranges can have profound impacts on the genetic structure and
evolution of organisms. By analyzing the genetic diversity of different
populations of organisms across complex environments, inferences can be made
about the timing and distribution of such historical processes and their impacts
on species evolution. The Hengduan Mountain Region (HMR) is positioned at the
transition zone between the Tibetan Plateau and lowland southwest China. This
region is unique in having repeated, parallel, montane river systems that run
across dramatic elevational and environmental gradients. Studies have shown that
the major rivers of the region (Mekong, Salween, and Yangtze) have experienced
significant changes in drainage patterns and flow directions in the past due to
the continental collisions between Eurasia and India and the subsequent
formation of the Tibetan Plateau, and these geological events have impacted
genetic structures among some aquatic animals and plants in the region. However,
the timing and geographic scope of changes in river topology remain poorly
understood, and nothing is known to date about the impact of such events on the
evolution of terrestrial vertebrates. Lizard species of the genus Japalura are
recognized to be associated closely with habitats along river systems in the
HMR. With many species endemic to the HMR, the group of terrestrial lizards is
well suited for investigating the impact of historical geologic- and
environmental-changes on population and species diversification in the region.
In collaboration with Dr. Jing Che from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, this
research will employ modern molecular techniques to the genetic data of endemic
lizards in the HMR. Through field-based surveys of species diversity of lizards
and lab-based studies of genetic diversity of the focal species group across the
HMR, this research not only will promote biodiversity and conservation studies
of the focal species group in a fragile ecosystem, but also, it will further our
knowledge of the historical importance of the formation of the Tibetan Plateau
for changes in river systems as well as for vertebrate diversification in the
HMR.

During the research period in China, fieldwork will be conducted in targeted
valley habitats along the three major rivers (Mekong, Salween, and Yangtze) in
the Hengduan Mountain Region (HMR) of China to increase available taxonomic and
geographic sampling of focal lizard species in the genus Japalura. Combined with
samples available already at the host institution in China, genomic DNA will be
extracted from tissue samples, and target genes (mitochondrial and nuclear) will
be amplified and sequenced at the host institute in China. Phylogenetic
approaches will be employed to study population genetic and biogeographic
patterns, and estimate the timing of lineage divergence, among focal lizard
species across the HMR. The results will be used to formulate biogeographical
hypotheses concerning the role that historical changes in river system and
formation of mountain ranges played in the vertebrate diversification around the
Tibetan Plateau.

The award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.