* 1714275
* AF: Small: Classification Program for Counting Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jin-Yi Cai, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 458,000.00

This project is a study of the computational complexity of counting problems.
The PI aims to classify the complexity of problems known as Sum-of-Product
computations. These counting problems come from all parts of computer science,
and even other fields of study. They are naturally defined and include such
counting problems as vertex covers, graph colorings, and graph matchings. There
is also a strong connection to problems studied in statistical physics.

In computational complexity theory, there is no higher aim than to achieve a
complete classification of a wide class of computational problems. This is
usually done in terms of the P and NP theory, where P and NP denote problems
computable in polynomial time by deterministic and nondeterministic algorithms,
respectively. There has been strong interest in the PI's classification program,
especially with the concept of holographic algorithms. There is also a
significant amount of computational experimentation in the search for the right
formulation of the classification, providing an opportunity to engage
undergraduate students in research.

A sharper delineation between what is or is not efficiently computable will have
broader impact within computer science and beyond. Within CS, a substantial body
of work in AI is centered around similar models called partition functions.
Outside computer science, there is a long tradition in statistical physics to
study partition functions, and this study informs the so-called exactly solved
models.

In more technical terms, these are computations defined as sum_sigma prod_f f |
sigma, where the f's are local constraint functions, and the sigmas are
assignments to local variables. There are three related frameworks to study
these problems.

(1) Spin systems or graph homomorphisms, (2) Counting CSP problems, and (3)
Holant problems.

Over the past several years, the following thesis has gained considerable
evidence, namely a large family of Sum-of-Product computations can be classified
into exactly three categories with an explicit criterion on the constraint
function set:

(I) Computable in P; (II) #P-hard for general graphs, but solvable in P for
planar graphs; and (III) #P-hard even for planar graphs.

Furthermore, for Spin systems and Counting CSP, category (II) corresponds
precisely to those problems which can be solved by holographic algorithms with
matchgates. But for Holant problems, there are additional novel tractable
classes of problems. The PI plans to prove classification theorems that apply to
asymmetric constraint functions. If this can be settled for asymmetric as well
as symmetric constraint functions, it will be a unifying result, answering
questions that are open at least since the time of Kasteleyn in the 1960's.