* 1714205
* Tracing the Dynamical States of Intracluster Media (ICMs)
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Thomas Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2022
* USD 610,597.00

The universe has assembled itself by gravity into objects from the size of
planets and stars up to galaxies and, on the largest scales, clusters of
galaxies. The investigators will focus on understanding the formation of these
clusters, giving us important insights into the entire process of how objects
form. Galaxy clusters can contain hundreds of galaxies and are filled with very
hot gas - their atmospheres, or "intracluster media". These atmospheres are so
hot that most of the light they emit is X-rays that can be seen only from space.
Astronomers have established that this hot gas has often been highly disturbed
when one cluster violently collides and merges with another cluster. The gas
motions can tell us about the collisions and how these largest structures in the
universe form. Space X-ray telescopes are limited in their abilities to trace
these motions, especially outside the denser cluster centers. As it turns out,
however, galaxies scattered throughout clusters spew out streams of highly
energetic particles that emit radio waves visible from the earth that reveal
their interactions with the intracluster media. The intracluster gas motions can
also energize radio emitting particles, illuminating the motions. The
investigators will find these radio emissions and map their details, using both
new and existing ground based radio telescope observations and utilizing the
citizen-science-based "Radio Galaxy Zoo." In addition, they will compute
detailed physical models to determine how these emissions can be used to trace
out the motions of the intracluster media as well as their origins and
histories. The results of these studies will substantially improve our
understanding of how galaxy clusters
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy clusters are the largest known
gravitationally bound systems in the universe. They are filled with
'intracluster media," diffuse plasmas with temperatures of 10s of millions of
degrees, which are visible from space using X-rays. The investigators will
address three key questions about these media: 1) what is the dynamical state of
the gas, its flows, turbulence and shocks? 2) how do these dynamical features
help us understand the cluster formation process? and 3) how do we reliably
connect the underlying motions with what we can observe? The investigators will
specifically concentrate on behaviors observable at radio wavelengths, using
emission from electrons moving at relativistic speeds in the presence of a
magnetic field. This allows them to study regimes such as cluster outskirts, for
which very little X-ray information is available. They will carry out numerical
simulations at the technical frontier, coupling the magnetohydrodynamics of the
hot gas to the relativistic particles generating the radio emission. They will
conduct new state-of-the-art radio telescope observations and analyses, along
with information from the citizen science project Radio Galaxy Zoo on
distortions of radio-emitting plasmas caused by the hot gas flows. Together,
this work will enable the investigators to gain important information about the
cluster formation process, a key piece in the universal picture of how
structures in the universe develop over billions of years.