* 1714623
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Eye Movement Biometrics in Virtual and Augmented Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Oleg Komogortsev, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2022
* USD 647,981.00

Virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR) applications are expected to play an
increasingly important role in many aspects of everyday life; however, we do not
yet have effective methods for protecting VR/AR systems from cybersecurity
threats. The goal of this research is to make VR/AR systems more secure via the
development of highly accurate and counterfeit-resistant biometric techniques
based on eye movements. These techniques are based on the computational modeling
of multiple characteristics of the way individuals move their eyes. The
development of trustworthy solutions for performing biometric recognition in
such systems is critical for the creation of a cybersecurity infrastructure that
can adequately serve emerging applications of VR/AR for social networking,
health monitoring, and economic transactions. Improved understanding of
distinctive eye movement features could also facilitate their use for the
detection of cyber-sickness, stress, fatigue, concussions and other states that
manifest in abnormalities of human vision. The education component of the
project will help recruit a greater number of diverse students to careers in
computer science as well as interdisciplinary studies involving computer
science, and it will better prepare students to be key players in the next
generation of innovators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
advance the current state of security in VR/AR systems via the development of
highly accurate and counterfeit-resistant biometric techniques based on eye
movements. The problem of eye movement-driven biometrics in VR/AR environments
is significantly more challenging due to the 3-D environment which produces very
complex eye movements that are hard to accurately classify and also the much
larger number of extracted eye movement-driven features when compared to the eye
movement-driven biometrics in 2D spaces. This project has two major thrusts: (1)
biometric recognition: establishing the baseline for person recognition
performance via eye movement characteristics in VR/AR environments; and (2)
counterfeit-resistance: researching the robustness against spoofing attacks
(e.g., attempts to defeat a biometric system through the introduction of fake
biometric samples). This research provides answers to important questions
related to the uniqueness, variability, scalability, and longevity of eye
movement characteristics in VR/AR environments. The outcome of this work will be
a new method to address the biometric security vulnerabilities of current and
future VR/AR systems.