* 1714015
* RAPID: Mobile Infrastructure for Monitoring, Modeling, and Forecasting of Coastal Weather Events
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Leonard Pietrafesa, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 11/30/2017
* USD 99,672.00

Tropical storms are among the most destructive natural phenomenon on the planet.
Each year, these storms pose a threat to the Atlantic Coast. The dangers of high
winds and storm-induced sea level rise are widely recognized, but these storms
can also result in inland flooding. Historically, inland flooding is responsible
for the majority of deaths attributed to tropical storms in the US. Existing
methods do not provide accurate forecasts of inland flooding patterns. This
project will improve these forecasts through a computational framework that
relies on key measurements collected from mobile sensing arrays deployed in
advance of incoming storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
computational framework to simulate inland lateral flooding processes.
Collection and calibration of the key hydrologic variables, both in baseline,
and in advance of future storms, is critical. The project will focus on surface
water velocity measurements near key population locales, particularly as the
river basins transition from storage modes to discharge modes ? resulting from
the recent passage of Hurricane Matthew. Data collection will be achieved
through mobile sensing arrays, comprising photogrammetry drones, GPS drifters,
and a new drifter-based technology for acquiring fine-grained surface water
velocity measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Atlantic coast is threatened by
approximately ten tropical storms per year, with more than half becoming
hurricanes. The impacts can be catastrophic, resulting in loss of life and
damage to property and infrastructure. Hurricane Matthew, widely viewed as a
near miss, resulted in more than 40 deaths in the US, and damage to more than
100,000 homes ? most attributed to inland flooding. This project will result in
improved forecasting infrastructure for inland flooding, enabling local and
state governments and emergency management teams to more effectively plan and
respond to tropical storms.