* 1714126
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Using Stories to Improve Computer Security Decision Making
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Richard Wash, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 531,987.00

People regularly need to make security and privacy decisions; however, they
often don't realize they are making these decisions, and when they do, they
often lack the experience and ability to make good choices. Based on studies of
how people make decisions "in the wild", this project looks to improve people's
security education, training, and awareness (SETA) by (1) using short stories
about regular users' security behaviors, rather than expert advice, facts, and
warnings, to raise awareness of and suggest responses to security risks, and (2)
deliver those stories at exactly the times people might need them, rather than
as a separate training program divorced from people's regular use and needs
around security. Through a series of interviews the project team will learn more
about how experts versus non-experts make security-related decisions in the
moment. Using these insights and theories of decision-making, the team will
develop and test a set of story-based training materials for common security
decisions including selecting passwords, ignoring phishing emails that lure
people to download malware or give personal information to fake websites, and
avoiding sites that present invalid security credentials. These experiments will
increase knowledge of how people make security decisions and how to design
materials to support SETA, as well as directly improving security at the lead
researcher's institution through live testing with students and staff. The PI
will also involve both undergraduate students and people from underrepresented
groups in the research and publicly release the materials the team develops. The
project seeks to test the hypothesis that telling end users stories about
security incidents can better train them to resist semantic attacks than
traditional facts-and-advice training. The researchers will first develop a
detailed understanding of how people make everyday in-the-moment security
decisions, using Critical Decision Method and Experience Sampling Method-based
approaches that focus on specific past attacks. The team will interview both
experts and non-experts to learn what features they use to recognize attacks and
how they identify actions to take; comparing expert to non-expert behavior will
help identify vulnerabilities and inform both effective training goals and
materials. These insights will be used in developing a set of story-based
training materials that emphasize important constructs suggested by the theory
of Naturalistic Decision Making including incident typicality, social norms
around responses, causality (linking responses to outcomes), and empowerment and
efficacy in security decision-making. Through a series of field experiments in
collaboration with security mangers at the lead researcher's institution, the
team will iteratively improve the training materials while developing
theoretical knowledge of how stories about security incidents can support
security decision-making in naturalistic settings.