* 1714658
* Collaborative research: Exploring the impact of cosmic ray feedback on galaxy evolution
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Andrey Kravtsov, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 06/30/2022
* USD 573,115.00

Astronomers seek to understand how galaxies formed and evolve. Vast filaments of
matter coalesce into galaxies under gravity. However, unknown forces from within
expel gas in the form of galactic winds. Ruszkowski and collaborators seek to
understand whether this missing force could be provided by cosmic rays. Using
computer simulations, they will study effects of cosmic rays on galactic winds.
They will determine whether cosmic rays contribute sufficient force to these
winds to expel matter from galaxies completely. Finally understanding what
powers galactic winds will contribute a major advance. This study may enable a
qualitative leap in our understanding of how galaxies evolve. Results of these
simulations will be used in stunning planetarium animations. Such visualizations
engage the public and inspire young people to study
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will probe a range of spatial scales.
It will include hybrid kinetic simulations of cosmic ray propagation around
isolated supernova remnants out to galactic disks and finally to cosmological
galaxy formation. Cosmic-ray transport physics will be simulated from first
principles. Local patches of the interstellar medium will be simulated using
adaptive mesh refinement. These results in turn will be used to develop sub-grid
models for galaxy and cosmological formation simulations. This project will
constitute the first large-scale study of galaxy formation to include cosmic-ray
transport processes on all spatial scales. It will yield specific predictions
for the properties of cosmic-ray driven galactic winds.