* 1714198
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2017 Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Karen Schofield-Leca, Internet Society
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2017
* USD 18,000.00

Critical to the health and resiliency of the Internet is the underlying security
of the systems that make our online world a reality. By bringing together
leaders in cyber security, including leading-edge security researchers and
implementers, globally recognized security-technology experts, and users from
both the private and public sectors, the Network and Distributed System Security
(NDSS) Symposium fosters information exchange among researchers and
practitioners of network and distributed system security. The target audience
(usually around 300 people) includes those interested in practical aspects of
network and distributed system security, with a focus on system design and
practical implementation. The February 2017 conference in San Diego will be the
24th NDSS symposia, demonstrating its longevity and its importance as the
leading conference in network and distributed system security.

Students often have limited sources of funds for travel to conferences and
limited opportunities to interact with in-the-field practitioners. NSF financial
support will assist nineteen (19) US-based graduate and undergraduate students
so that they may attend this meeting. Each travel grant is intended to cover
conference registration, lodging during the conference, and as much as possible
of the student?s travel (e.g., economy airfare).

Participation in symposia like the NDSS is a critical part of the students'
educational experiences, providing them the opportunity to interact with senior
researchers and to be exposed to leading edge work in the field. Regardless of
the field, investing in the development of human capital is crucial for the
future. Supporting and nurturing the next generation of network security
experts, providing them with an opportunity to learn from and engage with
established experts benefits the entire community. Each provides the other with
lessons learned, fresh ideas, and infuses a spirit of collaboration among a
rather small sub-section of the technical space.