* 1714159
* DCL: HBCU: Computational Atomic Laboratory Astrophysics for Stellar and Nebular Spectral Diagnostics
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Swaraj Tayal, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 05/31/2023
* USD 405,008.00

Atomic spectra---the unique energy signatures of atoms---carry important
information about the physical conditions of the astronomical environments in
which the atoms are found. The main goal of this research project is to perform
accurate calculations of key properties of atoms that are found in stars and gas
clouds in space. Accurate values of these properties will allow astronomers to
reliably analyze atomic spectra from these distant astronomical objects and
infer the conditions present there. The project will train a graduate student
and a postdoctoral researcher in methods of advanced computational research, and
it will increase the participation of underrepresented minority students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will study "iron-peak"
elements to better exploit them as diagnostic probes of the atmospheres of late-
type stars and gaseous nebulae. The researchers will calculate accurate
photoionization cross-sections, radiative and collisional rates, and electron
excitation rates for the singly charged ions Fe II, Cr II, Ti II, and Sc II
using innovative computational methods and numerical codes. Accurate data
generated in the study will allow reliable spectral analysis of stellar and
nebular regions because uncertainties in atomic data are thought to be a major
source of discrepancy between the measured and calculated abundances of singly
changed ions of the iron-peak elements. The new data will be incorporated into
the widely used modeling code CLOUDY, and they will be made available to the
astronomical community via atomic databases such as CHIANTI. The project will
train a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher in computational
laboratory astrophysics techniques, and it will provide opportunities to train
underrepresented minority students in advanced computational research.