* 1714084
* EAPSI: Investigating the Use of Pneumatic Muscles for Better Compliant-Control Rehabilitative Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Samantha Huynh, Huynh                   Samantha
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Hindered by muscular difficulties with control, coordination, tone, and reflex,
patients affected by muscular disorders like dystonia are often left voiceless
in a world where their minds are just as curious, just as creative, but they
lack the ability to exercise expression. Dystonia describes a collection of
abnormal states of muscle tone, usually resulting in muscular spasms and
abnormal postures. Patients with dystonia often have difficulty in
rehabilitation environments, as they are unfamiliar with the correct motor
control mechanisms to exercise their bodies as well as suffering from muscular
impairments. The exoskeleton provides a platform with which patients can learn
correct motor control by using artificial muscles to provide support where
necessary. In collaboration with Dr. Tomoyuki Noda, principal investigator and
main developer of a series of exoskeletons at the Advanced Telecommunications
Research Institute International (ATR) in Japan, this project investigates the
development of artificial muscles for use in a rehabilitative exoskeleton to aid
those with upper body movement disorders. The objective of this project is to
incorporate the advances developed in pneumatic-electric hybrid muscles by Dr.
Noda to the prototype exoskeleton compliant-control system currently under
evaluation at the University of Southern California's Sanger Lab.

The exoskeleton project seeks to provide a viable rehabilitative solution for
children diagnosed with dystonia with an emphasis on compliant control. User
input via electrical signals from excited muscles, also known as
electromyographic (EMG) signals, controls the exoskeleton's actuation, allowing
the patient to direct their own movements. The use of pneumatically powered
muscles is ideal for this project, as the mechanisms of pneumatic actuators are
best adapted for compliance-controlled targets. Just as human muscles exert
force under contraction, so do pneumatic muscles. This parallel aids in the
current investigation as patients will be using technology that mimics natural
movement. As a hands-on endeavor to engage users in their own rehabilitation,
the proposed activity stands at the edge of transforming existing parameters for
rehabilitative devices and understanding compliant-controlled systems.

This award, under the East Asian and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by the NSF and
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.