* 1714802
* Probing Energy Loss in the Quark Gluon Plasma with Direct Photon Correlations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Megan Connors, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2020
* USD 110,000.00

A hot, dense state of matter known as the Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP) is produced
in high-energy collisions of nuclei at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
(RHIC) and reproduces the early stages of the universe. Exploring the QGP
enhances our understanding of the nuclear force and sheds light on the workings
of the young universe. The properties of the QGP are studied by measuring the
characteristics of the particles produced in the collisions using detectors that
are at large and complex experiments like PHENIX. This award will support a
project that uses data collected by PHENIX to investigate how some of the
signals of particles coming out of the collisions are correlated with each
other. In addition to the analysis of PHENIX data, this project will work on the
instrumentation development and testing of detector components for an upgrade
planned for the PHENIX detector called sPHENIX. This detector that will make
precise measurements that will enhance further our understanding of the inner
workings of the QGP. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will measure direct
photon-hadron correlations in heavy ion collisions recorded by PHENIX. Photon-
hadron correlations have long been considered a "golden channel" for studying
jets in the QGP. Since the photon does not interact via the strong force, it
escapes the QGP unmodified and therefore can be used to estimate the initial
momentum of the opposing jet. Analyzing the newer larger PHENIX datasets will
enable more differential measurements than previously achieved, which will give
access to the transport coefficients of the QGP. In addition to the PHENIX
analysis, an effort is provided for developing and testing the hadronic
calorimeter for sPHENIX where photon-jet correlations will be accessible in
addition to other jet substructure observables. Such measurements are crucial
for developing a complete understanding of the QGP and the strong force.