* 1714093
* Collaborative Research: A systems approach toward understanding the diversification of tropane and granatane alkaloid biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Cornelius Barry, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 344,129.00

The goal of this project is to use comparative approaches to investigate the
synthesis pathways of two organic, nitrogen containing compounds in three
different plant families to discover new genes and test the hypothesis that
these two pathways developed independently of one another in each family. These
alkaloids defend plants against insects and other pests and pathogens, and are
used by humans as flavourings, fragrances, pesticides and medicines. This
research will provide multiple opportunities for interdisciplinary training in
genomics, structural biology, biochemistry, and analytical chemistry to graduate
and undergraduate students. Furthermore, graduate student training will be
enhanced through implementation of exchanges between partner labs to facilitate
the development of interdisciplinary skills. Formal undergraduate exchanges will
be accomplished by the recruitment of female and underrepresented minority
students from Texas Tech or Iowa State University into a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Program at Michigan State University. The project also will
work directly with a local Community College in Iowa to provide Community
College students with exposure to structural
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropane and granatane alkaloids contain a core
bicyclic ring structure and appear scattered across unrelated plant families.
The research project will utilize a top down approach of combined
transcriptomics and metabolomics coupled with comparative functional,
biochemical and structural biology based approaches to elucidate the pathways
and mechanisms that underlie the biosynthesis of the pharmaceutically important
tropane and granatane alkaloids. Gene discovery will occur in three distinct and
important crop families: Brassicaceae, Lythraceae and Erythroxylaceae and the
resulting data will be compared to an established tropane pathway in the
Solanaceae. This comparative approach will be used to test the hypothesis that
novel biocatalytic activities within the tropane biosynthetic pathways of
distinct species are the source of the independent emergence of the tropane
alkaloid system within the plant lineage. Additionally, the research explores
the possibility that the different components of tropane alkaloid metabolism
were independently co-opted to build new metabolic systems (e.g. granatane
alkaloids). Overall, this approach will lead to enhanced understanding of
tropane and granatane alkaloid biosynthesis. Moreover, knowledge of the
biosynthetic steps leading to tropane and granatane alkaloids is crucial for
quantitative modeling and metabolic engineering of these pharmacologically
active chemicals.