* 1714133
* Studies of the Structure of Light Mesons and Nucleons through Exclusive Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Tanja Horn, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 453,398.00

Pions and kaons are the lightest subatomic particles and play a unique role in
nature; our understanding of them is essential for explaining the fundamental
structure of matter. This research is centered on precision measurements of pion
and kaon properties that have the potential to reveal the three-dimensional
structure of the nucleons, the protons and neutrons that, together with their
interactions, generate nearly of the mass of the visible universe. As such, this
work probes the fundamental structure of that part of the universe that we can
see. This project is part of a series of experiments taking place at the Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator Laboratory. Early career scientists, graduate
students, and undergraduate students play an integral part in this project,
which provides them with opportunities to further develop their training and
education. These include gaining experience in the design, assembly, and testing
of modern instrumentation for the detection of radiation and subatomic particles
and fast signal processing electronics, and in analyzing scientific data.
Furthermore, learning to work in a large international scientific community will
prepare early career scientists and students for the modern work environment at
academic institutions, national laboratories, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This program is focused on precision measurements of pion and kaon
form factors and structure functions, and validation of our understanding of
hard exclusive and semi-inclusive reactions towards 3D hadron imaging and
potential future flavor decomposition. Form factors are the most basic quantity
towards understanding transverse spatial structure. The structure functions are
expected to be different for pions, kaons, and nucleons regarding sea quarks and
gluons and provide basic information about the origin of mass. 3D hadron imaging
allows for the extraction of correlations between quark longitudinal momentum
and transverse position from the experiment using factorization theorems. To
validate the meson factorization theorems and potential future flavor
decomposition, one has to measure the longitudinal and transverse (L/T)
separated cross sections. This project plays a central role in this effort
through precision pion, and kaon L/T separated cross section measurements at the
12 GeV Jefferson Lab and development of measurements of the, to date, mostly
unknown pion and kaon structure functions at a potential future Electron-Ion
Collider.