* 1714163
* CSHL Course on Yeast Genetics &amp; Genomics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory's three-week summer course on
Yeast Genetics and Genomics prepares students for modern scientific research in
molecular genetics. The highly intensive laboratory-based course work is
designed to make each student proficient in the fundamentals of yeast genetics,
which then establishes the conceptual backbone for more sophisticated molecular
technologies such as genome editing and next generation sequencing. The
experimental portion of the course is complemented by daily theoretical lectures
by instructors chosen for their proven expertise in the system and a world-class
seminar series from renowned investigators that utilize the yeast system.
Although the general organization of the course is intended to remain the same
from year to year, changes in content are introduced as yeast biology and
genomic approaches advance; as instructors are replaced new expertise is added
to the course and the latest technologies and approaches are incorporated into
the curriculum by the new instructors. Course participants are chosen from a
pool of highly qualified applicants ranging from early career scientists to
senior investigators and coming from diverse research backgrounds, including
biology, chemistry, engineering, physics, mathematics and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The course trains
researchers in the most up-to-date experimental and computational resources and
tools available for biological research in the yeast model, and trains teachers
in the use of yeast to demonstrate the fundamental concepts of eukaryotic
biology. Many of the students are likely to have educational and supervisory
responsibilities in the near future; others are already professors or post-
doctoral fellows who will immediately pass on what they have learned in the
course. Many of the students who take the course go on to lead their own
laboratories, with the course providing a foundation of knowledge and an
important network of scientific contacts for these new lab heads. In recent
years, female and male students were equally represented and under-represented
minority students took part in the course. To further this trend, the course is
advertised widely and specific contacts are made to institutional programs that
facilitate recruiting and retention of underrepresented groups into the life
sciences research community. The experimental protocols and associated materials
are disseminated via publication by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.