* 1714187
* High-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Govind Menon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 337,000.00

This project develops mathematical models for disordered physical systems. The
primary applications studied in this project are turbulent fluids, the
microstructure of glasses, and branched structures that arise in the aggregation
of clusters and the shape of lightning. As often happens, the mathematical
models studied also explain phenomena unrelated to specific physical systems,
and this project also includes a statistical approach to the performance of
several widely-used numerical algorithms. The primary purpose of this research
is to develop mathematical methods to improve understanding of important
phenomena, particularly turbulence in fluids and the aging of glasses, which are
well-known but poorly-understood systems in physics and materials science. This
project also contributes to the development of the STEM workforce through the
training of graduate students.

The main focus of this project is the development of mathematical methods for
dynamical systems that are strongly nonlinear, involve randomness, and have a
large number of degrees of freedom. The mathematical tools to analyze these
systems are drawn from integrable systems, kinetic theory, partial differential
equations and probability theory. Four projects are considered: (a) random
isometric embeddings and turbulence in incompressible fluids; (b) conformal
processes with branching; (c) aging of spin glasses; and (d) statistical
behavior of algorithms in numerical linear algebra. Projects (a) and (b) provide
rigorous results on random geometry. In project (a), turbulence heuristics are
used to improve the known critical exponents for the isometric embedding problem
in differential geometry. This construction also sheds light on random fluid
flows arising in isotropic homogeneous turbulence. In project (b), a new
stochastic partial differential equation, whose solutions describe conformally
embedded trees, is investigated. Project (c) considers a basic model for
vitreous systems in materials science. The purpose of project (d) is to quantify
the `probability of difficulty' for several widely used algorithms in computer
science. Both these projects are unified by the study of glassy behavior. In
particular, the algorithms studied may be viewed as high-dimensional dynamical
systems with exponentially many critical points. Their performance reflects
glassy behavior such as aging and metastability. Conversely, the algorithms
serve as numerical laboratories that shed light on aging dynamics in physical
glasses.