* 1714607
* Mean Field Games and Optimal Contracts
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Yuchong Zhang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2018
* USD 50,382.00

Many questions in finance, economics, and engineering involve competition or
interaction among a large number of agents. Large-population games have
traditionally been difficult to analyze due to the large size of the system and
the game nature of the interaction. The theory of mean field games provides a
useful way to approximate these complex systems, and the theory helps to improve
understanding of the effects of interactions and how populations react to
different compensation schemes or public policies. On the other hand, the 2008
financial crisis revealed the fragility of financial models. Since then, the
urge to develop financial theories that take into account model risk has grown
tremendously. This research project explores mathematical questions in mean
field game theory and robust finance. The first part of the project analyzes a
dynamic competition involving a large number of players, where the interaction
among players is through the ranking of the completion time of their respective
projects. The model applies to situations where many firms or individuals
compete to be the first to achieve a goal. The objective is to understand the
equilibrium and design a reward scheme that encourages early project completion
given that the organizer has a limited budget, or to minimize the budget given a
desired rate of completion. The second part of the project is concerned with the
accuracy of the mean field game approximation, when in many applications, the
typical size of competition is only modestly large. The objective is to study
the fluctuation around the hydrodynamic limit of the mean field game
approximation so as to improve accuracy. The third part of the project studies a
mean field game of optimal stopping when the interaction among players is
neither through the state process nor the cost structure, at least not in a
direct way, but through the belief or information revealed from the action of
stopping. The last part of the project considers pricing and hedging of
contingent claims in a financial market under both transaction costs and model
uncertainty, where model uncertainty is described by a collection of probability
measures. In general the collection need not have a reference measure that
dominates every other measure, and therefore, standard tools from functional
analysis cannot be applied, and new techniques are called for.