* 1714496
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Design of Low-Power True Random Number Generator based on Adaptive Post-Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Visvesh Sathe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 09/30/2020
* USD 246,667.00

Nearly all security protocols rely on random numbers. A hardware True Random
Number Generator (TRNG) is a circuit implemented within an Integrated Circuit
(IC). If a TRNG is not truly random, an adversary may be able to break into the
security of a protocol. Hence true randomness is an important property. TRNG
circuits are often large and power hungry. There is a need for low-power TRNG in
battery operated devices or in energy constrained environments. This proposal
addresses that need. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research explores an
alternative to traditional TRNG designs. Instead of taking on considerable
design complexity and energy dissipation by directly turning circuits to
generate high quality random numbers, it starts with a sufficiently good
physical circuit random number generator, and then combines it with a robust
low-power statistical post-processing unit to address both bias, and correlation
between TRNG outputs. This results in a design where the first component is only
required to provide some randomness, while the second component refines this
randomness through decorrelation and bias removal to extract provably perfectly
random sequence of bits akin to identical and independent fair coin flips. This
design will be implemented in a silicon prototype. The proposed research is
interdisciplinary involving applied probability, network security, and VLSI
design.