* 1714952
* Exploring the Role of Emodiversity in Preserving Empathy and Well-being in the Face of Stress
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Elaine Cheung, Cheung                  Elaine         O
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2019
* USD 86,250.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship award
supports a rising scholar who is investigating a novel approach to addressing
the problems of empathy decline and burnout in medicine. Stress disrupts the
capacity for empathy, and can have adverse consequences for physical and
psychological health. Certain fields, such as medicine, are characterized by
both high levels of stress and the necessity for empathy. Empathy has been found
to decrease over the course of medical training, as stress, burnout and
depression increase. Most psychological interventions for people coping with
life stress (e.g., medical students, people coping with the stress of a chronic
illness, people coping with bereavement) have focused on teaching skills for
reducing stress and negative emotion, or on increasing positive emotion.
However, attempts at emotional improvement can backfire, and can paradoxically
increase levels of stress and emotional distress. Rather than trying to control
or improve emotion when confronted with stress, the current project explores
whether cultivating a diverse emotional repertoire, termed emodiversity, in
which the individual accepts and experiences a wide variety of emotions, both
positive and negative (e.g., fear, anger, sadness, joy, contentment), may
promote a more balanced and flexible approach to coping with stress.
Specifically, the current project examines the protective role of emodiversity
in medical training, and explores whether an intervention aimed at increasing
emodiversity (LAVENDER: Leveraging Affect and Valuing Empathy for Nurturing
Doctors' Emotional Resilience) may help to protect against empathy decline and
burnout in medical training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress narrows attention and
erodes the capacity for empathy. Over time, stress can lead to burnout and can
negatively impact physical and psychological health. Most psychological
interventions for people coping with serious life stress have focused on either
reducing stress and negative emotion, and/or increasing positive emotion.
However, a growing body of evidence suggests that attempts at emotional
improvement (striving to reduce negative emotion and enhance positive emotion)
can backfire and can paradoxically increase levels of stress and emotional
distress. Rather than emphasizing emotional improvement, the current project
seeks to leverage recent developments in affective science to investigate
whether cultivating greater emotional diversity, termed emodiversity, may
promote a more balanced and flexible approach to coping with stress.
Emodiversity has been associated with superior physical and psychological well-
being, over and above the effects of mean levels of positive and negative
emotion. Emodiversity has been theorized to promote well-being by preventing
specific emotions (e.g., anxiety, sadness) from dominating the emotional
ecosystem. The present investigation will explore whether emodiversity may
similarly serve to protect against empathy decline and burnout in the face of
stress by allowing individuals to experience and empathize with others'
emotions, even amidst high levels of stress. The current project will examine
the protective role of emodiversity in medical trainees: a population
characterized by both high levels of stress and the necessity for empathy. Using
a two-pronged approach (both observational and experimental) this project will:
1) test the associations among emodiversity, emotion, stress, empathy, and well-
being in two ongoing cohort datasets of medical students and residents, and 2)
develop and test an intervention for increasing emodiversity in medical trainees
(LAVENDER). Ultimately, this program of research may provide evidence to support
widespread integration of the LAVENDER intervention into medical education and
may facilitate the development of interventions, therapies, and policies aimed
at cultivating empathy and well-being in other high-stress professions (e.g.,
police, military).