* 1714555
* The Role of Electrostatic Fields at the Protein-Protein Interface
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Lauren Webb, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 614,548.00

Biological function emerges from the interaction of multiple proteins in the
crowded environment of a living cell. In the post-genomic era, enhanced
understanding of the cooperative interaction between proteins is necessary to
explore the complexity of biological processes. For example, the signaling
protein Ras is responsible for propagating a chemical message that leads to,
among other things, cell division. To do this, Ras binds to and interacts with
multiple proteins in its lifecycle to switch between "on" (signaling) and "off"
(silent) states. However, the physical mechanisms that drive and stabilize these
protein-protein interactions and direct their resulting function are largely
unknown. These interactions are enabled by the distribution of weak, but long-
range electrostatic fields that are generated by the proteins' structures.
Subtle changes in the structure or chemical sequence of a protein that alter
these interactions can be devastating; for example, mutations to the human Ras
protein that prevent its binding to the appropriate partner leave it permanently
in the "on" state, causing uncontrolled cell division and tumor growth. It is
believed that a fundamental investigation into the physical mechanisms of the
formation and function of Ras-based protein-protein interfaces will have two
important outcomes: 1) generation of an entirely new understanding of the
function of this specific protein ; and 2) general knowledge about the role of
electrostatic fields in protein-protein interactions that can then be applied to
a wide variety of other biologically relevant multiprotein complexes. The
advanced multidisciplinary nature of this research project will enable the
exploration of important questions that arise at the interface of experimental
and theoretical chemistry and biology. In the process of achieving these goals,
students and postdoctoral researchers will be trained in multidisciplinary tools
and techniques that will form the foundations of their own scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's laboratory utilizes spectroscopic
techniques to study the molecular-level mechanisms that generate the
electrostatic fields, which in turn determine the formation and specificity of
protein-protein interfaces. The research group has used this technique to study
the interactions between normal Ras proteins and their binding partners in the
chemical signaling pathway (so called "effector" proteins) as a model system for
all biologically important protein-protein interfaces. In this project, the PI
will use this technique to investigate the formation of abnormal interfaces of
known cancer-causing mutants of Ras with their appropriate effector proteins in
order to understand the differences between normal and pathological Ras mutants.
Understanding the detailed mechanisms that are responsible for the formation of
an interface between Ras and other proteins and, in particular, how cancerous
mutations of Ras alter the function of these interfaces, will provide an
entirely new perspective on the role of electrostatic fields in the structure,
function, and dynamics of complex, multiprotein assemblies. How electrostatic
fields at the protein-protein interface may be altered through the selective
binding of small molecules to that interface will also be investigated. This
will be accomplished by focusing on the binding and inhibition of the natural
product brefeldin A to the interface of a Ras analog with its downstream
effector. The experimental data will be used to validate and refine
computational techniques for predicting protein electrostatic fields.