* 1714091
* SHF: Small: Making Strassen's Algorithm Practical
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Field Van Zee, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2021
* USD 465,884.00

High-performance linear algebra software libraries are at the core of scientific
computing and machine learning applications. At the core of many high-
performance linear algebra libraries lies the matrix multiplication operation
because many other matrix operations can be cast in terms of matrix
multiplication and matrix multiplication itself can attain high performance.
Strassen?s algorithm, first proposed in 1969, is a clever scheme for reducing
the number of arithmetic calculations that must be performed when computing a
matrix multiplication. It has mostly been a theoretical curiosity that has led
to a sequence of improvements over the years. Some practical applications of
Strassen?s algorithm for very large problem sizes have been encountered in, for
example, the aerospace industry. Very recently, it was shown that Strassen?s
algorithm, and some of its variations, can be made practical for small problem
sizes, opening up a range of new academic and practical directions of research.
The project will pursue these directions and will incorporate the advances in
high-performance software libraries. In essence, it will give the user a
performance boost of up to around 30%, for free. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will create a practical framework and analysis for the
implementation of a broad family of Strassen-like algorithms, building on a
model of computation that captures the interaction between software and
hardware. This will yield the most thorough understanding to date of the
practical implementation of such algorithms. The proposed project will also
deliver a software library for practical use in computational science and
machine learning applications that cast computation in terms of matrix-matrix
multiplication and/or tensor contractions, with a mechanism for choosing the
best algorithm from that family. It builds on recent advances regarding the
high-performance implementation of linear algebra software libraries. What was
shown was that such libraries can be composed from small kernels that can be
highly optimized for a specific architecture. These kernels have become the
building blocks for traditional algorithms for matrix operations. In this
research, they also become the building blocks for high-performance algorithms
that incorporate Strassen?s algorithm and closely related so-called fast matrix
multiplication algorithms. The resulting software will be released under open
source license to facilitate its use and study. Pedagogical outreach will
include the development of a Massive Open Online Course on "Programming for
Performance" in which Strassen-like algorithms and their practical
implementation will be a prominent enrichment. The project involves several
members from traditionally underrepresented groups and will continue a long
tradition of involvement by undergraduates.