* 1714029
* EAPSI: Voter Response to Party Switching in a Consolidated Democracy
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Garrett Bredell, Bredell                 Garrett        B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project examines voters' evaluations of legislators who change party
affiliations between elections in democratic systems. Party switching is
important because it weakens accountability between voters and their political
representatives in otherwise strong democratic institutions. Voters may support
a legislator and their party during an election, but the legislator may "jump
ship" after winning the election to another party, attenuating the linkages
between voters and their representatives. This project will examine how voters
react to party switching and whether they punish or reward legislators who
change their party affiliations. There is to date no research that explores
whether voters reward or punish party switching, and under what institutional
and political conditions these effects may change. Japan is an excellent
location and case for this study, where party switching has previously resulted
in shifts in governing coalitions and majority party status. This project will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Kuniaki Nemoto of Musashi University,
Tokyo. Located in Tokyo, Musashi University provides ease of access to political
resources including the National Diet and the National Diet Library.
Additionally, Dr. Nemoto is a well-respected scholar of parliamentary politics
in Japan, and is a very apposite partner for this project and topic.

Using a mixed-methods approach that incorporates a survey experiment and
interviews with voters and candidate support groups, this research agenda aims
to identify how and under what conditions Japanese voters positively or
negatively evaluate party switching legislators. Not only does it test whether
voters positively or negatively reaction to party switching, but the project
aims to test whether these reactions change depending upon several variables.
First, the survey will determine whether voters reaction to switching changes on
the seat type ? specifically, whether the party switcher is occupying a Single
Member District (SMD) seat or a Proportional Representation (PR) seat. Second,
it will test whether the category of party switching changes the voter reaction,
including whether the party switcher is moving to an incumbent or governing
party, and whether the party switcher is moving as a result of expulsion, party
dissolution or party formation. This research advances our understanding of
voter behavior in democratic systems, and studies an important but neglected
aspect of Japanese legislative politics.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.