* 1714603
* Molecular dissection of eukaryotic transcription termination mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Claire Moore, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2022
* USD 926,219.00

A great challenge for a eukaryotic cell is to produce the appropriate amount of
each protein and to quickly adjust that production as the cell's environment
changes. To meet this challenge, cells must orchestrate many discrete steps, but
the details of this integration are not well understood. This research will use
baker's yeast as a model to explore the molecular interactions cells use to
mount an integrated response to environmental stress. Because all organisms must
cope with stresses of various types, the results should be applicable to other
systems and may aid in developing strategies for engineering stress tolerance.
In addition to advancing scientific knowledge, this project will provide
opportunities for training undergraduates, post-baccalaureate trainees, and
graduate students from diverse backgrounds. It will improve STEM education by
providing research opportunities for junior faculty from primarily undergraduate
institutions at critical points in their careers. The project will also provide
training in computational science as a quantitative and predictive tool for
biological studies, and develop a publicly available web interface for
researchers to explore aspects of gene regulation using whole genome datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proper responses to cellular stress require coordination
among a number of gene expression steps. These include different phases of mRNA
synthesis--initiation, elongation and termination--as well as multiple steps in
processing, such as capping, splicing, polyadenylation, all culminating with
export of the mRNA from the nucleus. Each part of this "coordination network"
constitutes a step at which the amount and type of mRNA from a particular gene
can be regulated. The goal of this project is to use the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae as a model organism to identify critical molecular interactions that
coordinate transcription and mRNA 3' end processing. In particular, the project
will use complementary approaches of molecular biology, biochemistry, genetics,
and bioinformatics to determine how core polyadenylation factors contribute to
the activation and repression of genes in response to stress. The results should
provide new insights into the mechanisms cells use to rapidly fine-tune their
responses to changing environmental conditions.