* 1714722
* Physics of Correlated Disordered Packings
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Salvatore Torquato, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this award. It supports
theoretical and computational research to further fundamental understanding of
the structure and physics of new exotic states of amorphous matter called
disordered hyperuniform many-body systems. In a precisely definable way,
disordered hyperuniform systems lie between a crystal and a liquid. There is an
increasing realization that such states of matter may play vital roles in
various fundamental and applied problems, including: glass formation, jamming of
granular media, rigidity, the nature of metallic and insulating electronic
systems, localization of waves and excitations, self-organization, fluid
dynamics, and quantum systems. The concept may be important in the fields of
materials, mathematics, and biology. General objectives of this project include,
but are not limited to: (i) identification and study of the physics of new types
of disordered hyperuniform packings with tailored scattering functions; (ii)
formulation of new ways to measure organization and to characterize these
spatially correlated packings; (iii) and computation of their transport,
optical, chemical and mechanical properties and exploration of the extent to
which these characteristics are optimal. Statistical mechanics, including both
theoretical and computational techniques, will be among the formal tools the PI
will use to carry out the research. This project may lead to new fundamental
insights into the nature of disordered hyperuniform systems and the formulation
of overarching principles that link diverse forms of these exotic states of
amorphous matter. This research may lead to an ability to control, tune and
ultimately design new materials with novel physical properties. There is
potential to provide guidance to experimentalists to fabricate optimized
disordered hyperuniform materials, including via 3D printing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to
this award. It supports theoretical and computational research to further our
fundamental understanding of the structure and physics of new exotic states of
amorphous matter called disordered hyperuniform many-body systems. Disordered
hyperuniform materials are singular states of matter that behave more like
crystals in the way they suppress density fluctuations over long distances, and
yet also resemble traditional isotropic liquids and glasses with no Bragg peaks.
Such states may play vital roles in various fundamental and applied problems:
glass formation, jamming, rigidity, band and gap structure, localization of
waves and excitations, self-organization, fluid dynamics, quantum systems, pure
mathematics, and biology. A unified theory of disordered hyperuniform systems
poses a fundamental conceptual challenge due the fact that they come in
seemingly disparate equilibrium and nonequilibrium varieties as either classical
or quantum-mechanical states. To make this challenging task more manageable, the
proposed research is directed toward developing a foundational theory to
understand the structure and physics of disordered hyperuniform packings. Some
of the general objectives of this project include, but are not limited to the
following: (i) identification and study of the physics of new types of
disordered hyperuniform packings with tailored scattering functions; (ii)
formulation of new order metrics to characterize these strongly spatially
correlated packings; (iii) and computation of their transport, optical, chemical
and mechanical properties and exploration of the extent to which these
characteristics are optimal. This will be accomplished by using statistical
mechanics, including theoretical and computational techniques. This project is
aimed to lead to new fundamental insights into the nature of disordered
hyperuniform systems and the formulation of overarching principles that link
diverse forms of these exotic states of strongly correlated amorphous matter.
The conditions and mechanisms that drive either equilibrium or nonequilibrium
systems to be disordered and hyperuniform will be elucidated. The findings will
aid in categorizing the growing diverse instances of these amorphous states. A
natural byproduct of this project will be a deeper understanding of the nature
of disorder and order in many-body systems. This research may contribute to the
ability to control, tune and ultimately design new materials with novel physical
properties. The research is intended to have the far-reaching benefit of
providing guidance to experimentalists to fabricate optimized disordered
hyperuniform materials, including via 3D printing techniques.