* 1714103
* RUI: Discovering and characterizing the binding determinants for RNA polymerase-associated proteins in E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Padraig Deighan, Emmanuel College
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2022
* USD 351,536.00

To enable both cellular growth and prudent responses to changing environmental
conditions, bacteria, like all cells, need to ensure that each of their genes is
expressed at the appropriate time and at the appropriate level. The first step
of gene expression, called transcription, is mediated by a molecular machine
called RNA polymerase (RNAP) and is guided by a plethora of proteins
collectively named transcription factors. While the study of the bacterial RNAPs
continues to provide a framework for understanding transcription in all domains
of life, an in depth understanding of RNAP and transcription factor interactions
is lacking. In this research, undergraduate student-scientists will use
classical and innovative molecular biology techniques to discover and
characterize how transcription factors influence RNAP activity in the bacterium
E. coli. The findings will lead to a greater understanding of the fundamental
principles governing gene expression in all cells and the experimental tools
developed will facilitate future studies of protein-protein interactions.
Student-scientists will be mentored in all aspects of the research process. In
addition, the investigators will develop a CURE (Classroom Undergraduate
Research Experience) based on transcription factor-RNAP interactions to teach
fifty undergraduates during the funding period, and many more afterwards, about
the fundamental topic of protein-protein interactions. The project will also
develop a research module for inclusion in a well-established science education
outreach program for high school girls that will contribute to their
preparedness for future STEM career paths and leadership roles in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the great majority of the 250 transcription factors in
E. coli, it remains to be discovered how they influence gene expression and if
they make a direct protein-protein contact with RNAP or its seven sigma factors.
In this project, the investigators will discover and characterize transcription
factor-RNAP domain interactions and transcription factor-sigma domain
interactions. Guided by the availability of RNAP crystal structures the
investigators have inputted 47 structured domains from RNAP and its sigma
factors into a bacterial two-hybrid (B2H) assay. Over 100 previously-identified
candidate RNAP-associated proteins will be tested individually for interaction
against each RNAP and sigma factor domain. Further, the RNAP and sigma factor
domains will be screened against an E. coli proteome library using a B2H assay
strain that is optimized for a fluorescence-activated cell sorting protocol
enabling the isolation of cells containing productive protein-protein
interactions. The investigators will use next generation sequencing to identify
the DNA corresponding to the interacting protein-protein pairs. Following the
creation of a landscape map of RNAP- and sigma factor-associated proteins, they
will characterize exemplary interactions by identifying amino acid
substitution(s) in both the transcription factor and the RNAP domain that
disrupt the interaction. These genetic tools will be used to learn more about
RNAP function by investigating the effect of the transcription factor-RNAP
domain interaction on known phenotypes for the transcription factor in vivo, as
well as on the initiation, elongation and termination properties of RNAP during
transcription in vitro.