* 1714237
* Models of Controlled Biological Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Alberto Bressan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 345,000.00

In the process of their growth, tissues in plants and animals develop into
distinctly recognizable shapes: leaves, flowers, bones, etc.; almost
universally, the tissue growth appears to be controlled with remarkable
accuracy. The principal aim of this research is developing new mathematical
tools to understand this control mechanism. From this theoretical perspective,
some key questions will be addressed: What physical parameters produce the
different behavior of a climbing vine, compared with a tree stem? How does
nature control the shape and size of leaves, or flowers, in plants of different
species? The project will study various partial differential equations (PDE)
modeling the growth of a biological tissue. These equations describe the balance
between diffusion and adsorption of growth-inducing chemicals, volume
expansion, and elastic deformation of the tissue. The focus will be on the
emergence of distinctive shapes, and on how these shapes can be modified by
varying the growth-affecting physical parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on various models of tissue growth, described by systems of
partial differential equations. These represent diffusion and absorption for
morphogens within the tissue, bulk growth, and elastic deformation. Existence,
uniqueness, and qualitative properties of solutions will be studied, also in an
anisotropic setting and for stratified domains. The results to be obtained will
expand the current theory of evolution problems on domains with moving
boundaries. The research will also address new types of stationary
problems, somewhat like eigenvalue problems but in a set-valued framework.  For
various classes of stratified domains, the Principal Investigator expects to
discover families of locally invariant "morpho-stationary" configurations,
depending on finitely many parameters. These will generate a rich variety of new
geometric shapes, that will be studied both analytically and numerically.