* 1714693
* Regulatory mechanisms of plant heterotrimeric G-protein signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Sona Pandey, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 788,315.00

Plants respond to a variety of internal cues and external signals by employing
multiple protein signaling complexes, which facilitate changes in plant
physiology and environmental adaptation to optimize growth and development.
Heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G-proteins) are a class of proteins that
have emerged as key regulators of a multitude of plant signaling pathways. These
proteins are currently a focus of intense research due to their involvement in
modulation of many agronomically important traits such as seed yield, plant
defense responses, symbiosis and nitrogen use efficiency. The mechanistic
details of how a small number of proteins regulate a multitude of signaling
processes remain largely unknown. This research focuses on the regulatory
mechanisms of G-proteins and will address some of the unique features of plant
G-protein signaling, which remain undiscovered to date. Successful completion of
this research will not only fill major gaps in our knowledge of plant G-protein
signaling mechanisms, but will also build a foundation for further targeted
studies in other economically important plants, where detailed mechanistic
studies are currently not possible. Therefore, in addition to advancing the
basic understanding in the field, this study may also apply broadly to some of
the problems that challenge the world today, such as generating higher yield
with limited resources and unfavorable environments. The work will involve
training of a technician and a postdoctoral scientist in multidisciplinary
approaches, as well as mentoring of undergraduate students. The research will
also help promote an understanding of plant science to high school students and
the general public via a series of hands on experiments and interactive
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Naturally occurring or engineered changes in
the level of G-proteins cause profound effects on plant architecture, abiotic
stress responses and yield potential, making elucidation of their underlying
signaling mechanisms a high priority. The principal investigator has shown that
the regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) protein and a phospholipase D
(PLDalpha1) protein act in a double negative loop to precisely control the level
of active G-alpha protein in plant cells. The research will now focus on
predicting and validating specific G-protein regulatory circuits using
biochemical modeling and mutant response assays. Evaluation of the ancestral
versus derived states of the G-protein regulatory modes will also be
investigated by comparative evolutionary and genetic analyses. This research
seeks to answer important questions related to plant G-protein regulatory
mechanisms such as, (i) how is the plant G-protein cycle regulated, especially
in the context of its unusual biochemical properties? (ii) how is the
specificity of response regulation achieved despite a paucity of core
components? (iii) how the activation/deactivation balance of G-alpha protein
cycle is controlled in the absence of canonical G-Protein-Coupled Receptors in
plants? (iv) why is the loss of a key regulatory protein (e.g. RGS protein)
tolerated in a subset of plant species, even though it acts as an important
regulator of the G-protein cycle in plants that possess it? and (v) what might
replace RGS protein function in plants that lack it? Successful completion of
this research is expected to not only shed light on G-protein signaling in
plants, but to uncover additional, perhaps novel signaling and regulatory
pathways in other eukaryotes that have been obscured until now due to the
complexity of interactions.