* 1714261
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing a Cloud-based Cryptographic Simulator for Enhancing Undergraduates' Learning Experience in Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Jie Yan, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2022
* USD 399,755.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Bowie State University seeks to enhance cybersecurity
undergraduate education by strengthening students' learning experiences through
cryptography. The activities and strategies are evidence-based and a strong plan
for formative and summative evaluation is part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to: (1) develop
an interactive cryptographic simulator with real-world scenarios and deploy the
cryptographic simulator to a cloud-based platform; (2) infuse the cloud-based
cryptographic simulation modules for academic training in the cybersecurity
courses; and (3) build a cloud-based platform to share the instructional
materials online. Additionally, workshops are being held to build capacity in
cryptography education for high school teachers and college faculty. This
project will have an impact on enhancing cybersecurity education by providing a
platform for interactive real life scenario simulations in the context of
cryptography. It is expected that over 200 undergraduate students will be
impacted by this project annually.