* 1714425
* AF: Small: Computational Algebraic Methods for Systems of Partial Difference-Differential Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alexander Levin, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 181,746.00

Natural processes, like the formation of a snowflake, can reveal deep
connections between physical laws, which are often modeled as systems of
mathematical equations, and symmetries, which can be captured mathematically as
group actions. In computer algebra software, which can help solve systems of
equations, it would be good to be able to ensure that operations respect group
actions and preserve symmetries. Despite the over sixty-year history of
algorithmic approaches in differential and difference algebra, there are
currently no efficient computational techniques to analyze systems of algebraic
partial difference-differential equations (PDDEs) and more general systems of
partial differential equations (PDEs) with group action. This project aims to
develop the theory and algorithms to determine the structure of solutions of a
system of PDDEs or PDEs with additional conditions imposed by the action of
transformation groups (e. g., PDEs with symmetries), for describing physical,
chemical, or biological processes with symmetries. The educational goal of the
project is to involve into an interdepartmental program on applications of
symbolic computation the PI will develop, not only undergraduate majors in
computer science, mathematics, and physics at the Catholic University of America
(CUA), but also engineering majors in the field of automatic control and biology
majors who work with continuous and discrete mathematical models of biology
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key research directions of this project are:
(1) Development of computational methods and algorithms for difference-
differential elimination and for decomposition of solution sets of systems of
algebraic PDDEs and PDEs with group action into unions of characterizable
(?simple??) components. Extension of these techniques to systems with weighted
basic operators. (2) Elaboration of methods and algorithms for the evaluation of
dimension characteristics of the solution sets of the above-mentioned systems.
In particular, the PI will obtain algorithms for computing dimension polynomials
and quasi-polynomials that express the Einstein?s strength of a system of PDDEs.
(3) Application of the developed techniques to systems of PDDEs and PDEs with
group action that arise in physics, automatic control, chemistry and biology.
&lt;br/&gt;The main methods and approaches of the project include the
characteristic set technique for difference-differential polynomials and its
generalizations to the cases of several term orderings and weighted basic
operators, the relative Groebner basis method, the techniques of dimension
polynomials and quasi-polynomials, and decomposition methods for algebraic PDDEs
and PDEs with group action. The results will be demonstrated in
interdisciplinary research projects at CUA.