* 1714792
* Precision Studies of the Standard Model using Parity-Violating Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Wouter Deconinck, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 608,000.00

In our quest to understand the fundamental structure of matter, physicists
describe matter by its known elementary constituents: electrons, quarks,
photons, gluons, etc. All experimentally observed elementary particles and their
interactions are described by a theory known as the Standard Model of Particle
Physics. Since its inception in the mid-1970s, the Standard Model of Particle
Physics has been successful at describing a wide range of physical phenomena in
nuclear and high energy physics, at accelerator laboratories and in table-top
experiments. There are, however, compelling theoretical reasons to expect the
Standard Model to break down, as well as some experimental hints in precision
measurements. It is therefore widely believed that the Standard Model is simply
an approximate low-energy description, arising from more fundamental physics
that is manifest at energies that are currently beyond experimental reach.
Precision measurements present a powerful approach to test the Standard Model of
particle physics at low-energy electron accelerators. The Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport News, Virginia, is
currently the world's leading laboratory for a subclass of these precision
measurement tests of the Standard Model. This project supports precision
measurements of the weak charge of the proton and of the electron in two large
collaborative experiments at Jefferson Lab. In analogy to the electric charge,
the weak charge describes how strongly these particles interact through the weak
nuclear force. The results of both experiments, by themselves but also in
combination with the results from the Large Hadron Collider at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), will allow us to constrain models of
physics beyond the Standard Model. The investigators are working to increase
economic and ethnic diversity in physics through specific recruiting and
outreach efforts. One of the investigators has been active in improving gender
diversity in physics through a national APS-affiliated organization, and is also
developing a novel curricular track in Engineering Physics and Applied Design at
William &amp; Mary, which has a goal of attracting and improving retention of
women and students of color to the STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
electroweak-mixing angle, a fundamental parameter in the Standard Model of
Particle Physics, can be extracted at nuclear energies from measurements of the
weak charge of the proton or of the electron. The mixing angle runs with energy
scale in the Standard Model, and comparison of the measured value with the
predicted running allows a sensitive search for physics beyond the Standard
Model. The weak charges are accessed using parity-violating electron scattering
in the Qweak experiment (for the proton) and the MOLLER experiment (for the
electron). The Qweak experiment has taken data and the signature publication is
currently in preparation. This will constitute the first precision measurement
of the proton's weak charge. After publication of the main result, the
experiment will finalize more than a dozen ancillary results. The investigators
will continue their central role in the simulation and data analysis efforts
crucial to the analysis of the backgrounds from electron-aluminum scattering and
the polarization sensitivity of the main detectors. The MOLLER experiment is
currently in the design stages and will use parity-violating electron-electron
scattering to extract the electroweak mixing angle to a precision comparable to
the best available high-energy measurements, through a measurement of the weak
charge of the electron. The investigators will take a leading role in the
development and testing of the track reconstruction detectors for the MOLLER
experiment, and are also responsible for a detection system to measure the
background from electro- and photo-produced pions.