* 1714323
* Informal Settlements and Urban Migration in the Pacific
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2017,09/30/2017
* Cadey Korson, Korson                  Cadey
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 09/30/2017
* USD 0.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships program. The goal of the SPRF program
is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific
careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards
involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists
and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to
promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific
community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its research
programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Globalization has accelerated cultural
poverty, the commodification of indigenous knowledges, food insecurity, and the
exploitation of resources. As a result increasing numbers of indigenous peoples
are moving to urban slum settlements where they face unemployment,
discrimination, and further exclusion. A growing movement for what Lefebvre and
Harvey call the "right to the city" advocates for a democratic and participatory
approach to urban governance and planning. Through interviews with slum
settlement inhabitants in the Pacific, community leaders, politicians, and
scholars, this research examines how indigenous migrants are recreating
communities, the impact of migration and squatting on their culture, and develop
participatory approaches to improving conditions in slums. Indigenous peoples in
the United States, the Pacific, and elsewhere struggle with adequate
representation, quality of life, and poverty. This research aims to work with
indigenous communities to develop policies on affordable and sustainable housing
and the protection and celebration of indigenous culture in cities that can
inform indigenous struggles for inclusion elsewhere.

This research will build on a series of interviews, focus groups, participant
observation, and mental mapping activities to analyze the development of
informal settlements in urban peripheries. This project examines patterns of
internal indigenous migration to urban areas, the extent to which migrants
continue to participate in the activities in their home communities and maintain
kinship networks, and how migrants are recreating community and a sense of urban
indigenous identity in informal settlements. Finally, the concept of the "right
to the city" is applied to identifying participatory approaches to improving
conditions in informal settlements, creating affordable and sustainable housing
alternatives, and empowering squatter inhabitants and the indigenous community
to reshape the urban landscape in a way that celebrates their identity and
values. Indigenous participants should have a voice in the planning and
development of their homes and communities. By highlighting their ideas and
supporting activism among community groups, this research seeks to cultivate
participatory urban planning that meets the particular needs of indigenous
islanders. The resulting strategies can be implemented in other urban
environments with marginalized populations and informal settlements. These
spaces should not be simply labeled as crime ridden, impoverished, or illegal.
They are also spaces of innovation, indigenous knowledge, community, and
belonging that can offer new strategies for a better mode of urban governance
that improves the lives of inhabitants rather than excludes them.