* 1714528
* The Morphology of Dust-Obscured Starbursts: the e-MERLIN SuperCLASS Legacy Survey
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Caitlin Casey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 152,189.00

Galaxies -- collections of hundreds of billions of stars all bound by gravity --
are a fundamental building block in the evolution of our Universe. Our own Milky
Way galaxy is regarded as 'normal' in the Universe today, stretching 100,000
light years across and forming stars at a rate of 1-2 new suns per year. But, as
we look farther out into the Universe, it seems that galaxies in the distant
past (10 billion years ago) were dramatically different. Extreme "starbursting"
galaxies that produced 100 to 2,000 stars per year were much more typical, and
most stars formed at that time came from such starbursts. The awarded team is
trying to determine why these galaxies were so important in the Universe's
history and why they are so extreme, for example whether or not they are caused
by the catastrophic collision of two smaller galaxies, or whether the gas (the
fuel needed to power star formation) was more dense and efficient when the
Universe was much younger. These extreme starbursts are also heavily obscured by
dust, making them hard to see in optical light visible to our eyes. Cutting edge
radio-wavelength data from the e-MERLIN telescope will be used to peer through
the dust and determine the powering mechanism for the Universe's most extreme
starbursting galaxies. This project will support the retention of under-
represented students in astrophysics research through participation in the
TAURUS program at UT Austin, where undergraduate students spend nine weeks of
the summer on a research project. The awardee will be proactive in engaging and
supporting under-represented students in communities like
TAURUS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a unique data set of high-resolution (0."1)
deep (4 uJy) radio 1.4 GHz continuum data from e-MERLIN covering 1.77 deg^2 in
the SuperCLASS field, the awardees will assess the evolutionary origins of
highly-obscured radio galaxies in a statistically large sample (few x 100) out
to z~3. The objectives are to answer the following questions: (1) Are the high-
SFRs in dusty starbursts primarily driven by galaxy interactions or not? (2)
Does feedback from Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN) in obscured starbursts play a
role in suppressing star-formation? Or is there no discernible difference in
star formation seen in starbursts with or without radio-luminous AGN (and what
is the dependence on the AGN luminosity)? (3) What do galaxies' star-formation
surface densities tell us about the intensity of star formation and relative
obscuration geometries (when compared to optical imaging)? (4) Can one learn
about the physical origins of the mysterious far-infrared/radio correlation by
analyzing galaxies' radio synchrotron slope and radio morphologies? Answering
these questions through direct morphological analysis of the e-MERLIN SuperCLASS
data products will have significant impact on galaxy evolution studies.