* 1714779
* AF: Small: Lower Bounds for Computational Models, and Relations to Other Topics in Computational Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ran Raz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Computational complexity theory is a mathematical field that studies the limits
of computers and the resources needed to perform computational tasks. A
mathematical theory of computation is crucial in our information age, where
computers are involved in essentially every part of our life. Computational
complexity is also essential in designing efficient communication protocols,
secure cryptographic protocols and in understanding human and machine learning.
Studying the limits of computational models is among the most exciting, most
challenging, and most important topics in theoretical computer science and is
essential for understanding the power of computation and for the development of
a theory of computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study lower
bounds for the resources required by different computational models, as well as
related topics in computational complexity. The project will focus on three main
research directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-Space lower bounds for learning:
In a sequence of recent works, the PI and his coauthors proved that some of the
most extensively studied learning problems require either a super-linear memory
size or a super-polynomial number of samples. The project will further study
memory/samples lower bounds for learning and their relations to other topics in
complexity theory. Lower bounds for learning under memory constraints
demonstrate the importance of memory in learning and cognitive processes. They
may be relevant to understanding human learning and may have impact on machine
learning, artificial intelligence and optimization. They also have applications
in cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lower bounds for arithmetic circuits: The
project will study lower bounds for arithmetic circuits and formulas, as well as
for subclasses of arithmetic circuits and formulas. Lower bounds for arithmetic
circuits may have a broader impact within theoretical computer science, because
of the centrality of polynomials in theoretical computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lower bounds for communication complexity: In a
sequence of recent works, the PI and his coauthors proved the first gaps between
information complexity and communication complexity. These results show that
compression of interactive communication protocols to their information content
is not possible, and hence show that interactive analogs to Shannon's source
coding theorem and Huffman coding are not possible. Separation results of
communication complexity and information complexity may be relevant to
electrical engineering and in particular to the design of efficient
communication protocols. The project will further study these topics, and more
generally, lower bounds for communication complexity and their relations to
other topics in computational complexity.