* 1714070
* EAPSI: Developing Single Nucleus ATAC-seq to Map the Ageing Epigenome
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Siti-Nur-Sarah Morris, Morris                  Siti-Nur-Sarah
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Insights into the molecular basis of aging are key to developing diagnostic and
therapeutic methods for alleviating age-related disorders. However, one of the
difficulties in creating a general age panacea is the fact that each cell within
an organism ages differently. Therefore, one of the goals for aging research is
to characterize how individual cells change over time. This project will focus
on muscle cells because muscle weakness is a common complaint in the elderly.
Single cell studies are usually difficult due to the small amount of source
material. Advances in sequencing and cell collection technology provide an
opportunity for research into single cell genomes. This research project
utilizes facilities at RIKEN Yokohama to access the latest in single cell
technologies and to benefit from the leadership of Dr. Aki Minoda.

The purpose of this project is to develop a single nucleus Assay for
Transposase-Accessible Chromatin sequencing (snATAC-seq) protocol for the
characterization of epigenetic heterogeneity in mouse skeletal muscle. While
single cell ATAC-seq is available, viable snATAC-seq remains undeveloped. ATAC-
seq is a novel method to determine the status of epigenetic chromatin
modifications. Unlike other forms of sequencing, ATAC-seq is able to map
nucleosome positions, thereby providing a multidimensional description of the
cellular epigenome. Application of this promising technology to the question of
ageing and ageing-related disease opens up new avenues of discourse and possible
therapeutics. Development of single nucleus ATAC-seq ablates the size
restriction inherent in ATAC-seq and will open up research in a variety of cell
types in numerous other disease states.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.