* 1714212
* Nonlinear Manifold Learning of Protein Folding Funnels from Delay-Embedded Experimental Measurements
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2018
* USD 210,000.00

Proteins are the molecular engines that perform biological functions essential
to life. A major milestone in the understanding of protein behavior emerged with
the advent of the "new view" of protein folding. This perspective conceives of
protein structure, stability, and dynamics as governed by a molecular-level
landscape not unlike a relief map describing the surface of the Earth. Each
point on the landscape - analogous to latitude and longitude - corresponds to a
particular spatial arrangement of protein atoms. The altitude of each point on
the map defines protein stability - unstable conformations lie on mountaintops
and stable conformations within valley floors. Determining these landscapes is a
key goal of protein biology since they are useful in the understanding of
natural proteins and design of synthetic proteins as drugs, enzymes, and
molecular machines. It is relatively straightforward to calculate these
landscapes for small proteins using computer simulations, but it has not been
possible to do so from experimental measurements. It is the primary objective of
this research to combine mathematical tools from the modeling of dynamical
systems with machine learning approaches to analyze high-dimensional datasets to
determine approximate protein folding landscapes directly from experimental
data. The approach will first be validated in computer simulations of small
proteins where the folding landscape is known. Theoretical analyses will place
bounds on how close the approximate landscapes are to the true landscapes, and
place conditions on the experimental data required for their determination.
Ultimately the approach will be applied to experimental measurements of a
tuberculosis protein. The computational analysis tool will be released as user-
friendly software for free public download. Positive research experiences have
great benefits for undergraduate success and retention, and this award will
support summer and academic year research opportunities. New educational
outreach materials will be developed for the University of Illinois "Engineering
Open House" to promote awareness of materials science and engineering among
middle- and high-school students.

The aim of this work is to integrate nonlinear manifold learning with dynamical
systems theory to reconstruct protein folding landscapes from experimental time
series measuring a single system observable. The "new view" of protein folding
revolutionized understanding of folding as a conformational search over rugged
and funneled free energy landscapes parameterized by a small number of emergent
collective variables, with transformative implications for the understanding and
design of proteins as drugs, enzymes, and molecular machines. It is now
relatively routine to determine multidimensional folding landscapes from
computer simulations in which all atomic coordinates are known, but it has not
been possible to do so from experimental measurements of protein dynamics that
are restricted to small numbers of coarse-grained observables. This research
project integrates Takens' delay embeddings with nonlinear manifold learning
using diffusion maps to first project univariate time series in an
experimentally measurable observable into a high-dimensional space in which the
dynamics are C1-equivalent to those in real space, and then extract from this
space a topologically and geometrically equivalent reconstruction of the folding
funnel to that which would have been determined from knowledge of all atomic
coordinates. The reconstructed landscape preserves the topology of the true
funnel - the metastable configurations and folding pathways - but the topography
may be perturbed, i.e., the heights and depths of the free energy peaks and
valleys. The three primary objectives of this work are to (i) validate the
approach in molecular dynamics simulations of small proteins for which the true
landscape is known, (ii) place conditions on the sampling resolution and signal-
to-noise ratio in experimental measurements for robust landscape recovery, and
theoretical bounds on the induced topographical perturbations, and (iii) apply
the approach to experimental single-molecule Forster resonance energy transfer
(smFRET) measurements on the lid-opening and closing dynamics of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis protein tyrosine phosphatase (Mtb-PtpB).