* 1714018
* EAPSI: Disinfection Properties of Visible Light Active Iron-containing Silicate Glass
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kamrie Sarnosky, Sarnosky                Kamrie         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

In order to address current issues in global water quality and sustainability,
new environmentally friendly water disinfection technologies must be developed.
Currently, chemicals commonly used to disinfect wastewater, such as chlorine,
can react with other molecules in the water to create potentially harmful
disinfection byproducts (DBPs). New technologies using ultraviolet (UV) light
and semiconducting materials may be a byproduct-free alternative to chemical
disinfection to inactivate pathogenic bacteria. However, solar light has less
than 5% UV light radiation and artificial source of UV-light makes UV technology
expensive. This project will test the disinfecting capabilities of visible light
active iron-containing silicate glass. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with Dr. Shiro Kubuki, of Tokyo Metropolitan University (TMU) in
Tokyo, Japan, who has developed an iron-containing silicate glass that can be
easily activated by visible light. This specific type of glass can be prepared
from recycled glass bottles, and uses visible light, rather than UV-light,
making it a cost-effective, byproduct-free alternative to chemical disinfection.

Although it has been established that some semiconductors, such as titanium
dioxide (TiO2), can effectively inactivate pathogenic bacteria, they require
ultra-violet (UV) light to be effective. In this project, visible light active
and iron-containing silicate glass will be used. Our hypothesis involves the use
of iron-containing silicate glass made from recycled materials to eliminate
pathogenic microorganisms without the harmful by-products produced by chlorine
disinfectants and without the need for expensive and lengthy UV-light
treatments. This study aims to: a) test the capability of iron-containing
silicate glass to effectively inactivate pathogenic indicator organisms
(Escherichia coli) by visible light-induced photocatalytic reaction and (b)
explore the potential of using iron-containing silicate glass as an affordable
"green" catalyst for water disinfection purposes.

This award is under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program support
for a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.