* 1714321
* Developmental trajectories of emotional learning and episodic memory
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Catherine Hartley, Cohen                   Alexandra
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. The ability to learn from and remember
salient information in the environment is essential for an individual to survive
and thrive throughout the lifespan. During the transition to adulthood,
adolescents navigate a dynamic environment filled with new and often emotional
experiences. Actions in emotional situations, during this time of heightened
emotional sensitivity, can result in poor decision-making and negative outcomes,
including increased incidence of psychopathology and preventable death.
Normative developmental changes in emotional learning and the emotional
facilitation of episodic memory may contribute to adolescents' unique behavior
in emotionally charged contexts. A rich literature examining classical
conditioning has highlighted how the emotional significance of stimuli
fluctuates as the statistics of the environment change. Recent work suggests
that qualitative differences in the cognitive representations formed during
dynamic emotional learning may modulate the persistence of emotional memories.
Still, little is known about how this variation emerges, in both behavior and
brain, across development or how these changes may influence episodic memory.
The proposed research uses a computational model of classical conditioning to
examine individual differences in emotional learning and episodic memory across
development. By leveraging computational, neuroimaging, and behavioral
approaches to better understand developmental changes in how individuals learn
and remember the structure of the emotional environment, this research may shed
light on the neurocognitive processes that promote healthy development of
motivated behaviors. The insights from the proposed research will have
implications for affective, developmental, and computational cognitive
neuroscience each independently, and for bridging the three research fields.

The proposed research uses a formalized computational model of classical
conditioning to examine individual differences in emotional learning and
episodic memory across development. This project will expand on and integrate
several lines of research by investigating: 1) developmental trajectories of
individual differences in emotional learning, 2) the utility of a computational
model of conditioning for making predictions about engagement of neural
circuitry underlying emotional learning, and 3) how individual differences in
emotional learning may influence episodic memory for category-specific items
presented during learning. We will implement computational modeling of
psychophysiological emotional learning data, analyze neural activity and
functional connectivity during emotional learning, and examine how emotional
learning influences episodic memory across development. We hypothesize that the
increase in emotionally driven behaviors observed during adolescence may be
reflective of normative developmental changes in the cognitive structure of
emotional learning and memory processes. This research program will provide an
important contribution to the sparse literature examining emotional learning and
underlying neural circuitry in humans from childhood to adulthood, modeling age
continuously in order to determine distinct patterns of age-related change.
These data will also be the first to characterize the neural correlates of a
computational model of threat learning across development in humans and to
extend the model predictions to the effects of emotional learning on episodic
memory, also across development. This project builds on prior work examining
negative emotion, but we predict results will be similar examining positive
emotion. This work will serve as a foundation for future studies using
computational modeling approaches to study individual differences in the
cognitive structure of learning and memory across development. These data may
ultimately help identify ways to take advantage of individual differences and
developmental changes in emotional learning and memory to help optimize learning
and bolster healthy development.