* 1714002
* EAPSI: Using the Electrospinning Technique for Organic Semiconductive Polymers and Carbon Nanotubes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* William Serrano-Garcia, Serrano-Garcia          William
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This EAPSI award will support efforts that impact the global use of
semiconducting polymers, e.g. "semiconducting plastics", that are able to
conduct electricity, for military, space and electronic device development.
Semiconducting polymers and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/copper (Cu) composites
coaxial nanofibers for electronic devices using the Electrospinning technique.
CNTs and Cu are well known by their ability to conduct electricity. Their unique
properties (electrical behavior and nanofiber structure) can result in
fabricated electrical devices that are 1000 times smaller than a human hair.
Devices such as diodes, field effect transistors and sensors can be fabricated.
Coaxial nanofibers will be prepared using the electrospinning technique, a low-
cost, fast and reliable method for nanofiber fabrication. This research will be
conducted as a collaboration between the Advanced Materials Bio & Integration
Research Laboratory at the University of South Florida (USF) and Dr. Seeram
Ramakrishna of the National University of Singapore (NUS). Dr. Ramakrishna is a
global research leader in material sciences and a pioneer in the use of
electrospinning and nanostructured materials for applications in healthcare, the
environment, energy, and defense & security providing a unique insight for
electrospinning data acquisition.

Actual progress in coaxial fibers has advanced in many fields, but, for the
first time, two organic semiconductor polymers will form a p-n junction in a
coaxial structure, resulting in functional diodes of approximately 100 nm in
diameter. These structures, formed with the presence of CNTs, a well-known
natural p-type material, and Cu composites, enhances the characteristics of the
nanofibers extending the applications of the coaxial structure that can go from
single nanofibers to fully functional yarns. This structure can be arranged to
form intelligent textiles, electroactive water and air filters, membranes and
electronic devices as exposed, advancing the cutting-edge of coaxial nanodevices
for efficient cost effective electronic device development.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.