* 1714016
* EAPSI: Managing Stormwater Runoff and Nitrogen in Urbanizing Cities Through the Use of Bioretention Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Emma Lopez, Lopez                   Emma           V
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Stormwater and nutrient management are becoming increasingly important as
urbanization in coastal cities continues to increase. Stormwater runoff carries
pollutants that are discharged in natural waterbodies. One pollutant of concern
for water quality in coastal cities is reactive nitrogen. Although a nutrient
and vital for life on Earth, when found in excess in aquatic environments
nitrogen may lead to algal blooms, negatively impacting surface water bodies
which are sources for drinking water, recreation and the fishing industry. A
technology used to treat stormwater runoff is bioretention, which consists of a
shallow depression with native plants and a series of permeable layers including
sand and gravel where the water is filtered and pollutants are degraded.
Additional advantages of bioretention are reduced flooding, improved groundwater
recharge and increases green space. The purpose of this project is to study
bioretention systems for nitrogen removal in an urban coastal city. The
researcher will be working at the National University of Singapore, where
research on the development of bioretention systems for sustainable stormwater
management is being conducted. The research will be carried out under the
guidance of Dr. Hu Jiangyong, an expert on water technologies. Singapore is the
third most densely populated nation in the world and flashfloods are common
during the rainy season and stormwater and nutrient management is crucial for
their livelihood and water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen is a highly
mobile nutrient and therefore challenging to fully remove from the aqueous
phase. Biological, physical, and chemical processes that take place in
bioretention systems can contribute to the removal of nitrogen. Moreover,
bioretention systems need to be designed to promote nitrification and
denitrification to successfully remove nitrogen from the aqueous phase and
return it to the atmosphere as dinitrogen, N2 (g). The researcher will study how
the geographical context of different precipitation events and local materials
found in Singapore contribute to nitrogen removal in bioretention compared to
systems being studied in the U.S. Storm events that were performed in Tampa, FL
in a denitrifying bioretention system will be replicated in a bioretention
system in Singapore. Total nitrogen removal data will be compared for both
systems. These comparison studies will provide a deeper insight on how the media
type and environmental parameters of precipitation impact nitrogen removal. The
new knowledge gained will contribute to improvements in bioretention design and
overall water quality for coastal cities around the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student is
jointly funded by NSF and the National Research Foundation of Singapore.