* 1714054
* EAPSI: Identifying Unstable Volcanic Slopes with Satellite and Geologic Data
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* William Schleiffarth, Schleiffarth            William        K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Volcanic slopes are often steep, unstable, and prone to collapse, especially
when groundwater interacts and weakens rocks within the volcanic edifice. A
recent example of slope failure, which transformed into a fast-moving volcanic
debris flow, occurred without warning on the flanks of Te Maari volcano on the
North Island of New Zealand in 2012. Modern satellite imagery of the volcano
suggests the slopes are weak due to the circulation of hot groundwater. The
project will investigate the geology of the slopes to test the accuracy of
satellite data interpretations. By completing detailed geochemical analyses of
samples collected from the targeted slopes, the researcher will be able to
determine to what extent these volcanic slopes are unstable and unsafe. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Ben Kennedy, a noted expert
of volcanic processes, at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New
Zealand. The results will not only aid in understanding the 2012 Te Maari slope
failure but will provide important information about the accuracy of satellite
data on unstable volcanic slopes, which can be applied worldwide.

Both LIDAR data and field studies indicate that hydrothermally altered clasts
are present in the debris flow deposit. Additionally, hyperspectral data now
reveals ongoing alteration of the volcano, and provides a unique opportunity to
study and sample these volcanic flanks. With these samples and hyperspectral and
LIDAR data, the researcher will accomplish the following objectives: (1)
determine the amount and style of hydrothermal alteration from the slopes that
failed and produced the 2012 Te Maari debris avalanche using modern geochemistry
techniques; (2) interpret remote sensing data to test whether it can accurately
identify composition and textures at Te Maari; (3) apply remote sensing
techniques to other volcanoes in the region to assess slope failure hazards. The
results of this research will provide a framework to identify and classify
hydrothermal alteration on other steep volcanic slopes, where high-resolution
remote sensing data is available. In addition to a new framework for how to
identify unstable slopes on steep volcanoes with satellite data, this work will
improve hazard assessment and mitigation efforts.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Royal Society of New Zealand.