* 1714770
* Geometric Combinatorics and Hypergeometric Functions in Integrable Systems and Their Physical Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yuji Kodama, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,466.00

This research project is to investigate certain classes of nonlinear
differential equations arising as a mathematical description of several physical
phenomena. The project includes an investigation of nonlinear waves,
particularly, in shallow water. Because of nonlinearity, when one wave is
superimposed on the other the waves are not just "additive," as would be true in
the linear case, but interact with each other. Such waves form complex wave
patterns and have very important physical applications in the generation of
large-amplitude waves, for example, in shallow water near a beach, or tsunamis.
Understanding the nature and dynamics of such extreme waves, especially near
highly populated areas is a significant and urgent task. The project also aims
to investigate a new connection between classical special functions and a class
of hydrodynamic systems which describe, for example, shock wave phenomena in gas
dynamics. The research activities will involve graduate students who will be
trained in the fields of both pure and applied mathematics, and will gain first-
hand research experience. It is further anticipated that the results from the
proposed work would be useful in the study of similar nonlinear wave phenomena
that occur in other physical problems including nonlinear optics, particle
physics and plasmas.

The PI will continue his work on geometric and combinatorial aspects of certain
two-dimensional integrable systems, particularly, the Kadomtsev-Petviashvili
(KP) equation. The KP equation admits a large class of solitary wave solutions
with complex two-dimensional wave patterns, which are sometimes referred to as
the KP web-solitons. This project also aims to give a further investigation of
the PI's recent study on a class of integrable hydrodynamic systems in
connection with the generalized hypergeometric functions that are defined on the
Grassmannian. This project has two main goals, namely, (1) to investigate the
detailed structure of the complex two-dimensional patterns of the KP web-
solitons using geometric and combinatorial theories, and (2) to construct and
classify integrable hydrodynamic systems generated by the generalized
hypergeometric functions. Also, the project includes ongoing collaboration with
experimentalists in order to compare the obtained theoretical results on the KP
solitons with laboratory experiments performed in water wave tanks.