* 1714688
* Probing the Milky Way Disk with Massive Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Thomas Bania, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2023
* USD 453,138.00

Galaxies live and die by their star formation. Galaxies, like our Milky Way, are
rich in interstellar gas and dust clouds. Gravity causes some interstellar
clouds to collapse and form stars. The largest, brightest, hottest, and most
massive stars that form are called "OB stars." OB stars are seen at their
birthplaces because in their short lifetimes they do not have time to move very
far from the collapsing interstellar clouds from which they formed. The light
from these OB stars is energetic enough to create "HII Regions." HII regions are
hot bubbles of fully ionized gas that surround their parent OB stars. OB star
formation and the HII regions that go with it are mostly confined to the spiral
arms of galaxies. HII regions are tracers of Galactic spiral
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborations with Haystack Observatory and
Green Bank Observatory (GBO) will bring the excitement of radio astronomy to
Boston University undergraduates and provide mentors at the Physics Inspiring
the Next Generation (PING) Summer Camp for 9th grade girls and boys held at
Green Bank. PING is a collaboration between GBO and the National Society of
Black Physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OB star chemical abundances indicate
the present state of the interstellar gas and reveal the elemental enrichment
caused by the nuclear processing of many stellar generations. They thus provide
unique and important tracers of billions of years of Galactic chemical evolution
(GCE). The Southern HII Region Discovery Survey (SHRDS) will use the Australian
Telescope Compact Array to find hundreds of heretofore unknown HII regions. The
SHRDS extends the successful Green Bank Telescope and Arecibo HRDS projects to
the Southern sky; nearly half of the Milky Way disk cannot be observed from the
Northern Hemisphere. The SHRDS will improve the Galactic HII region census in
the largest unexplored part of the Milky Way disk where the location of the
spiral arms and the galactic bar is especially uncertain. It will give the first
complete map of where massive stars are forming in the entire Milky Way disk.
This map will allow a detailed analysis of the overall structure of OB-star
formation sites in the Milky Way and how the physical properties of HII regions
change across the disk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Galactic HII regions are
discovered by detecting radio recombination line (RRL) radiation from candidate
HII region targets. These targets are identified by comparing infrared and radio
continuum images from existing surveys of the sky. Comparing far-IR and radio
continuum survey data leads to a list of some 2,000 candidate HII regions in the
Galaxy. RRL spectroscopic confirmation is needed to prove that a candidate is an
H II region and to give its velocity. The recombination lines give kinematic
distances and electron temperatures for the nebulae. Together, these allow
derivation of the properties of the ionizing stars and the heavy element
abundances, the metallicities, of the HII region gas. A Galactic scale map of
HII region metallicities can inform both GCE and the merger history of the Milky
Way. This project will achieve an areal density of sources, distributed
throughout the Galactic disk, that can show local zones of metal enrichment (or
depletion). This would provide evidence for mergers, thus adding a new tool for
the study of Galactic archaeology.