* 1714281
* RUI:   Completing Studies of Supernova Remnants and the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Frank Winkler, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2023
* USD 204,122.00

Massive stars end their lives in catastrophic supernova explosions, releasing as
much energy as the Sun will expend throughout its entire 10-billion-year
lifetime. Such an enormous energy release has profound effects on the galaxies
where supernovae occur. For example, the shock waves can trigger bursts of star
formation when they encounter dense interstellar clouds. Supernovae are also
responsible for the production and distribution of most of the heavy elements in
the Universe. Virtually all elements from carbon to iron on the periodic table
were forged in the cores of massive stars and distributed around the cosmos
through supernova explosions. The central themes of this research are to better
understand (1) how supernovae explode, (2) how their huge energy release affects
their host galaxies, and (3) how supernovae contribute to the chemical changes
in the Universe. The investigator and their students will focus on selected
bright supernova remnants in the Milky Way. Also, they will study the average
effect of supernova remnants in the nearby galaxies. The investigator is at
Middlebury College, an ethnically diverse college in rural Vermont. The
investigator will work with undergraduate students and help them publish their
research results. The investigator will also reach out to the public via the
striking images from the Emission Line Atlas to be published in popular
literature and on the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will concentrate
especially on young supernova remnants (SNRs), where observations made over
three decades reveal significant expansion. In young core-collapse SNRs, where
uncontaminated ejecta fragments are freely expanding, image and spectroscopy
data will be used to obtain proper motions and Doppler velocities for dozens of
surviving ejecta knots to obtain 3-dimensional models and explore possible
asymmetries. Chemical abundances inferred from spectra can tie present knots to
their origin in specific core layers of the progenitor stars. In young Type Ia
SNRs, specifically Tycho (SN1572) and RCW86 (SN185), proper motions of Balmer-
dominated filaments that delineate their outer shells will be measured to gauge
their expansion. High signal-to-noise spectra of numerous filaments in both
objects will enable determination of the shock velocities, which together with
proper motions can yield the first precise distances to these key objects. The
investigator will also statistically investigate the properties of large SNR
populations in an entire galaxy, where SNRs can be seen unimpeded by the
foreground dust that hides from view most SNRs in the Milky Way. The
investigator and collaborators will identify the SNR populations in the two
nearby galaxies which had the most supernovae in the past century.