* 1714079
* EAPSI: Controlling and Utilizing Local Wave Resonance in Engineered Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Morgan Funderburk, Funderburk              Morgan         L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This award supports research that contributes to the PI's long-term goal of
developing a revolutionary material that combines the two concepts of
nontraditional material properties and thermal expansion to produce controlled
actuation in the resonant region of the material. The researcher will study
local resonance, and how it behaves on many scales. As waves are used to excite
a structure, there are particular frequencies which match the structure and
cause extremely amplified motion; these are the natural frequencies. This type
of phenomenon can be seen in earthquakes when building collapse happens
seemingly at random, but is tied to the earthquake wave frequency matching the
natural frequency of that structure. This phenomenon is known as resonance. This
project will look at resonance on a much smaller scale using ultrasonic waves,
which are longitudinal waves in the frequency above the audible sound for
humans. These rapid waves require a much smaller structure in order to fall into
a range where resonance is possible. When resonance occurs, the resulting
concentration of the ultrasonic waves can be used to alter the material
properties in that region. Earthquake waves and sound waves share similar
properties and are governed by similar equations because they are both types of
longitudinal waves. Therefore we can look to large-scale concepts to help us
understand even very small material structures. The resources and expertise
provided by Dr. Chin-Hsiung Loh and his laboratory group at National Taiwan
University will be invaluable to the development of these concepts based on the
group's extensive knowledge and past work concerning the fundamentals of wave
propagation and behavior. In this project, the researcher and Dr. Loh's group
will perform experiments and build models that can help predict and further
understand local resonance within engineered materials. These materials can then
be used to utilize and control waves. The implementation of established
earthquake wave theories and simulations into nanomaterials will provide a more
unabridged understanding of wave behavior over the broad range of engineering
scale.

The research impacts of this material and the subsequent consolidation of
fundamental wave theories would shift the thinking surrounding the traditionally
undesirable side effect of ultrasonic heating into the purposeful field of
controlled resistance and selective actuation. By exciting local resonance using
ultrasonic waves in a liquid-filled chamber suspended in a soft matrix, it is
hypothesized that the liquid can be heated significantly to produce a volumetric
thermal expansion. This expansion would undoubtedly cause an outward pressure on
the cavity and therefore on the soft surrounding matrix. This actuation would
produce a resistive force that could stop deformation of the material structure
due to an external pressure. The actuation of the liquid can be predicted
through the thermal expansion coefficient, which will allow for the production
of a repeatable and tailorable resulting pressure. As a further step in this
research, it is the goal of the researcher to develop a nanocomposite with sets
of linear chambers having identical resonances. After a particular chamber
undergoes deformation, however, it would have a local resonance that is unique
and independent of the undisturbed chambers and could be excited individually.
This chamber would then undergo isolated pressurization causing centralized
actuation limited to the chamber experiencing the deforming external pressure.
The research will create a new type of actuation technology along with coupling
acoustic wave resonance theory with ultrasonic heat transfer to produce novel
wave vibration theories and numerical modeling. The experimental methods and
analysis techniques would be unprecedented in the materials engineering field
and would open the door for new uses of well-established structural health
monitoring and analysis wave sensors. This research project seeks to collaborate
across scale, diverse engineering fields, and unique individual backgrounds to
create networks for future collaboration and discussion.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan.