* 1714304
* Mechanisms and Moderators of Victimization Continuity: The Role of Observed Friend Interactions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Hannah Schacter, Schacter                Hannah         L
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship award
supports the training and research of a young scientist studying the
interpersonal consequences of childhood exposure to family aggression in
different relationship contexts. The project also incorporates methodological
diversity, relying on longitudinal self-report data, coded observations, and
daily diary data, which allow for examining critical micro- and macro-level
interpersonal processes. Although past research shows that victims of parental
aggression are at increased risk for experiencing victimization and/or
exhibiting aggression in the context of their peer and romantic relationships,
it remains unclear how and why exposure to family violence increases risk for
future victimization and aggression. In order to interrupt these maladaptive
cycles of violence, it is important to identify the underlying mechanisms that
account for the stability of victimization over time and learn about potential
protective factors that can buffer victims from enduring interpersonal
difficulties. The current project seeks to delineate the interpersonal
characteristics of youth with a history of victimization by directly examining
adolescents' observed social behaviors in discussions with a close friend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the current project are to examine a)
how a history of family victimization influences adolescents? interpersonal
style (e.g., affect, behavior) within a dyadic, friendship interaction and b)
whether observed maladaptive interpersonal functioning with friends can account
for the continuity of victimization over time (e.g., from family to dating
partners). By studying victimization longitudinally, across different relational
contexts (e.g., family, peer, and romantic partner), and using a range of
methods (e.g., self-report, observational coding, daily diary), the proposed
study has the potential to advance both methodological and theoretical
approaches to studying antecedents and consequences of interpersonal violence.
In addition to examining maladaptive interpersonal functioning as a key
mechanism implicated in the continuity of victimization across different
contexts, the project will investigate the buffering role of social support for
adolescents with a history of victimization, relying on both lab-based observed
interactions with a friend and daily diary reports. By considering interpersonal
relationships as involving dynamic processes-unfolding through both moment-to-
moment interactions and gradually over time?the project will offer unique
insight into how peers can serve as both a source of stress and resilience
across childhood and adolescence. Additionally, identifying the specific factors
that maintain versus interrupt victimization stability is hoped to offer
increased understanding of how to develop targeted intervention and prevention
strategies among youth at risk for or experiencing interpersonal aggression.