* 1714276
* RCN: AgMicrobiomes: An Interdisciplinary Research Network to Advance Microbiome Science in Agriculture
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Jan Leach, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,998.00

Soil and plants support complex microbiomes composed of bacteria, fungi, and
viruses. Microbiomes are understood to have significant impacts on agricultural
productivity, and have attracted enormous interest as the 'new frontier' for
advancing capacities to sustainably produce sufficient food, feed, and fiber to
meet the projected global population of 9 billion by 2050. However, our current
understanding of the factors that influence the diversity, composition, and
benefits of plant microbiomes is limited by a lack of systematic and
comprehensive data on agricultural microbiomes across regional and continental
scales. This project will establish the Agricultural Microbiomes Project (AMP),
a global NSF Research Coordination Network (RCN) of scientists, research sites,
and model cropping and plant systems focused on agricultural plant and soil
microbes. Its broad goal is to advance our understanding of agricultural
microbiomes and their relationships to plant productivity and sustainable crop
production. The AMP will work to actively promote engagement and training of
diverse researchers by providing opportunities for research collaborations and
by offering scholarships for students and those from underrepresented
demographics to participate in workshop-based education and training
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN aims to provide the tools and human
resources necessary to accelerate microbiome science and its applications to
sustainable crop production. The specific objectives of the AMP RCN are to:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Establish an international network of agricultural
microbiome researchers to facilitate and advance coordinated synthetic,
collaborative, and integrative scientific studies of agricultural plant and soil
microbiomes;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2. Leverage existing national and
international long-term agricultural research sites and projects to create an
intercontinental-scale agricultural microbiome research platform;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Enhance development of foundational concepts and
training in agricultural microbiomes research through a series of workshops
targeted towards researchers in the field, and via symposia that build
connections and partnerships between agricultural microbiome research and work
in critical related fields such as systems and synthetic biology, geographic
information systems, and evolutionary biology; and, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.
Enhance understanding of plant microbiomes and plant-microbiome-environment
interactions using model plants and cropping systems, while establishing
strategies for applying and translating model system data towards practical
management of agricultural microbiomes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This RCN will
significantly enhance collaborative and synthetic, cross-system research on soil
and plant microbiomes, stimulate cross-disciplinary application of complex
analytics for 'omics-based microbiome research, and provide the potential for
continental-to-global scale microbiome analyses in agricultural systems.