* 1714064
* EAPSI: Constraining the Isotope Effect of Denitrification to Improve Global Models of N Fluxes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Rebecca Walker, Walker                  Rebecca        H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project will use modeling to quantify the amount of nitrogen lost from
soils through denitrification, a key component of the nitrogen cycle.
Quantifying denitrification is important because the gases produced during
denitrification cause poor air quality that damages human health. Also, because
nitrogen limits the ability of plants to grow, quantifying it will allow for
better predictions about carbon storage. Denitrification is nearly impossible to
measure directly, and as such, developing an accurate model is essential. This
project will be conducted at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organization (CSIRO) in Australia under the mentorship of Dr. Ying-Ping Wang.
The collaboration provides access to the expertise and computing capacity at
CSIRO.

Denitrification removes biologically available nitrogen (N) from ecosystems,
making it an important control over the biosphere's N balance, with implications
for air quality, human health, and climate change. Despite its importance,
estimates of the global soil denitrification flux remain highly uncertain. Major
challenges lie in directly measuring the gaseous by-products of denitrification
and scaling this complex microbial processes. Process-based models constrained
by empirical isotopic evidence have emerged as a method to help overcome these
challenges. However, the robustness of this method is limited by incomplete
understanding of isotopic expression of denitrification and how it varies across
known controls, such as carbon and nitrate availability and soil moisture and
temperature. The project will determine how the isotopic expression of
denitrification varies across a range of environmental controls and will
incorporate this data into models of denitrification. Ultimately this model will
be incorporated into the CASA-CNP, the global model of nutrient limitations on
terrestrial carbon sequestration developed by scientists at CSIRO. This will
reduce a key uncertainty in predictions of carbon sequestration.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a US graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Australian Academy of Science.