* 1714478
* EAGER: Exploratory Role of the Cytoskeleton in Anisotropic Regulation of Micrornas in Skeletal Muscles
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Aladin Boriek, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

Current models of the mechanical function of skeletal muscle are founded upon
studies of muscles that are generating or are subjected to forces along the
length of the muscle fibers. These measurements of the longitudinal mechanical
behavior of muscle have contributed to fundamental knowledge of muscle function
at the tissue, cell, and molecular levels of organization. However the
diaphragm, the main respiratory muscle, experiences a more complex mechanical
environment in which applied forces can be resolved into longitudinal and
transverse components. The potential physiological importance of mechanical
loads applied to the transverse plane of the muscle in addition to mechanical
forces along the length of muscle is suggested by the presence of similar
populations of force-transmitting protein complexes at the lateral surface and
at the ends of muscle fibers. The research will determine whether the diaphragm
can detect and respond separately to longitudinal and transverse loading. This
will increase our understanding of diaphragm function with age and disease.
Undergraduate students also will receive research experiences form participating
in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MicroRNAs are a recently discovered class
of naturally occurring 22 nucleotides small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression either by degradation of target protein-coding mRNAs or by repressing
translation in a mechanism similar to small interfering RNA mediated gene
silencing. There is little known about the regulation of microRNAs in response
to mechanical forces. Furthermore, it is not well understood how the complexity
of in vivo mechanical loading in skeletal muscles such as the diaphragm alters
the regulation of the microRNAs. It is also unknown whether specific
cytoskeletal proteins such as desmin modulate the regulation of mechanosensing
microRNAs in the ventilatory pump. The research will determine whether
mechanosensing microRNAs such as let-7e-5p and miR-98-5p are regulated by two
independent stretch induced signaling pathways that are dependent on the
directions of applied mechanical stretch: along muscle fibers and transverse to
muscle fibers. Also tested will be whether specific cytoskeletal proteins, e.g.
titin and desmin intermediate filaments modulate the mechanosensitive
anisotropic regulation of the let-7e-5p and miR-98-5p genes.