* 1714088
* EAPSI: Cultural Underpinnings of Singapore Students' Good Performance in Mathematics: Implications for Mathematics Educators in the US
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Daniel Abuabasa, Abuabasa                Daniel         K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

The United States has been bedeviled with poor mathematics performance of
elementary and high school students for a long time now. This has been the
concern of mathematics educators and policy-makers alike. Policy-makers and
educators over the years have tried to remedy the situation by means of reforms
- reforms aimed at improving pedagogy, teacher qualifications, and the
curricula. Despite these reforms, the problem persists. On the contrary,
Singapore's students in both elementary and high schools are performing
exceedingly well in mathematics, and are ranked among the best in the world.
Singapore has, therefore, become a sought-after country for advice for
mathematics educators from the west, United States included. However, one area
which they overlooked, and have not sought advice is the area of mathematics
education culture in Singapore. This culture of teaching and learning
mathematics is what this project seeks to study. Understanding the linkages
between the cultural norms and the classroom behaviors of students can help
inform mathematics instruction and mathematics education policy in other parts
of the world, including the United States. This project will be conducted at the
National Institute of Education, Singapore under the mentorship of Dr.
Berinderjeet Kaur, whose primary research interest is in classroom pedagogy of
mathematics teachers. The collaboration provides access to unique data that will
enable new insights into students' mathematics performance.

Anthropologists generally believe that some groups do well in school because
their cultures are congruent with school culture (Ogbu, 1982). This project will
therefore try to learn about the cultural norms of the society and the behaviors
of students. Employing ethnographic methodology, the project will seek to
understand the relationships between cultural norms and classroom behaviors of
students and teachers in Singapore. The classroom and after school cultures of
students and their teachers will be studied, and the impact of the cultural
norms on students? ability to learn and do mathematics will be explored.
Classroom observations and interviews of teachers, students and their parents
will be conducted using audio and video tapes. The schools for this project will
be selected and participants recruited with the help of my host in Singapore.

This award, under East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Singapore.