* 1714462
* Growing Lost Crops: Variation under Cultivation in the Eastern Agricultural Complex
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Natalie Mueller, Mueller                 Natalie        G
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This award supports a collaboration
between an anthropologist and a soil and crop scientist to investigate several
lost crops - plants that were cultivated by Indigenous people in Eastern North
America (ENA) for several thousand years, but which fell out of use hundreds of
years ago. When the indigenous foods of ENA are invoked, most people imagine
maize, beans, and squash - the bountiful harvest spilling out of the archetypal
Thanksgiving cornucopia. These crops, also known as the Three Sisters, were
historically grown together by Indigenous people across ENA by the time European
colonization began. But maize, beans, and many squash varieties (including
pumpkins and closely related varieties) were not domesticated in ENA, nor were
they a part of its earliest agricultural system. These plants were obtained
through trade from Mexico then adapted by eastern farmers to local conditions by
around AD 1000 (later for beans). For thousands of years before, beginning in
the Late Archaic period around 3800 years ago, ancient farmers in ENA cultivated
a group of native seed crops. These pre-maize crops are referred to as the
Eastern Agricultural Complex (EAC). They are a botanically diverse group that
includes familiar crops that are still widely grown, such as sunflower and acorn
squash, as well as lost crops that are native North American relatives of
barley, quinoa, and canary grass, among others. Most of the EAC crops fell out
of cultivation before the arrival of European chroniclers and are not recalled
in the oral traditions of Indigenous descendent communities, leaving many
questions about how they were cultivated. The objective of this research is to
study the living progenitors of these crops in the wild and under cultivation in
order to better understand the deep history of North America and the dynamics of
human-plant co-evolution in general. In addition to these research goals, this
project expands the Lost Crops Garden Network, a collaboration among several
anthropologists using experimental gardens as tools for experiential learning
and research. Several of the EAC crops are now endangered by increased herbicide
use and invasive weeds. This project documents the locations of remaining
populations of lost crops, an important first step towards conserving a group of
plants that have the potential to be re-domesticated and commercialized. One of
the key activities funded by this award is the creation of a seed bank, which
will facilitate further experimental studies by providing correctly sourced and
viable seed to other researchers. These plants were important crops for
millennia. With further study and improvement, they have the potential to
enhance the food and economic security of contemporary
farmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project 1) establishes the current range and
habitat of EAC crop progenitors and assesses their conservation needs; 2)
creates an institutionalized seed bank for EAC crop seeds; 3) studies the
effects of different cultivation techniques and environmental factors on plant
phenotypes and yield; 4) investigates the role of developmental plasticity and
epigenetics in plant domestication; and 5) establishes an accurate range of
yield estimates for each crop. This research creates interpretative links
between morphologies and/or ancient DNA attributes of archaeobotanical specimens
and the agricultural practices that created and maintained them. By doing so, it
also 1) helps bridge the gap between historically and ethnographically recorded
maize-based agriculture, and the unknown EAC agricultural system that preceded
and gave rise to it; and 2) contributes to the study of social change in the
eventful last 500 years prior to European colonization, an era which saw the
rise of maize agriculture, structural inequality, and regional political
confederacies. Globally, this project contributes to an emerging body of
research on the role of developmental plasticity and epigenetics in
domestication, in particular, and in evolutionary biology in general. Growth
experiments will measure the effects of the agroecosystem on plants' development
and reproduction, allowing the construction of more accurate optimal foraging
models that take into account the immediate effects of cultivation and
environmental engineering. This project also explores the epigenetic effects of
DNA methylation on crop morphology. Comparative methylome sequencing of control
and experimental plants can be used to identify epigenetic signals underpinning
phenotypic effects. DNA methylation survives in ancient tissues, so the ancient
DNA of archaeobotanical specimens can be used to assess the influence of
epigenetics in the domestication process. This research requires an
interdisciplinary effort, while also providing training that will enable its
recipient to make an experimental approach to the study of ancient agriculture
central to her future research and teaching.