* 1714019
* EAPSI: The Effects of Bilingualism on Reducing Prejudicial Tendencies in Unimodal Bilinguals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Alex Titus, Titus                   Alex           J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Taomei Guo, a noted
expert on bilingual research, at Beijing Normal University in Beijing, China.
Previous research has examined how cognitive processes may change as a function
of acquiring a second language. More concretely, it has demonstrated how
processing in a second language may broaden the scope of one?s cognitive ability
beyond communication. Findings have shown 2nd language (L2) learners to
demonstrate a reduction in decision biases, increased perspective taking during
joint tasks, and enhanced inhibitory control. This study will investigate how
processing information in a second language may affect prejudicial tendencies of
monolingual students at Beijing Normal University and those who have acquired
English as a second language We will be using a program that tracks computer
mouse movements when categorizing words and images. The program will measure the
degree to which individual?s associate positive/negative valance words to in-
group or out-group members. This study proposes that because of enhanced
cognitive abilities acquiring a second language affords, that bilingual
participants will show reduced prejudicial tendencies when compared to
monolingual participants. This study offers a step towards further strengthening
links between second language acquisition and their cognitive and social effects
on individuals. Most immediately, the results of this study will benefit
language educators with an improved understanding of the underlying benefits and
learning processes that second language learners undergo throughout language
acquisition. To this end, the results of this study will be provided to
interdisciplinary groups in highly diverse social communities, which will
include, faculty, policy makers and developmental psychologists working with
students from low-income, bilingual backgrounds. This award under the East Asia
and Pacific Summer Institutes program supports summer research by a U.S.
graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the Chinese Ministry of
Science and Technology. This research will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. Taomei Guo, a noted expert on bilingual research, at Beijing Normal
University in Beijing, China. Previous research has examined how cognitive
processes may change as a function of acquiring a second language. More
concretely, it has demonstrated how processing in a second language may broaden
the scope of one's cognitive ability beyond communication. Findings have shown
2nd language (L2) learners to demonstrate a reduction in decision biases,
increased perspective taking during joint tasks, and enhanced cognitive control.
This study will investigate the differences in prejudicial tendencies of
monolingual students at Beijing Normal University and those who have acquired
English as a second language, using a mouse tracking software. The software will
measure individuals' implicit thoughts towards out-group and in-group members by
capturing the movements involved in categorization of these groups with
positively/negatively valanced words. Compared to the traditional implicit
association tests (IAT), this measure will be able to capture hand movements
from when the stimulus is presented until the final categorization, providing
greater insight into the cognitive processes involved. Specifically, we will
focus on separating the higher order systematic processing from lower-level
intuitive processing for monolinguals and bilinguals in their L2 languages. The
proposed study seeks to produce a multidimensional account of what cognitive
effects second language acquisition has during individuals' temporal dynamic
categorizations of paired associations. Specifically, we will measure the
subjective bias categorizations of culturally relevant prejudices and
positive/negative valance words by recording streams of x- and y- coordinates
from hand-movement trajectories compared to monolingual samples.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.