* 1714076
* EAPSI: Wugs, Words, and Memory: An Experimental Investigation into the Mental Representation of Sino-Japanese Roots
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Jeffrey Adler, Adler                   Jeffrey
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

A single word or morpheme - the building block of linguistic meaning - may be
realized differently, depending on its linguistic environment. This variability
begs the question: how are words represented in memory? A minimal theory holds
that only the minimum amount of information necessary to identify a word is
included in a representation, to conserve space in memory. Any variation in a
word's utterance is understood as a result of independent cognitive mechanisms.
A maximal theory holds that all variants of a given word are stored, to maximize
contextual sensitivity. While the two theories are substantively different, they
are difficult to tease apart: minimal representation with cognitive processes
accounts for variation as well as maximal representation. Under the direction of
Prof. Shigeto Kawahara at Keio University, in Tokyo, Japan, the researcher will
experimentally investigate an empirical domain where the theories make distinct
predictions.

Sino-Japanese roots (root words from Chinese) appear in pairs, or "compounds".
Roots have different realizations in different compounds. For instance, the root
meaning {DIFFERENT} is realized as [bet]+tou and [betu]+noo. Under the minimal
theory, the representation of {DIFFERENT} would be /bet/. The /u/ would be
derived by cognitive process. Under the maximal theory though, the
representation would be /betu/. Both theories account for the variation in
common compounds. However, the theories make different predictions about what
speakers would produce in unfamiliar contexts. Thus, the researcher will use
wug-tests to probe the representation of Sino-Japanese roots. In a wug-test,
speakers are presented with a novel object and a novel name for that object
(e.g. "wug"). A speaker is then shown the wug in different situations, and asked
how they would describe the situation in such a way as to manipulate linguistic
context. The research will present speakers with novel Sino-Japanese root
compounds, and see how they describe the situation. In this way, we can test if
speakers' behavior reflects the representation of Sino-Japanese roots as minimal
or maximal.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.