* 1714446
* Advancing System Justification Theory
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mark Hoffarth, Hoffarth                Mark           R
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships program. The goal of the SPRF program
is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific
careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards
involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists
and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to
promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific
community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its research
programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Many social groups are disadvantaged in
society, which can have a negative impact on their lives. System Justification
Theory (SJT) has been widely used to examine many forms of inequality. Sexual
minorities are disadvantaged in many ways, yet there has been little research on
this topic from an SJT perspective. This project examines how several attitudes
and beliefs impact sexual minorities' life experiences such as "coming out",
coping with discrimination, and participating in political activism. This
research is scientifically important because it builds on and expands
psychological and political theory by applying what we have learned in other
domains to increase our understanding of the experiences of sexual minorities.
This research may benefit sexual minorities, and society more broadly, in many
ways. Sexual minorities currently experience high rates of mental health
problems (e.g., loneliness, depression, anxiety). This research may aid in
promoting mental health, well-being, and physical health among sexual
minorities. In addition, this research may help improve the functioning of
organizations by, for example, increasing diversity, acceptance, and group
functioning in the workplace.

System Justification Theory (SJT) is a political psychological theory aimed at
understanding how people respond to a wide range of social inequalities and
discrimination (e.g., inequality based on race, gender, social class). This
theory has been used to examine how members of both advantaged and disadvantaged
groups respond to inequality and discrimination. To date, relatively little
research has used SJT to understand the experiences of sexual minorities. The
purpose of this research is to expand the purview of system justification theory
by developing and testing a theoretical account for how sexual minorities
respond to heterosexism based on psychological and situational factors. First,
this project involves collecting data from a diverse range of sexual minorities
to understand variability in the experiences of sexual minorities based on their
life experiences, beliefs, and values. Factors such as the internalization of
negative stereotypes and beliefs about gays and lesbians are hypothesized to
play an important role. This project also involves experimentally examining how
sexual minorities respond to a range of experiences that may occur in their
everyday life to understand how sexual minorities cope with and react to
heterosexism and discrimination. For instance, sexual minorities may respond to
negative experiences and threats to their well-being by being less open about
their sexuality or engaging in political activism. This research will help
determine the extent to which previous findings within a System Justification
framework may apply to sexual minorities, and inform attempts to improve the
functioning of our increasingly diverse society. After publication, research
materials and de-identified data will be made available to other researchers on
the Open Science Framework to facilitate further research on sexual minorities'
experiences.