* 1714287
* Instabilities in Materials Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Yury Grabovsky, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 320,350.00

1714287 Grabovsky

The investigator and his collaborators study several important phenomena where
the main underlying feature is instability, or extreme sensitivity to
measurement errors, imperfections of shape, or load. Three projects, unified by
the general idea of instability, are pursued. One of them deals with
understanding instabilities in nonlinear elasticity associated with martensitic
phase transitions, whereby sharp phase boundaries are observed experimentally.
Such phase transitions are responsible for shape memory effects in alloys, and
for a giant magnetostrictive effect exhibited by some materials, to name just a
few examples. Another project applies new tools to analyze the extreme
sensitivity to imperfections of the buckling stress of axially compressed
circular cylindrical shells -- an essential structural component in a vast
variety of structures, from grain silos to airplanes and space ships. The third
project focuses on quantitative understanding of a well-known confluence of
rigidity and flexibility -- a seemingly contradictory combination of properties
-- of Herglotz functions that are ubiquitous in applications from materials
science to nuclear physics. For example, the investigator's research quantifies
the uncertainty due to experimental errors in the estimates of complex
electromagnetic permittivity, which describes how a material interacts with
electromagnetic waves of various frequencies from radio waves through visible
light to gamma rays. This project constitutes Ph.D. research of a graduate
student working under the investigator's guidance.

The most salient feature in martensitic shape transformations, which in
particular is responsible for shape memory effect, is the presence of phase
boundaries -- sharp interfaces separating different martensitic variants.
Stability of such phase boundaries can be completely characterized in terms of
the concept of quasiconvexity. With the understanding that characterization of
quasiconvexity is often regarded as unachievable, the investigator and his
collaborators focus on eminently computable algebraic conditions of stability of
phase boundaries and assess their "strength" through specific examples that show
how far off algebraic conditions are from true answers, which could be computed
either analytically or numerically. Another project deals with buckling of
cylindrical shells -- one of the extensively studied, yet poorly understood
problems in mechanics, where the classical formula cannot be used to predict
buckling stress observed in experiments due to initial imperfections of load and
shape. This project creates a mathematically rigorous theory of the buckling of
slender bodies that is capable of explaining why initial imperfections of shape
and load have strong influence on the buckling stress in some structures, while
having negligible effect in others. The third project studies the somewhat
paradoxical behavior of Herglotz functions, that are at the same time extremely
rigid and surprisingly flexible. Its understanding contributes to several areas
of mathematics and physics and answers many important questions. The problems of
data validation, and extrapolation are addressed. This project constitutes Ph.D.
research of the investigator's graduate student.