* 1714028
* EAPSI: Motion Compensation Techniques that Enable Radar Detection of Life Signs from an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Robert Nakata, Nakata                  Robert         H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or drones are often used for aerial
reconnaissance and provide stunning aerial views after an earthquake or
disaster. By mounting a radar sensor on these platforms, search and rescue teams
can locate victims that are buried under wood structures that have collapsed.
Radar sensors can detect physiological motions, such as respiration, by
measuring the chest motion from breathing. However, radar signals are corrupted
by the platform motion. This project will expand the PI's ongoing sensor fusion
research for motion compensation techniques that enable the use of radar sensors
for remote sensing of physiological signals. Specifically, this project will
investigate integrating the image based UAV navigation sensors developed by
Professor Takaba at Ritsumeikan University in Japan with other motion
compensation techniques developed by the Principal Investigator.

Position measurements via GPS, Inertial Measurement Units and Frequency
Modulated Continuous Wave Radars do not provide sufficiently precise
measurements to cancel the unwanted motion. Doppler radar in-range phase
measurements combined with image based cross range data may be used to stabilize
the platform. Additional signal processing can be used to extract the signal of
interest from the composite waveform. To date, the PI has implemented, tested
and characterized radar and ultrasonic secondary sensors as sources of motion
compensation correction signals. This approach compensates the vertical motion,
however, horizontal motion compensation techniques are also required to maximize
the Signal to Noise Ratio. Image based techniques are ideal for cross-range
stabilization by using pattern recognition techniques to isolate lateral motion.
This investigation will evaluate whether the radar and image sensor fusion
approach can successfully detect a radar derived respiration signal in the
presence of platform motion.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).