* 1714945
* Sinasina Sign Language: An Initial Description
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* James Woodward, Rarrick                 Samantha       C
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 145,931.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Language loss is a global issue, and with
each language that is lost, a system of knowledge, traditions, and history is
lost. While there are ongoing efforts to record and analyze a variety of spoken
languages, little is known of smaller sign languages which often have unusual
grammatical features and face the threat of extinction. This is especially the
case in Papua New Guinea (PNG), a country with over 800 spoken languages and
only two reported sign languages: Papua New Guinea Sign Language (PNGSL) and
Engan Sign Language (EnSL). This project aims to document and describe a third
sign language of PNG, Sinasina Sign Language (SSSL) which was uncovered by the
Fellow in 2016. SSSL is the first sign language reported in the highlands of
PNG. Through researching this sign language, the diversity of languages in this
region and the nature of language as a mental system will be better understood.
Additionally, this work can give a voice to deaf and hard of hearing people in
the country by recording their stories and allowing them the opportunity to
decide what they want for their community and language, especially with respect
to research and education. By including the opinions and perspectives of this
largely underserved group, the scope and best practices for research in this
region can be broadened. Over time, this can increase the quality and
appropriateness of research with deaf people in Papua New Guinea globally and
increase deaf people's access to education and participation in research in a
way that is both rewarding and useful to them.

As no other sign language has been reported in this region of PNG, the
description and analysis of SSSL has the potential to drastically further our
understanding of the typological features of sign languages in Papua New Guinea.
This project aims to address these issues by recording and describing the
phonological, morphological, and syntactic properties of SSSL in typological
perspective. It also includes comparative analysis of SSSL, PNGSL, and EnSL to
test for possible genetic relationships which would shed insight into the
linguistic and historical relationships of Deaf individuals in the country.
Methods to document and describe this language are consistent with modern
recommendations for best practices for language documentation, with attention to
longevity of data. Thus, the approach of this project will include (i) eliciting
lexical and grammatical information; (ii) conducting interviews with signers to
identify the geographic boundaries where this language is primarily used; (iii)
assessing the degree of endangerment of SSSL; and (iv) comparative analysis of
SSSL with other sign languages in Papua New Guinea. Proposed outcomes of this
project include: (i) three journal articles; (ii) a sketch grammar of SSSL;
(iii) a brief learners' dictionary; and (iv) four hours of recorded and archived
narratives with time-aligned translations. As SSSL is likely endangered, has no
known genetic relationships, and likely exhibits typologically unusual features,
this work is necessary for understanding the nature of small sign languages,
which are still vastly under-described.