* 1714285
* New Frontiers in Stellar Astrophysics: Massive Stars as Cosmological Tools
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Emily Levesque, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2022
* USD 525,389.00

Stars more than 10 times as massive as the Sun are important building blocks in
our Universe. Their violent deaths in supernova explosions, in which stars are
unable to hold themselves up against gravity, release new material into galaxies
to form new stars. These massive stars are bright, and thus they hold promise as
distance estimators to distant galaxies. If we know how bright a star should
look, we can compare its apparent brightness to find its distance.
Unfortunately, these stars are rare and thus poorly understood at the moment.
The investigator plans to collect basic data about massive, luminous stars in
other galaxies. The observations will help us better understand the lives of
these stars. Both graduate and undergraduate students will take part in the
research. She will also work with the Zooniverse Project to convert the light
variations of astronomical objects---usually conveyed visually---to sound. This
effort will be of interest to citizen scientists, particularly those who are
visually impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator describes a multi-
wavelength observing plan that covers the post-main sequence phases of stellar
evolution before the stars explode as supernovae. The ongoing HST COS far-UV
SNAP program provides high S/N spectra, with better resolution, than were
previously possible. The project will sample objects of different metallicity,
including extremely-metal-poor galaxies, that will serve as analogs for star
formation regions in the early Universe. The investigator will also create a
comprehensive library of ultraviolet spectra using observations of 87 nearby
star-forming galaxies, using these data to test the next generation of stellar
population synthesis and photoionization codes.