* 1714056
* EAPSI: Nitrogen Cycle Responses to Increasing Presence of Parasitic Mistletoes in Australian Eucalypt Forests
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Holly Andrews, Andrews                 Holly          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

Australian eucalypt forests are increasingly inundated with mistletoes, in large
response to changes in land management. Mistletoes are parasitic plants that
reduce the growth of their host eucalyptus trees but also promote increased bird
diversity in forests, resulting in conflicting opinions about how mistletoes
affect forest function and productivity. Assessing how biologically-important
nutrients, such as nitrogen, cycle through forests in response to mistletoe
parasitism may give insight into forest health and function. Changes in nitrogen
processes resulting from increasing abundance of mistletoe will likely have
ramifications for forest health and global climate, and may inform future land
management decisions in Australian woodlands and elsewhere. This project,
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Elise Pendall at the Hawkesbury Institute
for the Environment at Western Sydney University in Australia, will explore the
role of mistletoe for nitrogen cycling in eucalyptus woodlands. Dr. Pendall is a
renowned ecosystem ecologist known for her work in biogeochemical cycling in
response to ecological disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively little is
known about the impacts of Amyema miquelii mistletoe litter on decomposition,
nitrification, and denitrification processes in woodlands dominated by
Eucalyptus moluccana and E. fibrosa found in Cumberland Plain, Australia.
Presumably, nitrogen-rich mistletoe litter could increase decomposition rates
and serve as a substrate for increased emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O), a
potent greenhouse gas. This study will explore how rates of various components
of nitrogen cycling respond to increasing proportions of A. miquelii litter in
Eucalyptus forests. By analyzing the quality and quantity of litterfall from
plants, the soil microbial activity responsible for processing plant litter and
its nitrogenous components, and the emissions of N2O from forest soils, the
researcher will determine the increasing contribution of A. miquelii to soil
processes and nitrogen cycling in previously nitrogen-poor
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.