* 1714065
* EAPSI: Assessing Potential for Adaptive Governance and Joint Knowledge Production in the Presence of Rapid Environmental Change
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Amber Datta, Datta                   Amber
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

This project assesses the potential for coastal communities to adapt to rapid
environmental changes. Rising ocean temperatures, coral bleaching and
overfishing threaten coastal ecosystems and the communities that rely on them.
This project focuses on a case study carried out in the Solomon Islands where
the Solomon Islands Fishery Management Act is assessed for its potential to
increase the ability of their coastal communities to adapt to currently
occurring environmental changes. The Solomon Islands are impacted by rising
ocean temperature and increasingly frequent coral bleaching, which are
compounded by overfishing and coastal development. The resulting loss of marine
resources threatens coastal ecosystems and the communities that rely on them.
Flexible forms of marine governance are needed to ensure that stakeholders and
decision-makers are able to adapt to these effects. Previous research suggests
that engaging communities, and creating space for shared learning between
managers, researchers, and local people, are important components of a flexible
governance system. This project will use policy analysis and interviews with
regional experts to assess the potential of the fisheries act to create such a
system. This research will be conducted at Australia National University (ANU)
with Dr. Lorrae van Kerkhoff, a noted knowledge governance researcher. Canberra
is a hub for Pacific island research, making it ideal for interviews with
fisheries governance professionals. The results of this work will be relevant to
the Oceania region and to U.S. Pacific islands facing similar
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies environmental governance as a
lens to evaluate the Solomon Islands Fishery Management Act as a potential
example of emerging adaptive governance. Specific attention will be given to the
potential for this act to foster knowledge coproduction between stakeholders in
the Solomon Islands. Adaptive governance has been proposed as a system well-
suited to the complexity of rapidly changing social-ecological systems. Little
is known about how adaptive governance integrates with existent knowledge
systems, especially those of Pacific Island communities. This study employs a
deductive policy analysis and semi-structured interviews with Pacific fisheries
policy experts to better understand how adaptive governance may create space for
knowledge coproduction and transmission between indigenous systems and Western
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer
Institutes program, supports summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is
jointly funded by NSF and the Australian Academy of Science.