* 1714753
* Collaborative Research: Interactions Between Incipient Continental Rifting, Fluvial Systems, and Regional Climate in Southern Africa: The Okavango-Makgadikgadi Complex, Botswana
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Sarah Ivory, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 09/30/2018
* USD 127,122.00

The Okavango Rift Zone (ORZ) and Delta (OD), and the Makgadikgadi Paleo-Megalake
(MPL) form a dynamic system in northern Botswana, southern Africa, where
tectonic activity, climate change, sedimentation, vegetation, fauna, and human
influences interact with each other at various spatial and temporal scales. This
award provides support for a multidisciplinary study of the interactions and
feedbacks between incipient continental rifting, drainage patterns, and
Neogene/Quaternary regional climate in the ORZ-OD-MPL complex. The objectives
are to develop: (i) a structural and tectonic model of the ORZ-OD; (ii)
chronologies for the evolution of the OD and infilling phases of the MPL; and
(iii) histories of drainage basin expansions and contractions of the complex
climate/vegetation in the OD-MPL, and the links, or lack thereof, between the
ORZ, OD, and MPL. The overarching scientific question is: to what degree
tectonics interacted with surface processes and climate in the ORZ-MPL system,
and what feedback loops were involved in this interaction to control the
environmental evolution of central southern Africa since the Miocene?

The PIs will use a combination of seismology and sediment cores to look at the
geometry of the rift faults and sediment fill. The material from the cores will
additionally be used to establish provenance of the sediment and build climate
records. These two datasets from the cores will be used to assess the relative
importance of climate (via variable erosion) versus tectonic control (river
migration/capture, etc.) on sediment supply. A 2D numerical model will integrate
these data to explore the effect of basin asymmetry and sediment loading and how
these feedback into basin development via loading and strain localization.

