* 1714161
* SHF: Small: Exploration of the Transistor-level Monolithic 3D SRAM Design Space
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Static random-access memories (SRAMs) constitute an important part of modern
microprocessors, occupying more than half of its area. They are part of the
memory hierarchy that enables applications to be sped up on these processors.
Since traditional 2D scaling of integrated circuits (ICs) is running out of
steam, an alternative in the coming decade would be to go vertical, i.e., have
several layers of logic and memory in the same IC package. There are two ways to
go 3D: using through-silicon vias (TSVs) or monolithic 3D integration. Since
monolithic 3D integration enjoys many advantages over TSV based 3D integration,
this work is aimed at the former. In particular, its aim is to explore the
design space of transistor-level monolithic (TLM) 3D SRAMs implemented in the
modern semiconductor technology of FinFETs. A successful conclusion of this
work, hence, should be very beneficial to the semiconductor industry. The
designs/methodologies/tools that are developed will be made available on the
web. They will also be disseminated to the industry through various companies
the PI interacts with. The material will be included in a course that the PI
teaches. Many seniors are expected to do their thesis on this topic. Female and
minority PhD students will be attracted to this research through Princeton
Fellowships available for this purpose. Further outreach activities are also
planned for high-school students. Results will be disseminated through research
articles and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the TLM design style, the n-type
and p-type transistors can be placed on different layers, thus reducing the
footprint area of an SRAM bitcell significantly. This also enables separate
optimizations of the two layers, which has the added advantage of improving
stability of SRAM cells. Stability is a very important metric for SRAMs since
they push the semiconductor technology to its limits in order to accommodate as
much memory into the microprocessor as possible. However, there is hardly any
work on the TLM FinFET SRAM bitcell design space exploration. The proposed work
fills this gap through accurate capacitance extraction and device simulation,
under process-voltage-temperature variations on the IC.