* 1714080
* EAPSI: The Evolutionary Ecology of Seed Mucilage in Plantago Species
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Elise Elwood, Elwood                  Elise          C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

As the globe is warming and rainfall is less predictable, it is important to
determine the traits that allow plants to cope with increased water stress. Some
seeds can produce a gelatinous covering many times the size of the seed that
expands when the seed gets wet. This functional trait, known as mucilage, may be
an important way plants deal with stressful environments--for instance, by
increasing seed germination percentage and seedling establishment in conditions
of water stress--yet little is known about the trait This study will compare
seeds from Plantago lanceolata, known as common plantain, that experience
different habitat across the globe. The researcher will determine the frequency
of this trait in dry habitats, its effect on seed germination, plant growth, and
plant success under low and unpredictable water availability. This research will
be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Zhenying Huang, an expert on seed
mucilage at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing and the Central Mongolian
Field Station.

Seed mucilage (myxospermy) is found in 230 genera of angiosperms and has been
demonstrated to serve a variety of ecological functions including aid in
dispersal and germination. There is a trade-off between seed number per fruit
and mucilage in P. coronopus along a latitudinal gradient, suggesting that seed
mucilage may be costly to produce and mitigate stressful environments (increased
temperature and reduced precipitation). The researcher will use a common garden
experiment to conduct an intraspecific study on myxospermy in P. lanceolata, a
perennial species with a global distribution. The researcher will ask if seed
mucilage increases germination and establishment of P. lanceolata under low and
high osmotic stress. Through comparison of spatially dispersed populations, the
researcher will determine whether seed mucilage production differs along a
temperature or precipitation gradient. The researcher predicts that the seed to
mucilage ratio will be greater in arid and highly stochastic environments where
buffering may be needed. Another prediction is that seed mucilage will improve
fitness when seeds are exposed to osmotic stress.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology.