* 1714864
* Using Digital Media to Examine Social Activism
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Mary Parmentier, Abdelmonem              Angie
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This project examines how the public,
activists and media in Egypt have understood varying forms of sexual violence
over time and how these understandings of violence advances or impedes the
possibilities around civil society and citizen action for social and political
change. In particular, this project centers on the concept of sexual harassment,
or taharrush in Arabic, which many argue has long been visible in Egypt's public
spaces and hinders women's public participation. The meaning of the concept
taharrush remains unclear and is deployed by a variety of actors in multiple and
conflicting ways. Much remains to be explored regarding the complexity of how
taharrush has been conceptualized and its relationship with other forms of
violence. Moreover, how these variable conceptualizations impact public
responses and approaches to social and political action is important for better
understanding pathways toward creating a more just society that respects the
human rights of all. This study is critical for highlighting points of
cooperation and conflict between state and society and processes of
democratization in this region of the world.

This project traces the recent evolution of conceptual changes and examines the
conceptual tensions facilitating or hindering sexual violence activism. The
starting point for this project is the concept of taharrush, or sexual
harassment, which is examined in comparison with other Arabic terms for sexually
violent practices, including flirting/teasing, assault, and rape. This
comparative approach is necessary to define conceptual frames, their overlap and
points of difference as discussed by individuals, activists and media. It will
also make it possible to highlight the shifting contexts of deployment, the ways
in which activists seek to refashion some concepts, and public responses. A
comparative analysis of such terms will shed light on how widely held yet
potentially unclear concepts of violence impact the ability of activists to
promote their criminalization and to change society-wide ideologies of violence.
A mixed-methods approach is undertaken in this project that includes text mining
using Internet-based information and communication technologies (ICTs), archival
research of print news sources, and interviews with gender violence activists.
Data from the period 2000 to 2014 will be collected and analyzed through
grounded, text-based approaches. Through these methods, this project seeks to
generate a more nuanced view of the multifaceted nature of sexual violence and
the implications of this with respect to grassroots organizing and fomenting
social and political change. This project is significant in that it sheds light
on how different societal actors negotiate the meaning of violence in their
lives and their quest for social justice, as well as the processes by which
democratic change is made possible.