* 1714807
* SaTC: TTP: Small: SPHINX: A Password Store that Perfectly Hides Passwords from Itself
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,10/31/2021
* Nitesh Saxena, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Password managers represent a security technique that allows a user to store and
retrieve passwords for multiple password-protected web services by interacting
with a 'manager' (e.g., an online third-party service) on the basis of a single
master password. However, current password managers are highly vulnerable to
leakage of all passwords in the event the manager is compromised or malicious.
This project builds, studies, and deploys a novel approach to online password
management, called SPHINX, which remains secure even when the password manager
itself has been compromised. In SPHINX, the data stored on the manager is
information theoretically independent of the user's master password, meaning
that an attacker breaking into the manager learns no information about the
master password or the user's individual passwords. SPHINX, once deployed,
offers an improved level of protection and usability to everyday Internet users.
The research is being integrated with educational activities in the form of
advanced curriculum development and student mentoring in the broad domains of
Authentication and Human-Computer Interaction. The involvement of high school
and K-12 students, and minority populations broadens the reach of the project.
Collaboration with manufacturers and industrial consortia facilitatws technology
transfer and transition to real world use.

The technical design and security of SPHINX is based on the device-enhanced PAKE
model that provides the theoretical basis for this construction and is backed by
cryptographic proofs of security. Overall, the project designs, implements and
evaluates the computational/communication performance of a full online SPHINX
system offering browser plugins and a service-side (or manager-side)
application. As a main component of the design, the project highlights and
addresses the challenges associated in building transparent and robust
bidirectional manager-browser communication. Usability studies of the SPHINX
system are also being conducted in both lab and real-life settings. Further,
after refining the system software and UI designs informed by the results of the
usability studies, SPHINX will be piloted in the field settings. Upon completion
of this pilot deployment, the system will be ready for an eventual full-fledged
deployment in the real world.