* 1714394
* Developing a Quantitative Model of Ecohealth Justice:   a Case Study of Madison and Milwaukee, WI
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Phillip Warsaw, Warsaw                  Phillip        M
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 97,750.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship provides an
emerging scholar-scientist an opportunity to explore the role of consumer
decisions and social inequality in creating and perpetuating environmental
inequalities and connected public health deficiencies, denoted in this project
as ecohealth injustice. Scholars and policymakers have long investigated the
connection between environmental conditions and public health outcomes. Of
particular interest is the common observation that neighborhoods with a high
proportion of minority and/or low-income households often face higher levels of
exposure to environmental hazards, such as pollutants, while simultaneously
having lower access to environmental goods, such as local sources of fresh food.
These factors contribute to disproportionately adverse health outcomes within
these communities. However, despite the consensus on the existence of these
inequalities, the cause remains a point of debate complicating policy
discussions. Many researchers have argued that ecohealth injustice reflects
conscious decisions by households to sacrifice environmental quality for cheaper
home prices or other amenities, while others have suggested that it reflects
social inequalities, such as residential segregation, which prevent affected
households from accessing necessary environmental goods. This project, entitled
Developing a Quantitative Model of Ecohealth Justice: a Case Study of Madison
and Milwaukee, WI, uses recent advances in economic modeling to use residential
markets to enter this debate on the causes of ecohealth injustice, focusing in
particular on air quality and local food access.

The study develops and estimates a comparative residential sorting model, which
allows for the estimation of consumer preferences for structural and
neighborhood characteristics of homes within a given housing market. These
preferences are allowed to vary across households based on their socioeconomic
profile, namely race and income in this application, and can be represented as
simple dollar amounts. The residential sorting model also accommodates
counterfactual policy analysis, to determine the dollar impact of changes in a
housing market on households. Comparing the tradeoffs households of different
racial and economic statuses are willing to make between ecohealth amenities and
other housing features provides vital evidence as to the role of consumer
decision making in existing ecohealth inequality. Counterfactual analysis gives
policy makers a valuable tool in determining and comparing the impact of
different interventions to address these inequalities, which are again
represented as a straightforward dollar amount. Developing a comparative model
between Madison and Milwaukee serves as a useful contrast between two large
urban centers within close proximity of one another, which nonetheless differ
significantly in their geographical and demographic composition. This will allow
for a consideration of how these factors interact with household-level
demographics and preferences in characterizing existing inequalities, informing
future investigations into ecohealth injustice in different demographic and
geographic contexts.