* 1714413
* Collaborative EAGER project: Early Career Seismic Chief Scientist Training Cruise
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Mitchell Lyle, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2018
* USD 68,102.00

Results of the recent UNOLS Marine Seismic Questionnaire (MSQ) demonstrate the
value of an early &lt;br/&gt;career scientist Multi-Channel Seismic (MCS) chief
scientist training cruise. Proposed, and awarded, are funds to carry out
&lt;br/&gt;a MCS training program that includes 4 days of seismic data
acquisition to increase the number of early career scientists
&lt;br/&gt;experienced in marine seismology and to demonstrate the value of the
Scripps Institution of &lt;br/&gt;Oceanography portable MCS system, a UNOLS
facility. The training program consists of three parts: (i) &lt;br/&gt;Webinars
prior to the cruise to expose the participants to the fundamentals of active
source marine &lt;br/&gt;seismology, to provide the scientific background needed
to plan the upcoming survey effectively, and to &lt;br/&gt;introduce the
participants to open source processing and interpretation tools. The Webinars
will include &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Writing and Data Management training.
Applications will be solicited, including a maximum 2- &lt;br/&gt;page science
proposal, after the webinar series. Once selected, participants will discuss
their cruise plans &lt;br/&gt;with the PI team prior to the pre-cruise workshop
via several telepresence meetings; then, during a 2-day &lt;br/&gt;workshop
immediately before the cruise, the participants will finalize the cruise plan
under the PI team's &lt;br/&gt;guidance; (ii) A training cruise. Each
participant will contribute to the entire team walking off the ship
&lt;br/&gt;with post-stack time migrated data, as well as writing a cruise
report collaboratively; and (iii) a 2-day data &lt;br/&gt;interpretation
workshop with computer-based visualization software. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed survey regions are on the active continental
margin of the west coast of the United States, &lt;br/&gt;where a variety of
sedimentary and tectonic settings are available, providing targets of interest
to a wide &lt;br/&gt;range of participants. At the extended continental margin
off the coast of Oregon, the seismic reflection &lt;br/&gt;profiles acquired,
processed, and archived from this cruise can be used to image the subducting
plate and &lt;br/&gt;the Astoria Fan, as well as accretionary ridges hosting gas
hydrate and pockets of hemipelagic sediment &lt;br/&gt;containing paleo-
oceanographic information. Targets have implications for addressing important
&lt;br/&gt;societally relevant questions, such as earthquake hazards and
paleoclimate records in basins. There will &lt;br/&gt;also be potential for
using seismic techniques to reveal real-time, fine-scale within the water column
&lt;br/&gt;around upwelling regions of the northeastern Pacific Ocean
boundaries. Open access data from this cruise &lt;br/&gt;can augment on-going
and near-future science conducted by a broader community. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;For this novel, transformative project, early-career
scientists will be selected from a wide applicant pool. &lt;br/&gt;This science
mission will be advertised on the MSQ and other geoscience listservs, and
encouraged participations &lt;br/&gt;of underrepresented minorities and women by
promoting the opportunity via organizations such as &lt;br/&gt;Society for
Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Scienceand Earth
Science &lt;br/&gt;Women's Network. Participants will gain not only first-hand
seismic cruise experience but also &lt;br/&gt;experience communicating their
research to non-scientists. The proposed activities will be used to inform
&lt;br/&gt;the public about the unique and essential contributions of seismic
research toward solving a variety of &lt;br/&gt;important societal challenges.
Results will be shared on the AGU's GeoSpace blog and Instagram
&lt;br/&gt;account. Important deliverables from the pre-cruise and onboard
activities to the community are to &lt;br/&gt;establish and provide "cookbook"
of the open source software used during this cruise; and make the data
&lt;br/&gt;acquired from the cruise open immediately as soon as they are
archived at the publically accessible &lt;br/&gt;archives. A post-cruise survey
will be conducted in collaboration with the UNOLS office to obtain
&lt;br/&gt;feedback from the participants and encourage the participants to
write NSF proposals, the number of &lt;br/&gt;which will be the direct and
ultimate measurement of the success of this ECS.