* 1714759
* Collaborative Research: Terrestrial Late Permian to Early Triassic Earth Systems in NE Pangea: Insights into the Tempo, Effects, and Causes of the End-Permian Mass Extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Robert Gastaldo, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,533.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A non-technical description explaining the broader
significance of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major mass extinctions have
occurred at various times throughout Earth history. The most well-known of these
happened with the demise of the dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous Period,
but it is believed that the largest mass extinction happened at the end of the
Permian Period, approximately 252 million years ago. The extinction in the
marine realm was global and occurred over a relatively short time interval.
However, events in the terrestrial environment are only sparsely documented.
This project will examine well-exposed sedimentary rock successions that formed
in lakes, rivers, and ancient soils during the time of these extinctions. This
research will enable a precise documentation of the sequence of events on land,
a comprehensive analysis of the environmental changes that took place before,
during and after the event, and an investigation of how terrestrial animals and
plants responded to these changes. The results will determine if extinctions on
the continents occurred at the same time as those in the ocean and what
conditions existed that may have caused such large-scale changes. Given current
concern about rates of extinction, knowledge of the processes that occurred in
the past will help identify the reasons behind major changes in flora and fauna.
The project will develop museum exhibits and outreach programs to inform both
educational and general audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description
of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive, multidisciplinary
investigation of critical intervals of Earth history offers the best insights
into the conditions that prevailed before, during, and after major biotic
crises. The Permo-Triassic Mass Extinction is used as a model of how biological
and physical systems responded to major climate changes, including those
attributable to increasing greenhouse gases. Currently, the Permo-Triassic Mass
Extinction is interpreted as a coupled catastrophic collapse of marine and
terrestrial ecosystems, both of which experienced protracted restructuring of
ecological communities and recovery of stable ecosystem dynamics. The Bogda
Mountains in China contain a fully continental stratigraphy spanning the
critical interval wherein fluvial and lacustrine deposits alternate with an
extensive paleosol record, from which pedogenic trends and geochemical models
can be derived. A paleontological record including major plant and animal groups
is well-preserved. Pilot-project data show the preservation of a primary
magnetization in rocks in the section, from which a robust magnetic polarity
stratigraphy can be derived. There are also numerous volcanic deposits that
contain primary volcanic zircons spanning the critical interval. These will be
used to obtain high precision ages to establish a careful chronology. Together,
these data allow evaluation of environmental and ecosystem changes that took
place during the Permian-Triassic transition. Research results will be
integrated into curricula at each participating academic institution, and summer
outreach programs will be offered to high-school science teachers. Five
educational videos will be developed for the Field Museum's award winning "The
Brain Scoop" YouTube channel. Data visualizations of analytical and model
results will be developed for informal education outreach in conjunction with
the Visualization Studio at the California Academy of Sciences.