* 1714041
* EAPSI: Developing a Controls Engineering Education Program for Input Shaping
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Daniel Newman, Newman                  Daniel
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,400.00

In the field of controls engineering, command shaping techniques can be useful
in a wide range of applications such as cranes, spacecraft, hard disk drives,
and robotic arms. In particular, input shaping, which is a specific approach in
command shaping, can be used to reduce vibration in flexible systems simply by
altering the input command. Although input shaping has become increasingly
prominent, quality educational programs for this control method are not readily
available. This project will allow collaboration between Dr. Seong-Wook Hong, a
recognized expert on input shaping, and the PI in the creation of new
educational materials to expand the knowledge on this topic. Furthermore, the PI
will leverage Dr. Hong's experimental equipment at the Kumoh National Institute
of Technology in Korea to verify an input shaping method that will improve the
controllability of ship-mounted boom cranes. This project will expand the
knowledgebase of input shaping in complex dynamic systems while facilitating the
education of future engineers on this topic.

Input shaping is a command shaping method by which a desired input command is
convolved with a series of impulses to produce a shaped command that imparts
little to no residual vibration. It is particularly useful in the control of
cranes, which can exhibit multiple degrees of freedom. Because these systems
tend to have an operator-in-the-loop, input shaping can offer better performance
than a closed-loop feedback methods; its intuitive nature is more compatible
with a human operator. The main drawback of this open-loop method is its
inability to compensate for nonzero initial conditions. As part of this project,
a new input shaping technique that eliminates such initial conditions will be
experimentally tested. This research will facilitate the control of ship-mounted
boom cranes, which are frequently used for such tasks as ASV retrieval and cargo
transfer.

This award, under the East Asia and Pacific Summer Institutes program, supports
summer research by a U.S. graduate student and is jointly funded by NSF and the
National Research Foundation of Korea.