* 1714833
* Probing Nucleon Structure Through Muon and Photon Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Evangeline Downie, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James Thomas
* 07/31/2020
* USD 503,999.00

Protons, neutrons, and electrons are the building blocks of all matter with
which we are most familiar. Despite the scientific efforts to comprehend their
nature, there are many things about them that remain to be understood. In 2010,
a measurement of the size of the proton resulted in a proton size measurement
much smaller than expected. This measurement disagreed with, but was much more
precise than, all the other proton size measurements to date. The research
supported by this award aims to resolve this issue, known as the "Proton Radius
Puzzle" by making a simultaneous measurement of muon and electron scattering on
the proton in the Muon Proton Scattering Experiment (MUSE). In addition to
determining the proton size, the group will spend a small amount of its time
investigating the internal structures and dynamics of the proton and neutron, by
measuring quantities known as the polarizabilities. These measurements will be
made by scattering light from protons and neutrons. Experiments will take place
at laboratories in Switzerland, Germany and the US. Through these experiments,
in addition to gaining knowledge about protons and neutrons, the postdoctoral
researchers, undergraduate, and graduate students will gain knowledge and
experience of modern detection techniques, and simulation and reconstruction
software, which are employed in many applications such as industrial or medical
imaging. They will also participate in cultural exchanges with researchers from
many countries worldwide, and develop their communication, organization and
leadership skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MUSE will make the world's first
measurement of the proton radius via elastic muon scattering at a precision
which can address the 4% proton radius puzzle. The experiment will be performed
at the Paul Scherer Institute in Switzerland. The simultaneous measurement of
elastic e-plus / e-minus and mu-plus/mu-minus scattering on the proton in the
MUSE experiment will allow resolution of the proton radius puzzle: the 7-sigma
discrepancy between the charge radius of the proton measured in the excitation
spectrum of muonic hydrogen and that measured in the excitation spectrum of the
atomic hydrogen. The polarizabilities of the proton and neutron will be also
investigated via their influence on beam and target polarization asymmetries
measured in Compton Scattering. Precise cross section measurements on liquid
hydrogen and helium three and four within the A2 collaboration at the Mainzer
Microtron in Mainz, Germany, and at lower energies in the High-Intensity Gamma
Source (HIGS) at the Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory. This project
involves participation in and leadership of construction, data taking and
analysis of MUSE through the support of the PI, a graduate student, and postdoc.
It will result in precise, simultaneous elastic muon and electron scattering
data, and precise measurements of the scalar polarizabilities of the proton and
neutron.