* 1714897
* Pinpointing the Science of Fast Radio Bursts
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sarah Spolaor, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2022
* USD 457,427.00

Bursts of radio emission from space lasting only a few thousandths of a second
were first discovered in 2007. These events, now called "fast radio bursts"
(FRBs), were considered in a 2016 Nature magazine feature to be "the most
perplexing mystery" in astronomy today.   Around two dozen FRBs have been
detected and have been shown to come from far outside our Galaxy.  A research
team led by West Virginia University (WVU) will make use of a new capability of
the world's most powerful radio telescope array, NSF's Karl G. Jansky Very Large
Array (VLA), to detect and study several dozen FRBs over three years.  For the
first time, these astronomers will be able to accurately map out the locations,
distances, and environments of FRBs and identify the galaxies in which they
arise. This will allow the researchers to unequivocally find answers to
fundamental questions about fast radio burst origins and use them to better
understand the Universe. The team will also directly engage thousands of high
school students in the excitement and dynamism of the experiment by making it
part of WVU's "Pulsar Search Collaboratory" education and outreach network. This
program will provide students access to the FRB candidates with which they can
assess and discover new events and directly engage in the research and discovery
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WVU-based research team will use the VLA to
provide arcsecond localizations of FRBs, which will, for the first time, allow
their origins and nature to be studied in detail. The observations will begin to
address whether the phenomenon has more than one progenitor and how FRBs can be
used as tools to probe the intergalactic medium and the makeup of other
galaxies. The multi-wavelength studies of FRB hosts will lay a statistically
strong foundation for the future of FRB follow-up science that will endure for
years into the future.  A critical component of the program will be automatic
identification and public release of confident transitory events, which will
open opportunities to other scientists and facilities to use the results
immediately, further advancing time-domain science.