* 1714506
* Alternative Pathways of Stellar Evolution in Open Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Robert Mathieu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2022
* USD 597,149.00

Our understanding of the life cycle of individual stars is one of the great
intellectual accomplishments of the past century. However, half of stars like
our Sun form in orbit with companion stars. Going no further than understanding
individual stars would be like studying human lives without including people who
are in couples. The goal of this research is to understand these alternative
stellar life stories, by following stars that are born, live and die in clusters
of thousands of stars. The alternative life paths result when two stars orbit
near each other. Their life stories can include exchanging material between
them, the two slowly merging into one, or even violent stellar collisions.
Combining the studies single stars with new understanding of stars in clusters
will yield a complete picture of lives of all stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work also will increase participation of students underrepresented in STEM. The
research team will develop after-school programs for students at community
centers in Madison WI. These programs build on astronomy video games to excite
and nurture interest in STEM. The team also will add game-based learning to
astronomy and physics classes at the University of Wisconsin and at Madison
College. Finally, the team will provide and mentor research experiences for
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to transform our view of stellar life cycles by including the
interactions of stars in clusters. The planned research rests upon NSF-funded
WIYN Open Cluster Study research that comprehensively defines alternative
stellar evolution products, and the close binary populations from which they
form, in 6 rich older (1.6 Gyr &lt; t &lt; 8 Gyr) open clusters. The first
objective is to theoretically reproduce alternative stellar evolution pathways
within all 6 clusters using two numerical modeling codes, called MESA and TWIN.
In particular, blue stragglers with detected white-dwarf companions will permit
direct, detailed modeling of mass-transfer evolution from progenitor binaries to
current blue-straggler binaries. The second objective is to simulate the
rotation distributions of stars in clusters, as a function of effective
temperature. The rotation trends of main-sequence single stars do not hold, and
the actual rotation distributions of not yet known. The third objective is to
model angular momentum changes as a function of mass. They will use models of
current spin-down rates of stars to constrain the magnitude of spin-up events in
stellar formation events.