* 1714828
* Low Mass Galaxies and the Baryonic Tully Fisher Relation as a Distance Indicator
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Martha Haynes, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2021
* USD 272,918.00

It is difficult to understand an astronomical object unless its distance is
known. That is why distance estimators are so precious. Scaling relations can be
used to infer the distance to a galaxy. The Baryonic Tully Fisher Relation
(BTFR) links the spin speed of a galaxy to its total mass in gas and stars.
Astronomers are just beginning to ask if low mass galaxies obey the BTFR. These
galaxies are sprinkled throughout the local universe and knowing their distances
can open novel lines of inquiry. The team will use observations from NSF's
Arecibo Observatory to measure the gas content, spin speed and recession speed
of low mass galaxies. They will tally up the total masses in baryons to see if
the galaxies obey the BTFR. If so, they will derive distances to galaxies near
and inside the Pisces-Perseus Supercluster (PPS). They will compare the new
distances and recession speeds to simulations to understand how the PSS formed.
Senior team members will train junior team members. The Cornell team will
continue to participate in the Undergraduate ALFALFA Team initiative, thereby
involving students at 19 primarily undergraduate institutions in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will investigate the population of low-
mass, HI-rich galaxies. Their goals are to (1) establish a robust BTFR for local
star-forming disk galaxies, (2) use the BTFR as a distance estimator and to
probe regimes where baryon deficiency becomes important, and (3) infer BTFR
distances in the Pisces-Perseus Supercluster (PPS) and its foreground and
background voids, to constrain simulations of PPS formation.