* 1714514
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Negotiating Cyber Systems Access for Older Adults with Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Helena Mentis, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 515,587.00

Older adults are rapidly increasing their use of online services such as
banking, social media, and email -- services that come with risks around
security and privacy. These risks may be especially important for older adults
who suffer from mild neurocognitive disorder (miNCD), which can reduce their
ability to recognize scams such as email phishing, follow recommended password
guidelines, and consider downstream implications of sharing personal
information. One way older adults with miNCD cope with their impairments is
through the help of caregivers, including partners, children, and professional
health personnel, when using and managing online services. This, too, carries
risks: sharing personal information with caregivers can raise questions of
embarrassment, agency, autonomy, and information leakage; caregivers also do not
always act in their charges' best interest. Through a series of interviews,
design work, and evaluation, this project will study the issues that arise
around caregivers helping older adults with miNCD use security- and privacy-
sensitive online services, and how new system designs can reduce the privacy,
security, and relational risks involved while increasing older adults' autonomy
and access to online services. Beyond that specific context, the work will
deepen understanding of both how cognitive impairments affect technology use and
how to design accessible technologies that people with impairments use through
collaborating with others -- a common situation for people with a variety of
physical and mental impairments. The work will also inform interdisciplinary
course materials aimed at technology and aging and provide both undergraduate
and graduate students research experiences working with these
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is organized around three main
activities. The first aims to determine how older adults with miNCD and their
caregivers currently manage access to such services, and problems with current
practices. To do this, the team will study pairs of caregivers and older adults
(both with and without miNCD, to isolate whether findings are related to age
versus cognitive disorder), using a person-centered design approach that
combines short-duration interview and observational work in comfortable
environments and is well-suited to working with both older and cognitively
impaired individuals. These findings will be used to develop requirements for
the second main activity, a participatory design (PD) process aimed at designing
interaction mechanisms for cooperative negotiation around access to online
banking, social media, and email accounts. The PD process will also follow the
person-centered philosophy, using an "invisible device" paradigm that prompts
participants for design ideas by showing video scenarios in which actors use and
discuss unspecified devices to address issues identified in phase 1. The team
will then synthesize ideas generated by caregiver-older adult pairs into user
interaction prototypes for each of the three domains and test them for basic
usability. The third main activity is a six-month longitudinal deployment of
these prototypes to 40 older adults (20 with and 20 without miNCD). Participants
will keep a diary of adverse events and their reactions; the team will analyze
these, along with surveys, interviews, and video observations, to assess how the
technologies affect participants' perceptions of their caregivers and autonomy,
their involvement in and satisfaction with decision-making around online access,
and their ability to manage risks around security and privacy.