* 1714867
* The adaptive variation of human skin: A comprehensive anthropological genetics examination of epidermal differentiation complex
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Omer Gokcumen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 387,886.00

Skin is one of the most visible and distinguishing characteristics of humans,
and understanding skin variation among humans is of central importance to the
field of human biology. Indeed, there have been great advances in the last
decade with regards to the genetic and developmental bases of pigmentation of
the skin, explaining variation of skin color within and among human populations.
However, variation in other important properties of skin, especially its barrier
function, has not been well characterized. This proposal uses state-of-the-art
genomic approaches to determine the extent and evolutionary relevance of skin
barrier variation and address why potentially detrimental variants remain in
human populations. The proposed study is at the forefront of applying novel
genomic and computational technologies to anthropological questions. Specific
courses and workshops are designed within the context of this project to create
a major hub for training the next generation of biological anthropologists, both
at the undergraduate and graduate levels. In addition, with constant public
interaction, the research contributes to a better understanding of how
biological evolution of the skin is independent of the cultural constructs of
identity.

Recently available modern and ancient genomes allow for a comprehensive look at
the evolutionary signatures in the human genome. In addition, long-read
sequencing technologies now permit accurate investigation of genomic structural
variants (e.g., deletions and duplications of DNA segments), which have an
outsized impact on human evolution and biological variation. The proposed study
uses these newly available resources to investigate the evolution of the
epidermal differentiation complex, a 2Mb region on human chromosome 1, which
harbors more than 50 genes with known roles in skin development and function.
The genes in this complex are involved in several important functions, such as
immune response, insulation from UV light, heat, moisture, and wound healing.
Preliminary work indicates the presence of multiple geography-specific adaptive
forces, including pathogenic pressures, shaping the genetic variation in this
region, providing a glimpse of the evolution of skin barrier function in humans.
The proposed project expands on this premise, to provide the most comprehensive
understanding to date of the evolutionary forces acting on epidermal
differentiation complex genes. In addition, the project identifies genetic
variants that are of anthropological significance for human skin phenotypic
variation, and are thus perfect targets for downstream functional studies. The
project will also lay a methodological groundwork for future anthropological
genetic studies, especially pertaining to structural variation in the human
genome.