* 1714922
* An Examination of the Impact of Health on Families' Financial Status
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jermaine Toney, Toney                   Jermaine
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. A theme that is evident in the literature
is that disparities in health affect other social outcomes, including the
disparities in financial wealth. The NSF mission emphasizes the need for
research that can advance the national health, prosperity and welfare. This
project responds to this call by using data from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) to examine the conventional wisdom on the link between health
status and the financial basket. Explorations on the link between
mental/physical health of the person and financial basket (aka portfolio
allocation, i.e. portion of household wealth allocated to stocks, bonds, mutual
funds) is a relatively new line of inquiry. In previous research, however, the
focus is only on the health status of the individual or head of the household.
Such a focus on the individual may in fact underestimate the full extent of
health on portfolio allocation. This project improves upon existing knowledge
and focuses on connections between the health status of the head of household
and their siblings, parents and grandparents. The extended family can contribute
as a positive or negative social force to the well being of a household.
Previous research indicates that economic hardship in the family tree, e.g.
among siblings and parents, helps to undermine the ability of middle-class
households to accumulate net wealth, and it substantially lowers the probability
of carrying stocks or a bank account in their portfolio. Middle-class black
households, in particular, are far more likely to have relatives that face such
hardship. What is more, previous investigations find that relatively younger and
elderly black households tend to devote a much lower proportion of their assets
to risky investments, e.g. stocks and mutual funds, compared to their white
counterparts. These scholars do not, however, consider the forces behind such
disparity.

The underlying hypothesis of this project is that sickness in the family tree
may be a unique contributor to the black-white disparity in portfolio selection.
To test this proposition, this project relies on perspectives and statistical
methods used by Bogan et al (2013). One empirical model that the project uses is
the logistic regression for binary data. The logistic regression is a model that
can estimate the weight of health status in the family on ownership of a
particular asset type, e.g. wealth ownership of stocks, bank account, mutual
funds. Another model that this project proposes to run is the tobit model. A
tobit model is appropriate because it can estimate the impact of health on the
share of wealth allocated to a particular financial asset. Bogan et al (2013)
estimate the influence of self-reported health status on household wealth by
using a tobit regression model. If after controlling for income, education,
etc., certain demographics appear to have lower wealth prospects due to illness
in the extended family, such inequality needs to be made known. Potentially,
this project could draw attention to the disproportionate effect that health
status in the family tree has on different demographics and why certain assets
are not contained in an individual's portfolio.