* 1714953
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the nature of dark matter with gravitational lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Tommaso Treu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,722.00

Understanding the nature of dark matter is one of the most pressing issues in
all of modern astrophysics. This mysterious substance makes up the vast majority
of the material in galaxies, including our own Milky Way Galaxy, but does not
appear in any images taken of these objects. Furthermore, dark matter is one of
the two major components, along with dark energy, that make up the Universe.
While the properties of dark matter are not well known, relatively simple models
of it have done a remarkable job of reproducing the distribution of galaxies in
the Universe. However, when looking on smaller scales, the models predict that
thousands of small galaxies should orbit galaxies such as the Milky Way, while
careful observations of the Milky Way have detected fewer than 50 satellite
galaxies. The primary goal of this project is to build up and analyze a large
enough sample of rare gravitational lens systems to distinguish between
different models of dark matter and, thus, to further our knowledge about one of
the most important components of the Universe. The excitement of this program
will be shared with the public, with a special emphasis on introducing young
people to the scientific method and to the techniques of cutting-edge
astrophysics research. This will be accomplished through specialized summer
programs for high-school students, introductory-level college classes in
astronomy and sustainable energy, and research projects for undergraduates.

The fundamental question underlying this project is "what is the nature of dark
matter?". We now know that dark matter is a major component of the mass energy
of the Universe, second only to dark energy, and completely dominates the mass
of galaxies and galaxy clusters. However, the properties of the dark matter
particle are not well quantified with efforts to measure these properties
proceeding both in astrophysics and physics. The proposed research utilizes four
steps to better understand dark matter: (1) building better statistics by
applying our gravitational imaging and flux-ratio anomaly techniques to new
samples that will provide a significant increase over our current numbers, (2)
significantly improving the power of the lensing approach to disentangle cold
and warm dark matter by pushing orders of magnitude down the mass function of
substructures, (3) develop techniques to reduce systematic errors that are now
known to have affected earlier dark matter analyses, and (4) do at least two
independent measurements of the substructure mass function in distant galaxies
and analyze the results in the context of alternative dark matter models.