* 1714699
* SHF: Small: Supporting Regular Expression Testing, Search, Repair, Comprehension, and Maintenance
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Kathryn Stolee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,996.00

In software development, regular expressions are a common programming construct
used for many purposes, including querying databases, searching documents,
validating user input, and parsing files. Most programming languages have
standard libraries or built-in support for regular expression processing.
Despite their frequent appearance in software development activities, regular
expressions are prone to programming errors. When a regular expression is
responsible for a software bug, the impact can be severe, possibly resulting in
corrupted data, security vulnerabilities, denial of service attacks, or website
outages. This research develops new techniques to test, understand, reuse, and
maintain regular expressions, in an effort to improve developer comprehension
and reduce related bugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to develop
coverage criteria for test suites, similarity metrics, and semantics-preserving
transformations for regular expressions. The coverage criteria apply to the
automata representation of the regular expression and are used to automatically
generate test inputs to help developers adequately test regular expressions. The
similarity metrics allow developers to find regular expressions that are similar
to a buggy regular expression, as well as explain how the behavior differs among
them. The semantics-preserving transformations enhance comprehension and
maintenance, and also support the migration of regular expressions between
languages.  The broader impacts come primarily from the goal of reducing bugs
related to regular expressions, which creates more reliable software for all.