* 1714818
* AF:Small:Beyond Worst Case Running time: Algorithms for Routing, Scheduling and Matching
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Clifford Stein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 06/30/2022
* USD 456,793.00

Algorithms are ubiquitous and influence many important aspects of our lives.
They address decisions ranging from the mundane, e.g. which movie to watch, to
the vitally important, e.g. how to manage the internet or to schedule some time-
critical tasks in a navigation system. Even though computing power and network
bandwidth increase at a rapid rate, users and applications increase their demand
for computation and their use of networks at roughly the same pace. Thus, a
critical bottleneck in many important technologies and applications is an
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems considered in this project, mainly
matching, scheduling and routing are fundamental algorithmic problems. By
looking at resources such as energy, machines needed, and reassignments, the
project will significantly broaden and deepen our understanding of these basic
algorithmic problems. It will also design simpler algorithms that will lead to
easily implementable solutions. The PI will make progress both in theory and in
practice and will disseminate his results. The project will also make
significant contributions to education via PI's textbook and other new
materials. The PI will continue his commitment to Ph.D. student
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now well-understood that time, space and
worst-case solution quality are not the only resources that need to be
optimized. For the past few decades, there has been a growing emphasis on other
concerns such as availability of information, use of cache, management of disk,
etc. More recently, there has been a growing understanding that energy and power
management are also resources that should be carefully managed. In addition, one
may also be interested in features of solutions as they evolve over time, or one
may be interested in the algorithm's use of resources such as machines,
processing speed or updates. Finally, one may also be interested in not just the
bounds that we improve, but also the real-life performance of important
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to study several algorithmic
problems that arise in scheduling, routing and matchings. The PI intends to make
progress on some traditional problems and their variants and is particularly
interested in considering problems from novel perspectives, that is, considering
metrics that go beyond the traditionally studied ones. In particular, the
project will consider energy consumption in both computers and networks, and
will also consider environments in which other resources must be managed, such
as minimizing the number of changes to a solution over time, the amount of
processing power needed to compute a solution, or the algorithm's response to a
changing environment.