* 1714014
* Methods for Data Analysis and Systematic Corrections in the Fermilab E989 Muon g-2 Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Bradley Plaster, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 04/30/2023
* USD 228,693.00

This award supports data taking and analysis as well as calculations that will
enable the precise measurement of the muon's magnetic properties and thereby
test the Standard Model of Particles and Interactions. Muons are subatomic
particles that are like electrons but are about 200 times more massive. Past
measurements of the muon's magnetic moment, a fundamental property that
quantifies how it interacts with magnetic fields, disagree with predictions of
the Standard Model. The experiment will take place at the Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) and use muons moving at nearly the speed of
light and confined in a circular storage ring using magnetic fields and electric
fields. Extracting the muon's magnetic moment from the data will require
corrections to account for variations in the magnetic fields through which the
muons pass. Methods for these corrections will be developed under this award. In
addition to the training of a graduate student in forefront experimental and
data analysis techniques, this project will also connect students from local
public high schools interested in the physical sciences with fundamental physics
research, via the mentoring of junior- and senior-level students in capstone
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A high-precision comparison of
measurements and theoretical calculations of the muon's anomalous magnetic
moment constitutes a test of the completeness of the Standard Model. In the
Brookhaven E821 experiment, which completed data taking in 2001, the muon's
anomalous magnetic moment was measured to a precision of 0.54 parts-per-million
(ppm). The result from that experiment lies some tantalizing ~3.5 standard
deviations from the Standard Model theoretical value. In the Fermilab E989
experiment, which began data taking in 2017, the precision on the anomalous
magnetic moment will be improved by nearly a factor of four to the level of 0.14
ppm, thus presenting the possibility for a definitive claim of evidence for new
physics, provided the experimental and theoretical central values do not change
significantly. In the experiment, relativistic "magic momentum" muons will be
stored and subsequently undergo cyclotron orbits within a 1.45 Tesla
superconducting magnetic storage ring, with electric fields employed for
confinement. This award supports work on systematic corrections to the muon's
cyclotron and spin precession frequencies, the difference of which is
proportional to the anomalous magnetic moment, resulting from muon transport
through the small non-uniformities in the magnetic fields inevitably present
over the volume of the storage ring and the magnetic fields resulting from the
muons' relativistic motion through the electric fields. Methods for modeling and
simulating these systematic effects will be developed by the PI and a graduate
student under this award.