* 1715153
* SHF: Small: Automated Detection and Repair of Errors in Event-Driven Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Frank Tip, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2021
* USD 451,979.00

Event-driven software plays an exceedingly important role in modern society, in
a variety of domains that include browser-based software for the web, server-
side applications, and apps running on mobile devices. In such applications,
control flow is driven by events that are triggered by users or by external
systems. Writing event-driven software is notoriously error-prone, and when
programmers make mistakes, various types of errors manifest themselves that are
notoriously difficult to debug. The quality of event-driven web-based software
remains a significant challenge, and programming errors undermine confidence in
companies and institutions that offer goods or services on-line, and may put
them at risk legally and financially. The intellectual merits of this project
are the development of practical algorithms and tools for detecting and
automatically repairing errors in event-driven software. The project's broader
significance and importance follows from improvements in the quality of web-
based software that are enabled by practical tools for finding and fixing
errors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical focus of this project is on the
development of well-founded solutions for accommodating event-driven control
flow in static and dynamic program analysis algorithms, implementing them in
practical tools, and evaluating them on real-world software. Specific research
topics under study include the development of: precise interprocedural data flow
analysis algorithms that are capable of preventing data flow along infeasible
control-flow paths, static analysis algorithms for JavaScript code that makes
use of promises, a mechanism for asynchronous computation that is now widely
adopted in the JavaScript community, and techniques for automatically repairing
event race errors in web applications, by restricting event handler scheduling
in the browser according to a specified repair policy. Together, these
techniques will facilitate the development of more reliable event-driven
software, by enabling programmers to detect and repair errors more
quickly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is releasing the developed tools as
open source and is building a user community around the tools by ensuring that
interested researchers are able to contribute to the codebase. This aspect is of
special interest to the software cluster in NSF's Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which provides co-funding for this award.