* 1715494
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Interplay between the Conformational and Functional Space of Membrane Proteins and the Physicochemical Properties of the Surrounding Bilay
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alfredo Angeles-Boza, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 186,031.00

Biological membranes and their constituents are involved in virtually all
processes vital to living organisms, including the immune response. This
research investigates how several agents of the immune response combine their
antimicrobial effects by interacting with each other on bacterial cell
membranes. The specific agents of interest are host defense peptides and copper
ions. Host defense peptides are powerful molecules that act on a broad range of
pathogenic cells, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Copper ions, which are
present in immune cells, can damage the cell membranes of bacteria by oxidizing
their phospholipids. Interestingly, some host-defense peptides contain a copper-
binding motif that enables them to bind copper and become metallopeptides. In
this project, the PIs will develop new bio-physical and biochemical tools to
investigate how host defense metallopeptides and copper ions may synergize their
antimicrobial effects. This project has the potential to produce new principles
that could be useful to design novel antimicrobial biomaterials. In addition,
the project will include activities that engage college and pre-college students
from diverse backgrounds in hands-on science and enhance their analytical
skills. The PIs will leverage the interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of
their research, and passion for scientific research to spike scientific interest
in young students and prepare high school students for a successful transition
to college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this research is a rigorous
investigation of the interplay between host defense mechanisms at biological
membranes. The molecular systems of interest are membrane-interacting host
defense metallopeptides and other agents of the immune response that have the
potential to unify their antimicrobial effects at lipid membranes. While host
defense peptides have been studied for their ability to disrupt the
conformational arrangement in bacterial cell membranes, the possibility that
host defense peptides and other immune agents such as copper and oxidized lipids
synergize their antimicrobial effects has not been explored on a molecular
level. The PIs will test this hypothesis using peptides from fish (piscidins)
and ticks (ixosins). They will leverage their expertise in the characterization
of membrane assemblies and harness a platform of cutting-edge biophysical
techniques (solid-state NMR, neutron diffraction, surface-sensitive methods) and
biological assays to obtain structure-dynamics-function information on these
metallopeptides under native-like conditions. The project will focus on model
membranes to accurately and precisely control membrane composition and directly
relate their molecular contents to specific functional and conformational
behaviors of host defense metallopeptides and their interactions with bilayers.
The project will feature assays on live cells relevant to the biological context
of the chosen host defense peptides to investigate the contribution of lipid
oxidation to the antimicrobial potency of the peptides, identify synergistic
effects among peptides, and relate biological potencies to physicochemical
properties. This project will generate multiple broad impact outcomes. First,
the new findings and methodologies created will contribute to advancing
scientific knowledge in the fields of membrane biophysics, structural biology,
immunology, and biochemistry. These fundamental principles could be useful to
design novel antimicrobial agents and biomaterials. Second, the scientific
environment will foster partnerships between academia and national labs. Third,
the outreach activities will stimulate the interest of college and pre-college
students from diverse backgrounds in hands-on science, and enhance their
analytical skills.