* 1715197
* RAPID: Building Community Resilience: Understanding Homeowner Response to Extreme Events
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Karen Richman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 70,323.00

Strengthening community resilience to natural disasters is important in all
communities, including in the residential sector. In some instances, homeowners
may survive a hazard event yet still experience significant direct and indirect
losses that, when aggregated over entire communities, can impede recovery
following major disasters. Reduction of future losses may require homeowners to
undertake voluntary actions to reduce risks to their residences. This research
will focus on the role of social and cultural factors, including religiosity, in
motivating homeowners to be proactive. This research will conduct homeowner
surveys in two Haitian communities whose residential sectors were respectively
devastated by 2016's Hurricane Matthew and the 2010 Earthquake. Understanding
the attitudes and behaviors of these extremely vulnerable homeowners can in turn
inform efforts to encourage proactive risk reduction among similar communities
in the United States. Such findings will inform the development of programming
enabling cultural and social institutions to move beyond their historical roles
as key actors in response and recovery and become drivers of proactive risk
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homeowner decisions to reduce risk to natural
hazards like hurricanes and earthquakes are likely constrained by complex
social, economic, and political forces, including the role of important social
and cultural institutions. The specific practices of these institutions may vary
considerably even within those of a particular type, and may be associated with
corresponding differences in the posture of adherents towards various hazards.
The recent (e.g., Hurricane Katrina) and more distant history of US disasters
has shown, for example, that institutional affiliation may inform risk
seeking/avoidance behavior. This study pays particular attention to the role of
religiosity in determining homeowner agency to rebuild for resiliency. Other
variables tested for their effects on risk-reducing homeowner behavior include
the severity of prior disaster damage (quantified by engineering forensic
assessments), perceptions of future natural hazard risk, and time elapsed since
prior disaster experience. Data used in this investigation will be generated
from face-to-face homeowner surveys distributed to 500 primary decision makers
of single family residences in each of the two demographically similar
communities in Haiti, Les Cayes and Leogane. Residents of Les Cayes are in the
early stages of recovery following 2016's Hurricane Matthew, where intent toward
risk reducing construction can be documented. By contrast, respondents in
Leogane, the epicenter of the 2010 Earthquake, have had six years to navigate
the steps of rebuilding and demonstrate actions toward risk reduction, allowing
a comparative evaluation between intent and action in household recovery. Given
the lack of accurate census data for random sampling, respondents are selected
through modified random walk protocols. Data analysis includes basic descriptive
statistics (frequencies and cross-tabs) for the two communities and multivariate
analysis on the Structural Risk Mitigation Index, a quantitative indicator of
the homeowner's proactive response toward resilience-enhancing construction.