* 1715178
* Coupled Physics Inverse Problems in Medical and Geophysical Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Yang Yang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 134,435.00

Non-destructive imaging technology provides a variety of methods to image the
interior of an object. It is especially important for clinical diagnosis in
medicine and for oil prospecting. For medical imaging methods, for example, the
success rests primarily on two ingredients: on one hand, the methods should
display a large contrast between healthy and unhealthy tissues, on the other
hand, they should have a sufficiently high, typically sub-millimeter,
resolution. Computerized Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), or
Ultrasound Imaging (UI) are typical examples of modalities with such a
resolution. These modalities however fail to exhibit a sufficient contrast.
Other modalities, for example those based on the optical, elastic, or electrical
properties of tissues, do display a high contrast but suffer from low resolution
capabilities. A breakthrough has been made on the way to overcoming such
limitations by coupling two existing modalities: one with large contrast while
the other with high resolution. A combination like this is referred to as a
hybrid modality. Various hybrid modalities have been invented and tested in the
past few decades. Their effectiveness is justified in experiments, yet the
underlying mathematical theory is still incomplete. This project aims to
complement the extant mathematical knowledge of several hybrid modalities.
Better understanding of the involved mathematics could facilitate further
improvement of the modalities, providing potential candidates for the next
generation of medical and geophysical imaging
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among other hybrid modalities, Photo-Acoustic
Tomography (PAT) and Thermo-Acoustic Tomography (TAT) are typical methods in
medical imaging; and Seismo-Electric (SE) and Electro-Seismic (ES) imagings are
examples in geophysical imaging. PAT and TAT take advantage of the high
resolution of ultrasound waves and high contrast of optical/electromagnetic
waves, while SE and ES imagings couple seismic waves and electromagnetic waves.
Arising in different areas, their mathematical models consist in common of two
stages: an inverse source problem for a hyperbolic system and an inverse problem
with internal data. The investigator will study these two stages in each
modality as well as the relations between different models. The research
concerns primarily recovery of optical, electromagnetic and seismic parameters
of the targeted object from the aspects of uniqueness, stability, partial
measurement case, and reconstructive algorithms. The main tool to study the
inverse hyperbolic problems is microlocal analysis which is a powerful method
for tracking propagation of singularities. Consideration of the inverse problems
with internal data will be based on properties of the specific equations. The
research is also expected to result in reconstructive algorithms which will be
numerically implemented and tested.