* 1715649
* DNA deformability in linear and circular DNA: Implications for site-specific recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Anjum Ansari, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

Sequence-dependent DNA shape, and level of flexibility, is at the core of how
DNA binding proteins recognize their binding sites. Protein binding to DNA is
important for many aspects of DNA function as a means for storing and
transmitting information in a cell. DNA flexibility is studied using both
computational and experimental methods, but experimental studies testing
computational predictions have lagged, leaving a big gap in our understanding.
This study will provide an experimental dataset that will significantly expand
our understanding of one type of DNA deformability, contributing to the overall
efforts by the DNA mechanics community to rationally predict and map sequence-
dependent DNA conformations and deformations. Specifically, the research targets
sequence patterns that render DNA highly kinkable, leading to improved rules for
recognizing such sites and their protein binding partners. As participants in
the research activities, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in
a cross-disciplinary research environment. The PI will contribute to curriculum
revisions leading to more quantitative skills for life science majors, and will
develop biophysics-related lab activities to be integrated into the curriculum
for physics majors. These efforts, together with biophysics courses the PI
previously developed, will be integrated into a planned Biophysics major at the
PI's institution. Longer range goals are to develop an interdisciplinary
graduate program in Molecular and Cellular Biophysics. The PI will work with
high school teachers to develop teaching modules at the growing interface
between physics and biology, and host high school students in her lab in the
summer. The PI will also mentor, through summer research activities,
underrepresented students recruited through an outreach program at the PI's
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study brings together multifaceted
approaches to elucidate the rules that govern DNA sequence-dependent shape and
deformability, and to examine how these variations in DNA flexibility influence
protein binding. This study will identify highly deformable DNA sequences using
in vitro selection of random sequences that bind with high affinity to
architectural IHF/HU family of DNA bending proteins that severely kink DNA at
two sites. The sequence patterns that enable this high degree of kinking will be
important for developing models of sequence-dependent DNA deformability that go
well beyond the small base-step deformations described by harmonic potentials.
The intrinsic DNA deformability of selected sequences will be investigated using
laser temperature-jump spectroscopy, biochemical assays, NMR-probed base pair
dynamics, and computational modeling of bending deformations. The researchers
will (1) examine the correlation between protein-binding affinities and DNA
deformation energies; (2) investigate how the variations in the binding
affinities are reflected in the DNA-bending rates to form the complex; and (3)
examine the potential for spontaneous bending/kinking of these DNA substrates by
(i) measuring base-pair dynamics at kink sites using NMR approaches; (ii)
probing their reactivity within the context of minicircles by biochemically
detecting kinks and unpaired bases induced by severe bending; (iii) modeling
structural dynamics of highly deformable sequences. This study will generate a
comprehensive dataset of sequence patterns that underpin DNA dynamics and
flexibility. Results from this project will be made available on the website
http://ansari.lab.uic.edu/research/ .