* 1715627
* NSF/MCB BSF: Direct Force measurements and analysis of intrinsically disordered proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Omar Saleh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 764,235.00

Many important structures within organisms are built out of proteins, large
string-shaped molecules that typically coil up ('fold') into a well-defined
globular shape. However, recent discoveries have found that there is a rather
large subset of proteins (including about 30% of the proteins in humans) that do
not fold; instead, their shape continually fluctuates like a wriggling piece of
spaghetti. These disordered proteins are also distinguished from folded proteins
by their composition and typically contain a larger number of electrically-
charged subunits in comparison to folded proteins. This project will investigate
the link between the highly-charged composition and the fluctuating structure of
disordered proteins. The experiments conducted using modern physical methods
that will permit new insight into protein shape and its fluctuations. This
project will particularly focus on important proteins found in muscle and in
neurons. This research project will have broad, long-term impacts in training
young scientists, as well as forming an international collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intrinsically-disordered proteins (IDPs) are frequently
enriched in charged residues, and subject to regulatory control through
phosphorylation. Thus, electrostatic interactions are dominant in defining and
modulating chain structure. For IDPs, structure is a dynamic concept, as the
proteins fluctuate through a large ensemble of available conformationa. The
overarching goal of this proposal is to study the effects of electrostatic
interactions on dynamic IDP structure. This project will focus on two important
disordered proteins: i) the PEVK region of the muscle protein titin, a highly-
charged domain whose entropic elasticity helps define the passive elasticity of
muscle; and ii) the C-terminal tails of neuromuscular intermediate filament
(NIF) proteins, whose electrostatic interactions drive the assembly of filaments
into hydrogel networks that define the cytoskeleton of axons. The dynamic
structure of PEVK and NIFs will be studied by using quantitative experimental
methods and concepts derived from soft-matter physics, including low-force
single-molecule stretching to infer dynamic structure from entropic elasticity,
and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements. Electrostatic effects will
be studied by exploring the effect on structure of different solution salt
conditions, as well as exploring the effects of phosphorylation, and of varying
chain charge profiles. The combination of SAXS and single-molecule manipulation
measurements will lead to quantitative, microscopic insight into biologically-
relevant mechanisms of electrostatic control of IDP structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the
US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science Foundation.