* 1715858
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research:  EEG-Guided Electrical Stimulation for Immersive Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Deniz Erdogmus, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 142,000.00

Spatial presence, in Virtual Reality (VR) terminology, refers to the perception
(or illusion) of being physically present in a simulated environment. VR strives
to create interactive environments that provide experiences of spatial presence
through accurate delivery and perception of multimodal sensory stimuli. Research
in VR spans fields ranging from neuroscience and medicine to gaming. While the
computing and gaming industries have generated tremendous advances in hardware
and software for graphics processing and 3D display technologies, VR systems
still lack capabilities for providing users with haptic feedback (a sense of
touch), which is crucial for generating truly immersive, real-world experiences.
It is known that an increase in the feeling of spatial presence manifests itself
in the form of increased brain activity. This research aims to achieve the
control of haptic sensory stimulation adaptively, based on the changes in brain
activity associated with perceptual responses elicited by sensory stimulation in
VR environments. Project outcomes will include novel scientific discoveries and
engineering enhancements that will make significant contributions to other areas
of interest, such as prosthetic limbs, augmented reality, and telepresence
applications. The project will help train a new generation of engineers skilled
in addressing multidisciplinary challenges, while through outreach activities
STEM careers will be promoted at the K-12 level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective is to identify and analyze brain activity associated with the
increased feeling of haptic spatial presence elicited by electro-tactile
stimulation and measured through EEG, and to investigate closed-loop techniques
to control electro-tactile stimulation for enhanced haptic presence in VR
environments. Specifically, the project will: (1) develop an electrical haptic
stimulation framework; (2) design analysis techniques to identify markers of
haptic inputs in EEG; (3) establish control policies for adaptive electrical
stimulation; and (4) evaluate and refine EEG-guided adaptive stimuli control
framework in VR environments. In particular, the proposition to actuate haptic
feedback through electrical stimulation is novel, while formulating design
principles for model-based optimal EEG-guided closed-loop haptic feedback for
immersive spatial presence is transformative. Additional innovative propositions
to advance adaptive control under uncertainty and psychophysical investigations
are unique; these present a potentially game-changing opportunity for VR system
development and perhaps for general human-computer interaction.