* 1715638
* CNH-L: Climate Change Adaptation in a Coupled Geomorphic-Economic Coastal System
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Brad Murray, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,499,752.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A non-technical description explaining the broader
significance of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the
ways in which coastal processes and economic decisions about land use and
coastal engineering interact to determine the nature and timing of adaptation to
climate risk. It addresses the interactions of natural forces, economic
decisions, and public policies over long time horizons to determine how the
built environment and patterns of human settlement react to rising seas and
related coastline changes. These issues are of concern to a significant part of
the US population, especially along the East Coast and Gulf of Mexico, that
faces persistent flooding and storm damage. A fundamental aim of this research
is to provide knowledge and tools to look further forward in time in responding
to coastal and environmental changes. The results will advance knowledge about
how beaches and coastal environments react to various storm-related scenarios.
It will also provide insight into how real-estate markets react to complex
changes in environmental conditions, public policies, scientific knowledge, and
individual attitudes and values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of
the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing climatic and geomorphological
processes are likely to increase risks of living at the coast in the future and
to increase the value of reducing those risks through engineering. However, the
same factors will tend to elevate the cost and decrease the certainty of the
effectiveness of those engineering actions. These dynamics may eventually make
it too expensive to continue coastal habitation in its current forms. Coupled
choices about modifications to the natural and built environment will determine
not only the characteristics of coastal communities but also the nature of
transitions to less inhabited or uninhabited states. Natural systems will be
represented by state-of-the-art three-dimensional coastal geomorphology models
to significantly improve predictions about the way coastal systems evolve over
time. The economic system will be investigated through a novel specification of
the property markets in two US east coast communities and will be informed by
surveys and qualitative research into residents' knowledge of risks and
preferences for coastal amenities and infrastructure. The project will
investigate the way that public policies, including government-managed
insurance, engineering projects, disaster relief, and infrastructure, will
impact both economic decisions and the coastal environment. The resulting
modeling structure will be a significant step forward in modeling community-
environment interactions in response to climate change over long time scales,
and the code and model structure will be made both accessible for additional
research and policy decisions.