* 1715176
* Chemistry without Cofactors: Discovering How a Protein Environment Facilitates Important Reactions with Oxygen
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jennifer DuBois, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 496,927.00

Metabolism of food by cells occurs over a long and elaborate series of steps
inside our cells, which is, in essence, similar to the chemical reaction known
as combustion, in which the carbon compounds combine with oxygen gas (O2), to
yield carbon dioxide, water, and large amounts of energy. The "flint", hidden
inside proteins, consists of small metal-containing or vitamin-like compounds
called cofactors, which bind the O2 molecule and begin to break apart its
chemical bonds. The partially dismantled oxygen molecule is then ready to
combine with carbon-containing molecules from food, releasing vast amounts of
energy. In this way, cofactors allow nature to harness and control the power of
atmospheric O2. The main objective of this project is to investigate a
surprising variation on this process. Recently discovered proteins catalyze
reactions between carbon-containing molecules and O2 without the help of
cofactors. This project examines how these proteins effectively generate "fire
without flint" or energy without cofactors. This project also examines an
important potential biotechnological application of these proteins. A cofactor-
free, protein-based catalyst can be easily grown in bacterial cultures without
the need for the expensive added ingredients or elaborate biochemical pathways
needed for assembling cofactors into proteins. These biocatalysts moreover offer
clean, byproduct-free alternatives to existing chemical methods for carrying out
similar processes. This project specifically examines how cofactor-free proteins
can efficiently convert the abundant, renewable plant polymer known as lignin
into starting materials for the production of bioplastics. This project will
train K through 8 teachers and help develop a course about teaching teachers on
issues of sustainability and science education. Research training and education
of graduate and undergraduate students will also be supported by this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;O2 is an ideal oxidant because of its
thermodynamic power, abundance, and the benign nature of its by-products.
However, O2 possesses unpaired electron spins, making reactions between O2 and
organic molecules impractically slow unless a catalyst is present. Biological
catalysis of reactions with O2 generally depends on cofactors. The requirement
for cofactors to mediate O2 biocatalysis is generally considered absolute.
However, bacterial enzymes that catalyze diverse reactions between O2 and
organic species in the complete absence of cofactors have recently been
discovered. The main objective for this project, which focuses on a large family
of cofactor-independent enzymes, is to determine how the protein environment
alone activates O2 and steers the activated species toward the formation of
specific products. This objective integrates experiment with several levels of
theory. This project is supported jointly by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of
the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and Chemistry for Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.