* 1715714
* RI:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Information-driven Autonomous Exploration in Uncertain Underwater Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 265,000.00

This project develops the theory and algorithms for autonomous navigation of
mobile sensing platforms, such as unmanned ground, aerial, and underwater
vehicles, so that the collected information is maximized while constraints on
movement capabilities and energy expenditure are accommodated. This work
facilitates the use of autonomous robots in environmental monitoring, search and
rescue, surveillance and security, among other applications of societal
importance. The algorithms are evaluated in field trials using unique gliding
robotic fish. The project provides training for both graduate and undergraduate
students, including those from underrepresented groups. Through showcasing at
the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago and offering of an open-source
robotic fish education kit, the project promotes the interest of K-12 students
and the general public in science and engineering. The project further
facilitates transfer of software and hardware for robotic sensing to the
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to bridge the gap
between the theory and practice in information-driven mobile sensing and to
develop a principled theoretic and algorithmic framework for autonomous
exploration in uncertain, specifically underwater, environments. The approach
exploits the concept of ergodic exploration, where the underlying optimization
problem is solved using methods from nonlinear optimal control. The research
consists of: 1) Establishing a rigorous theoretical framework for ergodic
exploration for guaranteeing solution well-posedness and stability, and
developing synthesis methods for real-time control; 2) exploring active probing
of flow conditions via auxiliary measurement of tracer agents to mitigate
environmental uncertainty; 3) investigating collaborative exploration schemes
that strike balance among performance, complexity, and robustness; and 4)
conducting field experiments to validate the framework using a group of gliding
robotic fish to monitor harmful algal blooms and localize sources of chemical
spills.&lt;br/&gt;