* 1715049
* Laboratory Measurements of Electrostatic and Magnetostatic Properties of Stellar and Circumstellar Molecules
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Timothy Steimle, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2020
* USD 339,134.00

Molecular spectra---the unique energy signatures of molecules---carry important
information about the physical conditions of the astronomical environments in
which the molecules are found. The main goal of this research project is to
perform accurate laboratory measurements of key properties of molecules that are
found in star spots and in the gas and dust around old stars. Accurate values of
these properties will allow astronomers to extract reliable information from
molecular spectra observed in these distant regions and infer the conditions
present there. The project will train students and a postdoctoral researcher in
advanced experimental techniques. It will also provide an advanced physical
science experience to high school students and teachers at a college preparatory
academy and science enrichment to local K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using state-of-the-art spectroscopic techniques,
the research team will accurately measure the electrostatic and magnetostatic
properties of refractory diatomic and triatomic molecules that are known
constituents of stellar atmospheres and circumstellar envelopes. The
measurements will yield (1) dipole moments of AlO, AlNC, FeNC, SiCN, SiH2, SiN,
SiC, HNSi, and SiCSi from optical Stark spectra; (2) magnetic g-factors of VO,
CrH, FeO, TiH, and TiO from optical Zeeman measurements under magnetic fields
comparable to those in star spots; and (3) electronic transition moments and
spontaneous emission rates of VO, AlO, FeO, TiH, CrH, and FeH. The high quality
laboratory data will allow optimum exploitation of astronomical spectra obtained
with large radio and optical telescopes. Key astronomical applications include
the elimination of false positives in exoplanet searches in the near-IR by
accurate characterization of spectral line broadening in star spots, and the
accurate determination of molecular column densities from radio observations of
circumstellar envelopes. This project will train undergraduate and graduate
students and a postdoctoral fellow in advanced laboratory astrophysics
techniques. Additionally, the research team will conduct activities to engage
students and teachers at the Arizona State University (ASU) Preparatory Academy
in the physical sciences, and it will participate in ASU's "Science Is Fun"
program to provide science enrichment to K-12 students, many of whom come from
backgrounds underrepresented in science.