* 1715323
* Collaborative Research:   Spectra of Linear Differential Operators and Turbulence in Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Vladimir Zakharov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 142,401.00

Nonlinear evolution equations, also known as soliton equations, are used to
model a wide variety of physical systems, such as ocean waves or fiber optic
communications. Many such equations, for example the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV)
equation for waves in shallow water, have the exciting feature that many of
their solutions can be given exactly by an explicit formula. This allows one to
develop a precise understanding of the underlying physical processes. However,
the range of conditions for which exact solutions are currently known is
restrictive, inhibiting the use of such solutions in real-world applications.
This project aims to find larger families of exact solutions to soliton
equations, and use these solutions to develop statistical theories of the
corresponding physical systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the
project is to construct and study new families of solutions of soliton equations
such as KdV, Nonlinear Schrödinger, and Kadomtsev-Petviashvili. These solutions
are obtained as limits of multisoliton solutions, and are bounded and non-
decreasing at infinity. They are described by a Riemann-Hilbert problem and can
be efficiently computed numerically. The first goal is a rigorous mathematical
description of these new solutions. The PIs will investigate to what extent
these solutions solve the initial value problem for KdV and related systems.
They will study spectral properties of the associated linear operators and
construct non-periodic one-dimensional ideal conductors. Finally, the PIs will
develop a statistical theory of integrable turbulence for KdV and other soliton
equations.