* 1715413
* Modeling Dual Active Galactic Nuclei in Mergers: Unique Probes of Black Hole Inspiral and Growth
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Laura Blecha, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 12/31/2020
* USD 285,550.00

Collisions between galaxies can dramatically change their structure and are key
phases in their evolution. These merger events can also strongly influence the
supermassive black holes that live in the centers of galaxies. Supermassive
black holes grow by consuming gas in their surroundings, and galaxy merger
events can funnel a fresh gas supply to the black holes, triggering a phase of
rapid growth. Eventually, the black holes from each merging galaxy also form a
close black hole binary, which produces powerful gravitational waves---ripples
in the fabric of spacetime---that could be detected in the near future. However,
the formation timescale for black hole binaries remains highly uncertain,
hampering efforts to predict their gravitational wave signals. Moreover, the
connection between galaxy mergers and black hole fueling is still actively
debated, an issue complicated by the fact that signatures of black hole fueling
are often hidden by intervening gas and dust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator's (PI's) work will address these critical limitations in the
understanding of black hole fueling. Using simulations of galaxy and black hole
evolution, the PI will determine the connection between mergers and black hole
fueling and make predictions for future observations, including observations
with the upcoming James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). The PI will also provide
new constraints on the timescale for black hole binaries to become detectable
gravitational-wave sources. In addition, the PI will initiate a Women in Physics
&amp; Astronomy program at Florida, including a multi-level mentoring program
and a seminar series on professional development and equity &amp; inclusion
topics. This program will encourage retention of junior female scientists,
create stronger ties between the physics and astronomy departments, and promote
an inclusive climate that is actively welcoming to members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy mergers are key phases in the evolution of
galaxies and their central supermassive black holes (BHs). Mergers can
dramatically change galaxies' structure and trigger new star formation as well
as rapid BH fueling. These events also lead to the formation of close BH
binaries, which are powerful sources of gravitational waves (GWs) that should be
detectable in the near future. However, BH binary inspiral timescales remain
highly uncertain, hampering GW predictions, and the connection between galaxy
mergers and BH fueling is still actively debated. Empirical studies are
complicated by the fact that signatures of active BH growth are often obscured
by intervening gas and dust. The PI's work will address these critical
limitations in the ability to interpret observations of BH fueling and inspiral
in mergers. JWST will soon transform the view of BH and galaxy evolution, and
the advent of the GW era has amplified the need for better constraints on the
low-frequency GW source population. Now is the ideal time to undertake a study
of BH fueling and inspiral in merging galaxies that makes testable predictions
for near-future observations. The PI will use hydrodynamic simulations and
radiative transfer calculations to quantify the intrinsic connection between
mergers and BH fueling, determine the role of selection biases in surveys of
merger-driven BH fueling, and place semi-empirical constraints on BH pair
inspiral.