* 1715504
* Some Mathematical Problems Associated with Hyporheic Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Xiaoming Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/2018
* USD 0.00

1715504&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The supply of fresh water is under
pressure for many reasons, including natural variability, population growth,
expansion of business activities, rapid urbanization, climate change, depletion
of aquifers, and pollution. Therefore, there is an urgent need to study water
resources, especially unfrozen fresh water in terms of surface water and
groundwater. Surface water and groundwater interact with each other. A prime
example is the hyporheic zone, a portion of the bed and bank of a river or
stream where surface water and groundwater mix, exchanging solutes and water at
various scales. The hyporheic zone is critical to the ecology of river
corridors. In particular, it is important in controlling the flux and location
of water exchange between stream and subsurface; providing a habitat for benthic
and interstitial organisms; providing a spawning ground and refuge for certain
species of fish; providing a rooting zone for aquatic plants; serving as an
important zone for cycling of carbon, energy, and nutrients; providing a natural
attenuation zone for certain pollutants by biodegradation, sorption, and mixing;
and moderating river water temperature. The purpose of this project is to
develop and analyze better models of flows in the hyporheic zone in order to
improve our understanding of the fundamental physical processes associated with
hyporheic flows. Graduate students participate in the work of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and colleagues study the Navier-
Stokes-Darcy-heat system that models coupled surface water-groundwater
interaction together with thermal effects. The mathematical model presents
several challenges: the strong nonlinearity associated with the Navier-Stokes
flow in the river, the complications arising from including physically and
biologically important thermal effects, the substantial disparity of spatial and
temporal scales between flows in the river and in surrounding porous media
(small Darcy number), the uncertainty associated with the geometric form and the
permeability of the riverbed and riverbank, and the different physics in
different parts of the physical domain. Although these difficult issues have
been studied separately before for some subsystems of the models under
consideration here, the need for a better integration of the physical and
biological factors relevant to flow and transport in the hyporheic zone requires
a more comprehensive model. The work of the investigator proceeds in steps.
First is mathematical analysis of the model in terms of asymptotic behavior in
the physically important small Darcy number regime. Second, he designs,
analyzes, and implements accurate and efficient decoupled numerical methods for
the model so that the results can be compared to experiments performed by
collaborators. Third, he uses the model to assess the validity of various
simplifications utilized by the water resources community in hyporheic flow
studies. Graduate students participate in the work of the project.