* 1715444
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Experimental and Computational Approach to Discover Biomechanical Mechanisms of Leaf Epidermal Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Joseph Turner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 385,927.00

The size and shape of leaves are important agricultural traits that strongly
influence crop yield. The growth of individual cells collectively determine leaf
morphology, and a major challenge in biology is to understand how cellular
constituents pattern the cell wall to influence local rates and directions of
cell growth. This project focuses on discovering the growth control mechanisms
of the outer layer of cells that form the leaf epidermis. The epidermis serves
both as a waterproof layer that protects the leaf and as a growing biomechanical
shell that influences the size and shape of the leaf. This project aims to
understand how cell signaling and cytoskeletal patterning is controlled among
adherent cells and how local growth can scale to influence tissue or whole leaf
traits. The Broader Impact activities include interdisciplinary training for all
members of the team (including undergraduates and high school students). A K-12
summer camp module will also be developed for the Young Nebraska Scientist
Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arabidopsis leaf epidermal morphogenesis
system is ideally suited for major breakthroughs. However, progress has been
slow because of the lack of reliable phenotyping methods to define genetic
pathways and analyze the non-intuitive biomechanical interactions that occur
among the cytoskeleton, cell wall, and cell geometry. The interdisciplinary
research team will create a new experimental and computational approach to
discover how microtubule-dependent patterning of cellulose microfibrils drives
polarized growth in the epidermis. The resulting computational models will make
predictions about the how cells generate the spatial and temporal
heterogeneities in the cell wall that drive interdigitated growth of these jig-
saw-puzzle shaped cells. Importantly, biomechanical feedback control of the cell
wall on the microtubule cytoskeleton is a general feature of plant development.
The proposed research will generate data and create integrated computational
models that reveal how cell wall stress patterns influence cortical microtubules
and tissue morphogenesis.