* 1715681
* Physical regulation of cellular respiration by membrane lipid composition
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 625,340.00

The chemical energy that cells use for growth is generated using respiration, a
universal set of reactions that occur partly within lipid membranes. Lipid
composition is used by cells to modulate the properties of their membranes,
which could act as important physical structures for reactions that occur during
respiration. In this project, novel synthetic biology approaches will be used to
investigate biophysical roles for lipid chemistry and membrane structure in
respiratory activity. This research will provide mechanistic insight into
respiratory function and cell physiology that is applicable to a wide variety of
organisms and is relevant to understanding the interplay of diet and disease in
human health. In addition to the research activities, this grant will support
education and outreach efforts that focus on scientific training for
underprivileged high school and undergraduate students. These efforts will teach
students fundamental concepts in metabolism and provide hands-on experience with
emerging biotechnology research projects in order to support their future
careers in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to engineer
fatty acid composition in bacteria have led to the observation that fluidizing
lipid components, such as unsaturated lipids, act as a general regulator of
respiratory metabolism. The project will test the hypothesis that respiratory
flux by is controlled by the lipid-mediated diffusion rates of electron
transport chain components. This will be done with a combination of biophysical
measurements, physiological experiments, and physical modeling of bacterial
respiratory chains. Lipid composition varies tremendously among prokaryotes and
this could partly be understood through differences in their metabolic
requirements. The project will therefore use synthetic biology approaches to
assess the metabolic effects of isoprenoid-based membrane components that
modulate membrane structure in a heterologous bacterial host. Lipid composition
is also tightly regulated in mitochondrial membranes, which carry out
respiration in all eukaryotic cells. The project will use engineered yeast
strains to systematically investigate the role of fatty acid composition in
mitochondrial structure and respiratory activity. These systems will serve as
models for understanding how lipid composition can affect metabolic functions
and may be broadly applicable to many important processes.