* 1715710
* Metabolic remodeling during Bacillus subtilis biofilm development
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Daniel Amador-Noguez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Most bacteria naturally congregate to form complex communities called biofilms
through an elaborate process that involves secretion of a thick, gooey substance
that allows cells to stick to each other and to surfaces, thus providing the
community with protection against harsh environments, other bacteria and
predators, and antibiotics. These biofilms are abundant in natural environments
and play an important role in many clinical, industrial, and ecological
settings. For example, bacterial biofilms found in rivers and lakes are critical
components of food chains; biofilms in oil and gas pipelines can lead to severe
corrosion problems; biofilms associated with agricultural crops can either cause
disease or be beneficial to plants; and biofilms in hospitals contribute
significantly to risk of infection transmission and to the staying power of
infections. Due to the ubiquity and significant impacts of biofilms on human
activities, there is a clear need to better understand how these biofilms
develop. This project will investigate a critical but poorly understood aspect
of biofilms: the role that the most important general reactions of the cell
(called central metabolism) play during biofilm development. This project will
provide the first in depth investigation of how the general reactions in a cell
change during bacterial biofilm formation, and has the potential to
fundamentally transform our understanding of what really happens to cells when
they join a biofilm community and how we might be able to encourage or interfere
with biofilm formation. In addition, this project will have significant broader
impacts on education through the participation of graduate and undergraduate
students in research activities and training, as well as through outreach
activities that foster enthusiasm for the field of
microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis in this project is
that dynamic remodeling of central carbon and nitrogen metabolism constitutes an
essential component of the highly coordinated physiological response that takes
place during biofilm development. Using Bacillus subtilis as a model organism,
the work will integrate state-of-the-art systems-level metabolomic and proteomic
approaches, microscopy, and quantitative computational modeling, to generate the
following outcomes: 1) a systems-level quantitative understanding of how
metabolism is remodeled during biofilm formation; 2) elucidation of driving
regulatory mechanisms controlling metabolic remodeling during biofilm formation;
3) novel insights regarding metabolic heterogeneity within biofilm cell
subpopulations; and 4) elucidation of the physiological relevance of major
metabolic alterations during biofilm development. These results will
significantly advance the understanding of the underlying logic and unifying
principles behind the complex signaling systems of the biofilm regulatory
network and will provide a holistic and quantitative understanding of the role
of metabolism in biofilm development.