* 1715019
* The Role of Lysine Deacetylases in Regulating Transcriptional Dynamics at Glucocorticoid-activated Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Catharine Smith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Cells adapt to changes in their environment through chemical communication
networks (signaling pathways) that cause changes in gene expression. Enzymes
that chemically modify other proteins are key components of signaling pathways.
Lysine acetylation is a protein modification conserved from bacteria to humans.
Studies have revealed its widespread occurrence on cellular proteins but its
roles in signaling-modulated gene expression are poorly understood. The enzymes
that regulate acetylation, lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) and lysine
deacetylases (KDACs), are considered to promote and impair gene expression,
respectively. However, recent studies have shown that KDACs are concentrated at
active genes and can promote their expression, but the underlying mechanisms are
unknown. Genes are expressed in bursts of transcriptional activity interspersed
with periods of inactivity. Signaling pathways change gene expression by
modulating the frequency and/or the size of active bursts. Understanding how
KDACs affect bursting patterns of genes will allow insight into the mechanisms
underlying their ability to promote gene expression. This is important because
chemicals that inhibit KDACs are present in the environment as natural products
of unicellular organisms, pollutants, and drugs. Increased knowledge of the
function of KDACs in gene expression is essential to assessing the impact of
their inhibitors on living organisms. The work will be performed by several
undergraduates and a postdoctoral fellow. The incorporation of undergraduates
into the research team will provide mentoring experience to the postdoctoral
fellow and serve under-represented groups through several University of Arizona
programs that provide research opportunities to undergraduates from these
groups. Research team members will be trained in critical thinking, problem-
solving, and communication skills that will enable them to pursue careers that
contribute to strengthening and diversifying the national scientific workforce.
The research findings will be disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed
journals and presentations at local and national
conferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine how
KDACs regulate transcriptional bursting patterns of genes that are activated by
glucocorticoids, a type of steroid hormone. The first aim will use single
molecule fluorescent in situ hybridization and live cell imaging of
transcription to assay the effects of KDAC inhibitors on bursting kinetics. The
second aim is focused on determining where KDACs contribute to transcription in
the regions in and around genes using global run-on sequencing. The study
results will contribute to building improved models of signaling-induced
transcriptional regulation that incorporate transcriptional dynamics and the
positive contributions of KDACs to the transcriptional cycle.