* 1715206
* Modeling Galaxies in the Modern Era: A Synergy between Theory and Observations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Desika Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 311,013.00

Charting the formation and growth of galaxies, such as our own Milky Way, is a
fundamental goal of modern astrophysics. The investigator studies galaxies
forming their stars and changes in the appearance of galaxies with time. The
investigator will study how the elements seen in galaxies change as stars form,
then later explode. Answering these questions requires a technique called
Spectral Energy Distribution (SED) fitting, where astronomers model the light
coming from a galaxy, then infer its physical properties. However, associated
with the fitting technique are potential errors that could result in a
misunderstanding of the physical properties of galaxies. The investigator will
model potential errors and therefore derive a more accurate view of galaxies in
the distant Universe. The investigators will improve on their theoretical models
for galaxies by running large-scale computer simulations of galaxies forming and
changing. These simulations use many millions of computer hours. They will model
galaxy changes with time, starting from soon after the Big Bang until present
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will also work with high school
teachers visiting in the campus in the summer to train them in the software and
background material that will accompany the lesson plans. The lesson modules
will leverage the capabilities of both the World-Wide Telescope and the Galaxy
Zoo projects. The investigator will transform the cosmological simulations into
fly-through interactive movies to show the public the beauty of these
fascinating simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's goal for this
project is testing SED fitting techniques. They will employ a series of
cosmological galaxy formation simulations in which individual galaxies change
with from early Universe to the present time. They will select the galaxies to
zoom in on from state-of-the-art cosmological hydrodynamic simulations and run
models ranging from Milky Way mass through the progenitors of the most massive
clusters at present epoch. The investigators will next use their detailed
simulations and compute what the astronomers would see, given the telescope
characteristics. Because astronomers use programs to deduce the physical
properties from observations, the investigator can compare the galaxy simulation
with the values deduced from the simulated observations. This will test the
accuracy of observational results, and the comparison will be used to devise
better ways of making astronomical measurements. Their main goals are to improve
models of star formation rate, stellar mass, and metallicity estimates.