* 1715719
* Studying Planet Formation by Mapping Small-scale Structures in Circumstellar Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Andrea Isella, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2021
* USD 487,087.00

Planets formed from material in disks that once surrounded the stars they orbit.
Part of this process includes this material clumping into larger grains or
pieces. With the new Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) and
Jansky Very Large Array (VLA) radio telescopes, it is now possible to see
material well into the zones in many of these disks where planets are forming.
In this project, the investigators will look first for clumps of dust of
different sizes and structures in disks around other stars. They will then study
how the different structures affect the distribution of dust pieces having
different sizes. Finally, they will measure how the dust pieces are spread in
the disk with respect to gases of different molecules. The goal of this project
is to learn whether the different observed structures trap solid dust pieces.
This project serves the national interest by advancing our understanding of the
science behind the formation of planetary systems. A postdoctoral scholar and a
graduate student will conduct the research. All of the raw and processed data
will be available to the scientific community.

This project will study the formation of planets by mapping small-scale
structures in nearby circumstellar disks around pre-main sequence stars, using
ALMA and VLA radio observations that will resolve material well into the planet-
forming zones of a large sample of disks. The research has three main goals.
First, quantify the prevalence and morphology of small-scale structures in the
distribution of dust particles. This will be achieved by mapping the 1.3 mm dust
continuum emission in 20 nearby disks at an angular resolution of about 0.04".
Second, study how these structures affect the distribution of dust grains with
different sizes. To do this, multi-wavelength observations between 0.87 mm and 1
cm, which probe the distribution of mm- and cm-sized dust grains, will be
acquired. Third, measure the distribution of dust particles relative to the
molecular gas. This goal will be achieved by mapping the molecular line emission
(e.g., CO) from disks characterized by substructures at an angular resolution
comparable to that of the continuum maps. The goal is to understand if the
observed structures trap solid dust particles, therefore solving the long-
standing radial migration problem. A postdoctoral scholar and a graduate student
will conduct the data analysis and publication of the results. Additionally, the
scientific community will receive access to the full suite of data products
derived from this program.