* 1715661
* Collaborative Research: Mergers of Massive Black Holes at the Centers of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Zoltan Haiman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2022
* USD 436,322.00

The investigators will explore how black holes (BHs) grow and shine over long
timescales. Most galaxies have enormous black holes at their centers, surrounded
by stars, planets, dust, and ionized gas. Stars formed by this material can also
feed the black hole. These black holes have masses that are up to billions of
times the mass of the Sun. Galaxies repeatedly merge with other galaxies during
their lifetimes. Thus, super massive black hole pairs form frequently. These
pairs of black holes make ripples in space and time called gravitational waves.
As such, they are prime targets for gravitational wave detectors. Gravitational
wave simulations provide a new way to explore the Universe. The investigators'
computer simulations will help determine how black hole binaries interact with
surrounding material. The investigators' simulations will help astronomers
detect merging black holes and understand the regions surrounding the black
holes. The investigators will train students and develop new numerical codes
that can be used for a wide variety of science and engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will numerically simulate
the long-term merger dynamics of supermassive black hole binaries (SMBHB) with
disks of gas, planets, and stars surrounding the black holes. The investigators
will model, in detail, the hydrodynamical reaction of the disk to the orbital
motion of the SMBHBs as well as the back-reaction of the disk on this orbital
motion. These theorists seek to answer several questions important for
understanding astronomical observations. They will model the time it takes for
the two black holes to merge in the presence of different types of gas disks.
Observationally, it is important to estimate how bright the region surrounding
the SMBHB will be during merger. The results will be applied to interpret
observations of the stochastic gravitational wave background, periodicities in
quasar light-curves in large time-domain surveys, and gravitational wave
strength of stellar-mass BHs.