* 1715512
* Collaborative Research: A Comprehensive Picture of Black Hole Growth  Over Cosmic Time: a multi-wavelength synthesis approach
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* C. Megan Urry, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,105.00

Black holes form when gravity pulls enormous amounts of matter into a small
enough volume. Predicted by Einstein's Theory of General Relativity, they were
first detected in astronomical observations of a special kind of galaxy called
an "active galaxy"---distinguished by the fact that a very big black hole at its
center is growing at a rapid rate and radiating enough light to heat the entire
galaxy. From detailed measurements of that light in thousands of active
galaxies, the investigators will learn when and where these black holes grew
over the past 13 billion years of cosmic time. They will also connect that
growth to measurements of the black hole masses at different epochs in order to
form a comprehensive understanding of how and when black holes grew and how much
energy was radiated into the galaxy as a result. This in turn supplies a vital
ingredient to theorists' models of how galaxies like our own Milky Way formed
and evolved. This project will advance discovery while promoting teaching,
training, learning and excellence through a collaboration with the Meyerhoff
Scholars program at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will identify up to 16,000 active galaxies
in three surveys (called GOODS, COSMOS, and Stripe 82X), which have
complementary combinations of depth (sensitivity) and area on the sky. The
active galaxies will be identified by the amount of X-ray light they emit. Their
distances will be measured using optical and infrared spectroscopic observations
at large telescopes to determine the redshift (i.e., the wavelength shift of
atomic emission or absorption lines) of a large fraction of the active galaxies.
For the rest, the investigators will estimate redshifts by analyzing the total
infrared, optical, and ultraviolet light that they emit. Catalogs listing the
X-ray, infrared, and optical brightness of each active galaxy will be made
publicly available, along with their redshifts, so that anyone can mine the data
to answer other astronomical questions. In this project, the investigators will
analyze the overall spectral energy distribution of each active galaxy to deduce
its dust and gas content. For selected subsets of data, the investigators will
measure key characteristics like black hole mass, luminosity, amount of dust and
gas (important for understanding whether any light is occluded), black hole
growth rate, and the number of other galaxies near each active galaxy. The
investigators will combine these measurements to model the growth of black holes
over time, constrained by the data acquired. The investigators will also search
for evidence of the interplay between black hole growth at the center of the
active galaxy and star formation throughout the active galaxy; this will be most
apparent in massive galaxies, like our own Milky Way. All these investigations
will be published and made openly available to everyone.