* 1715384
* Spin Labeling Studies of Biomolecular Flexibility and Hydration
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Gail Fanucci, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 822,459.00

The process of life involves numerous interactions between folded and unfolded
large biological molecules. Additionally, the specific folded shape and changes
in the shapes of biological molecules can regulate cell cycle events and
important cellular functions. Traditionally, all interactions between molecules
were thought to fit together like a lock-and-key. However, recent research has
shown that nearly 30% of biological molecules are unfolded and interactions
between unfolded biological molecules can be "specific" and "transient". Many of
these transient interactions involve phase separation (like oil and water) to
form sub-cellular structures responsible for clustering the necessary
ingredients necessary for cellular functions required for life and replication.
This work aims to understand how water concentration and movement at the surface
of these biological molecules can alter their shape, structural fluctuations,
and phase separation; thus shedding light on important aspects of cellular
control and regulation. The project will also provide unique training
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school students that include
exchange experiences with collaborators and attendance at conferences and
workshops. Diverse undergraduate students will be recruited for research
experiences that will enable them to integrate their undergraduate course work
into a research environment. High school students from underprivileged
backgrounds will be recruited into the University of Florida Summer Science
Teaching Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expanding discovery of novel RNAs
and their unique multifaceted cellular capabilities has resulted in a rich arena
of research interfacing RNA biology, chemistry, and biophysics. Intrinsically
disordered proteins (IDPs) have also found a growing appreciation for their role
in regulating cellular function through the formation of membraneless sub-
nuclear organelles. Specifically, this work utilizes site-directed spin-labeling
(SDSL) electron paramagnetic resonance approaches to characterize conformational
sampling, dynamics and hydration environments of the glycine riboswitch; a
large, dynamic RNA that modulates gene expression and select IDP
proteins/peptides. The results will reveal how solution environmental conditions
modulate conformational flexibility and hydration environment and clarify
details of a model of conformational equilibrium that describes interaptamer
interactions upon ligand binding that lead to regulatory function (in this case
gene expression). This work will also add to the development of spin-labeling
magnetic resonance applications in large RNAs; thus laying the foundation for
work that can be utilized in other RNA systems. Investigations on the impact of
environment on IDPs will provide molecular level details of how environmental
parameters (salt, concentration and other molecules) can modulate hydration,
structure and phase separation. An ancillary aspect of this project is to
continue to optimize Overhauser dynamic nuclear polarization (ODNP) technologies
for investigations of macromolecular hydration environment at molecular
concentrations found within membraneless organelles such as the nuclear bodies.