* 1715947
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Robust Physical Layer Security with Channel Knowledge Uncertainty
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ravi Tandon, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless communication infrastructure is poised to make a significant impact
beyond cellular networks, such as in emerging internet-of-things (IoT) networks,
device-to-device communications, and autonomous systems. Such systems may not
have the full-fledged infrastructure or capabilities to achieve confidentiality
via traditional cryptographic approaches. Furthermore, the broadcast nature of
the wireless transmission medium can make them prone to information leakage
through eavesdropping. This project develops new approaches to achieve provable
wireless security in the presence of uncertainty about the wireless channel. The
results of this project can have a wide reaching societal impact through
mechanisms that can enable light-weight, and provably secure communication over
the physical layer, and contribute to trustworthy operation of wireless
infrastructure for various emerging applications. In addition to the research
impact, the project will have an educational impact through curriculum
development and the training of undergraduate and graduate students, in addition
to outreach activities through the University of Arizona Science, Engineering
and Mathematics (ASEM) scholars program and the STEM learning
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last decade, several significant and
fascinating insights have emerged on how to leverage knowledge of wireless
channels to achieve secrecy. Despite these advances, the practical viability of
physical layer security faces obstacles, primarily due to the fact that channel
knowledge is available imperfectly, and is almost always unavailable from
adversarial entities. This project will lay the foundations for achieving
secrecy in scenarios where the precise knowledge about the wireless channel is
minimal or non-existent. The key underpinnings behind making wireless security
robust to channel knowledge uncertainty are argued to be rooted in the
fundamental properties of wireless channels: path loss, fading, and inter-symbol
interference. Instead of viewing these as negative attributes of the wireless
channel, this project will devise approaches that systematically leverage
statistical heterogeneity in these properties to gain advantage against external
adversaries, even without the precise knowledge of the wireless channel. In
particular, the specific goals of the project are: (i) to leverage heterogeneity
of inter-symbol interference to achieve secrecy with only statistical knowledge
about the channel; (ii) to develop principled encoding/decoding mechanisms that
guarantee secrecy with only topological knowledge about the network; (iii) to
generalize these concepts to large-scale single-hop and multi-hop networks with
untrusted nodes; and (iv) to obtain information-theoretic bounds on the
corresponding secrecy capacities for the various models with statistical channel
knowledge.