* 1715174
* Structural Studies of Proteins by Paramagnetic Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Christopher Jaroniec, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 876,518.00

Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a spectroscopic technique, which
enables atomistic studies of structure, dynamics and interactions to be
performed for proteins and nucleic acids in the context of large bio-molecular
(supramolecular) assemblies. A wide range of such assemblies, which include
amyloids (molecular assembiles responsible for neurodegenerative diseases),
lipid membrane protein complexes and chromatin, play important roles in
fundamental biological processes and mechanisms. In this project, the PI is
developing new solid-state NMR methodologies for the determination of protein
structures and interactions, which focus on measurements of long-range
structural restraints and overcome some of the key challenges associated with
conventional solid-state NMR techniques. The research aims of the project are
integrated with education and outreach activities involving diverse groups of
graduate, undergraduate and high-school students. These activities, which
include intensive, full-time summer research internship programs for
undergraduate and local high-school students organized annually in the PI's
laboratory, aim to directly impact students in the earliest stages of their
educational experience by introducing them to cutting edge interdisciplinary
research at the interface of chemistry, biology, and physics, building their
confidence in themselves and their scientific abilities, and encouraging them to
think of science in a broad, discovery-based manner. The ultimate goal is to
increase student participation and retention in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique feature of the proposed novel NMR
methods being developed lies in their use of covalently-attached paramagnetic
tags, which enable up to ~20 Ã… electron-nucleus distance restraints to be
simultaneously accessed for multiple protein sites via multidimensional NMR
approaches. Already having recently demonstrated that it is possible to
elucidate protein structures in a de novo manner by using paramagnetic solid-
state NMR, the current project aims to further advance this methodology by
developing compact and versatile metal binding tags that permit measurements of
a broad range of paramagnetic effects, systematically exploring the limits of
high-resolution protein structure determination by paramagnetic solid-state NMR,
and expanding the realm of applicability of this technology beyond model
globular proteins in microcrystalline phase to large assemblies of biological
macromolecules.