* 1715505
* Dynamics, Structure, and Function of Proteins by NMR and Computation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Rafael Bruschweiler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 862,963.00

Critical functions of living systems, such as humans, animals, microbes, and
plants, at the microscopic level are often carried out by large biological
molecules, which include many different types of proteins. Most proteins adopt
multiple shapes (conformations) that incessantly interconvert into each other.
The balance between these conformations and their life spans allows proteins to
attain properties that are necessary to perform a variety of important
biological functions. This includes the specific recognition of large and small
molecules for the formation of molecular complexes, including interactions with
drugs, the acceleration of chemical reactions, and many other interactions
essential for living systems. The project aims at a deeper understanding of
these fundamental processes, which will assist the development new cures and the
engineering of proteins with new properties. This project provides
interdisciplinary training and research opportunities for undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdocs at Ohio State in programs that serve
significant numbers of students from demographically underrepresented groups.
The new CCIC NMR center will be utilized to introduce a broader public to the
discoveries and benefits of basic and applied molecular research. High-school
students will have the opportunity to perform and analyze NMR experiments of
their own samples. NMR workshops will be organized to introduce and train future
NMR users from academia and industries in Ohio. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
realistic representation of conformational ensembles of proteins depicting both
structure and dynamics at atomistic detail is of fundamental biophysical
importance as it provides a better understanding of protein properties and
function, such as stability, molecular interactions, recognition, cooperativity,
and allostery. During this project, new and broadly applicable methods will be
developed for a comprehensive description of the conformational dynamics of
globular and intrinsically disordered proteins (IDP) by combining nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy with advanced computer simulations, and
applying these methods to a variety of molecular systems. This includes studies
of the allosteric regulation of the sodium-calcium exchanger NCX via its large
cytoplasmic loop and the interaction modes of different IDPs with synthetic
nanoparticles. New methods for the rapid and simultaneous screening of protein
side-chain dynamics on the picosecond-to-nanosecond timescale and the
millisecond timescale will be developed and applied to biologically important
protein systems. Heterogeneous dynamics behavior observed in protein loops will
serve for the systematic improvement of molecular dynamics force fields. The
research will produce new experiments, web servers, and software for the more
accurate and realistic characterization of proteins in their native environment
and their interaction with nanoparticles. The combination of NMR spectroscopy
with high-performance computation is expected to become applicable to a wide
range of biomolecular systems. These tools will be made available to the
structural biology, biophysics, and biomolecular NMR communities. Their
application will enhance the understanding of protein behavior and function and
serve as input for the engineering of proteins with new properties and the
design of better drugs.