* 1715525
* Interaction of Amyloidogenic Proteins with Asymmetric Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Daniel Raleigh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 749,999.00

Many important biological processes involved the interaction of proteins with
cell membranes. It is thought that such interactions have a role in the killing
of bacteria by certain anti-bacterial proteins. They may also play an important
role in the death of human cells during amyloid diseases such as Alzheimer's
disease. The importance of membrane protein interactions extends beyond biology
and the templating of specific structures via interactions with membranes has
applications in bio-inspired materials. High resolution molecular level studies
of the interactions of proteins with membranes could lead to the design of
better anti-bacterial agents and the development of novel materials.
Unfortunately, investigators have been forced to use relatively crude mimics of
biological membranes that do not capture critical aspects of natural cell
membranes. In particular, natural cell membranes are asymmetric in the sense
that the inside layer of the membrane has a different composition than the
outside layer. This effect has important consequences for their behavior. This
project will exploit recent technical breakthroughs to study the interactions of
a representative member of an important class of human proteins with realistic
asymmetric model membranes. The research will provide an unprecedented high
resolution view of how proteins interact with biological membranes and induce
cell death. The project includes significant efforts devoted to training the
next generation of STEM students including initiatives designed to increase
undergraduate participation in research and to promote women in the STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will define the principles of
membrane-catalyzed aggregation of intrinsically disordered polypeptides (IDPs)
using biologically relevant asymmetric membranes with a focus on the
amyloidogenic polypeptide IAPP. The aggregation of polypeptides on membranes is
a general feature of amyloid fiber formation and likely plays a role in the
function of certain anti-microbial polypeptides. Unfortunately, existing model
membranes are very poor mimics of the relevant plasma membranes. This has
hindered biophysical studies of membrane induced self-assembly and membrane
activity, making it exceptionally challenging to connect high resolution
biophysical studies with the situation in vivo. This project will use asymmetric
membranes with physiologically relevant lipid composition and cholesterol
together with new methods to probe protein aggregation at high resolution. IAPP
is chosen as a model system because it is broadly representative of amyloid
formation by IDPs and because of the wealth of biochemical, biophysical and
biological data available for this system. The principles that emerge from the
research will be applicable to a wide range of systems including other
amyloidogenic proteins and anti-microbial peptides. This project is supported by
the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate.