* 1715909
* Collaborative Research: Examining the role of nitrogen exchange in the formation of algal blooms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Silvia Newell, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Cyanobacterial algal blooms plague lakes and rivers across the globe. These
toxic blooms damage the health of lake ecosystems, threaten the public health of
surrounding communities, and harm local economies due a reduction in tourism and
fishing industries. Blooms are hard to combat, mainly because the factors that
contribute to the successful growth of bloom-forming microbes are not yet fully
understood. This project will provide new insight into how algal blooms occur by
focusing on how the algae interact with surrounding bacteria to obtain and
exchange the nutrients, especially nitrogen, that allow the blooms to occur.
Through a combination of experimental manipulation, measurements, and
physiological modeling, the work will provide a detailed picture of how nitrogen
exchange promotes algal blooms. This results will help environmental managers
develop effective mitigation strategies to combat toxic blooms in lakes and
rivers. Experiments will be conducted by undergraduate students at James Madison
and Wright State Universities, and much of the research will take place in an
undergraduate classroom setting, providing excellent training for students early
in their science careers. The researchers will also work with homeschooled
students in rural areas, inspiring potential young scientists.

In aquatic systems, interactions between primary producers and heterotrophic
bacteria alter water chemistry and shape ecosystem function. The goal of this
project is to quantify and model interactions, specifically nitrogen exchange,
between heterotrophic bacteria and a model primary producer in the phycosphere
(the microenvironment surrounding a phytoplankton cell). This work will: 1)
quantify the reliance of the model freshwater cyanobacterium Microcystis on the
heterotrophic bacteria in the phycosphere; 2) quantify and model the transfer of
nitrogen between Microcystis and specific phycosphere partners, using co-culture
experiments with a single heterotrophic partner, and profile the transcriptome
while simultaneously performing targeted nitrogen-related metabolite analysis;
and 3) expand the model of nitrogen transfer to the entire phycosphere
consortium by tracing and quantifying the flow of different nitrogen compounds
through the symbiotic phycosphere consortium.