* 1715606
* NSF/MCB-BSF: DYNAMIC MEASUREMENTS OF NUCLEAR MECHANOTRANSDUCTION IN SKELETAL MUSCLE CELLS IN VITRO AND IN VIVO
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jan Lammerding, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2021
* USD 441,755.00

Cells in an organism respond to mechanical forces, enabling the cells to adapt
to their physical environment. This "mechanotransduction" process, in which
mechanical stimuli is translated into biochemical signals that control cellular
functions, is particularly relevant in muscle tissue: when exercised, muscle
increases in size (hypertrophy), while lack of activity results in progressive
muscle loss (atrophy). The underlying mechanism by which muscle cells "sense"
the mechanical input remains unclear. This project examines the hypothesis that
the nucleus, which houses the cell's genomic information, serves as a cellular
mechanosensor. The diverse and multidisciplinary research in this project
provides an outstanding training environment for biology and engineering
students alike. The Lammerding lab will host and mentor high-school and Cornell
pre-freshmen students, particularly underrepresented minority and first-
generation college students, as part of newly created outreach modules.

The work will involve the development of advanced high resolution imaging
approaches in combination with genetic and mechanical perturbation of
subcellular mechanics. This project will provide measurements of the forces
acting on the nucleus during muscle contraction and of the induced deformation
of the cell nucleus. Coupled with an analyses of the induced changes in genome
organization and gene expression, the research will answer if/how force-induced
deformation of the nuclei in muscle cells can induce adaptive responses in gene
expression. Insights gained from this project are not only critical for
understanding how muscles adapt to mechanical stimuli, but will also provide
clues into how other cells, such as those in bones or blood vessels, respond to
their dynamic mechanical environments. This research was funded by a joint
Israeli and United States program in which the NSF provides funding for the US
laboratory, located at Cornell University in New York, while the US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation (BSF)in Israel provides funds for the
collaborating Israeli lab at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot.