* 1715233
* Understanding multistep electron transfer reactions for the design of photsensory proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Brian Crane, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 627,635.00

In biological systems, many metabolic processes involve electron transfer (ET)
reactions, which function to direct the movement of electrons among
macromolecules without dissipating the high free energy needed to drive chemical
transformations. ET is often multi-step in that reactive protein residues act as
waystations to harbor electrons or their vacancies ('holes') during long-range
charge migration. Understanding this so-called electron, or hole, 'hopping' is
important for adapting key properties of proteins for the purpose of energy
conversion. This project will apply spectroscopic and structural techniques to
study the role of multi-step ET in model systems and in native biological light
sensors to test mechanisms and design new functionality. These studies also will
have important prospects for optogenetics, the development and use of engineered
photosensitive proteins for controlling cellular processes, including circadian
rhythms, with light. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate
students in cutting edge research in fields including enzymology, protein
biochemistry, structural biology, spectroscopy, chemical kinetics, and protein
engineering. The collaborative and multidisciplinary nature of the project will
expose students to research that bridges disciplines and scientific cultures.
The project will also couple to an on-going program developed by the PI to
engage students from under-represented groups in scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand multi-step ET reactions
that involve reactive protein side chains (i.e., hopping) in photoactive
proteins. Kinetic and structural studies of a photosensitive model system
composed of redox partners cytochrome c peroxidase and cytochrome c will explore
the reactivity of a Tryptophan/Tyrosine hopping center by systematic
perturbation of the radical environment and incorporation of non-natural amino
acids at the hopping site. Coupled work on hole-hopping in blue-light sensing
cryptochromes and Light- Oxygen- Voltage (LOV) photoreceptors will probe the
biophysical attributes that allow reactive protein side chains to mediate rapid
and stable charge separation in these flavin-containing photosensors. For a new
class of LOV-like protein, multi-step ET involving non-aromatic residues will be
investigated. Redesign of these systems will test hypotheses, confirm mechanisms
and develop tools for applications of optogenetics, the field of engineering
cellular systems to be regulated by light.