* 1715132
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Spatiotemporal Control of EGFR-ERK Signaling in Gene-edited Cell Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alexander Sorkin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 07/31/2021
* USD 531,301.00

In this project, the investigators will develop a new experimental and
computational platform to answer the longstanding biological question of how
cellular receptors generate biochemical signals as they move among various
subcellular compartments. By helping to quantitatively resolve certain
apparently conflicting observations that have recently been made within a
biological system previously thought to be well understood, this project will
add fundamentally new understanding of basic mechanisms of cell signaling that
may have implications across numerous receptor systems in cell biology.
Moreover, due to the broadly important role that receptors, and the biochemical
signals they generate, play in virtually every biological process, the new
quantitative understanding gained will ultimately impact ongoing efforts to
optimally engineer receptor-mediated signaling. This project also includes a
broad and detailed set of integrated educational objectives that leverage the
specific scientific objectives and activities of this project to reach students
at different training stages and from diverse backgrounds. These education and
outreach activities involve innovation upon existing programs at the partnering
institutions as well as the creation of new outreach efforts that will target
larger audiences, such as a summer academy of science for high school students
and a collaboration with the Museum of Science and Industry in Tampa, FL to
develop a live interaction program on cell signaling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
biochemical signaling that results upon ligand binding to receptor tyrosine
kinases is accompanied by receptor clustering and internalization, or
endocytosis. While it has been understood for decades that endocytosis enables
cells to degrade or recycle receptors, the question of how endocytosis
ultimately impacts downstream signal propagation remains wide open. For example,
even for the highly studied epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) the
literature contains highly cited, yet conflicting reports that conclude that
EGFR endocytosis either promotes or impedes downstream signaling through the
extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) pathway. In this project, the investigators
will explore the hypothesis that the intrinsic complexity of the spatiotemporal
signaling regulatory mechanisms creates parameter spaces for both answers to be
true depending on the cellular context. The complexity of the receptor
trafficking and signaling system cannot be fully dissected, however, without
integrating quantitative experimental measurements that faithfully reflect cell
biology with spatiotemporal computational models. Accordingly, the overarching
goal of this project is to combine novel live-cell imaging of gene-edited cell
systems with mechanistic models that capture system complexity with
unprecedented detail to resolve the kinds of conflicting reports previously
mentioned, as well as more recent surprising observations that certain proteins
conventionally thought to remain in complex during signal transduction may
become physically separated through trafficking processes. Ultimately, the
proposed integration of gene-edited cell systems, quantitative live-cell imaging
and biochemical measurements, and a spatiotemporal computational model will lead
to an entirely new quantitative platform to answer these kinds of questions for
EGFR and other receptor signaling systems.