* 1715474
* Collaborative Research:   Spatial Stochastic Rare Events by Asymptotics and Weighted Ensemble Sampling to Understand how Cells Make Space
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jay Newby, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 80,522.00

The surface of a cell is crowded with many different biomolecules. These include
receptors and other large protein molecules that enable the cell to sense its
environment. For example, cells that function as part of the immune system can
sense extra-cellular molecular signals of infection. The cell surface is also a
highly dynamic environment, and the movement and interactions of surface
molecules play a crucial role in the response to extra-cellular signals.
Mathematical modeling enables researchers to study these complex, dynamic,
molecular processes in more detail than is currently afforded by experiments.
The investigators will develop new mathematical approaches and computer
simulation methods tailored to the study of how molecular motion on crowded cell
surfaces influences cellular processes. The developed tools will enable
researchers to predict the sequence of molecular events that initiate cell-cell
interface formation and signaling processes. By enabling computational testing
of novel strategies for biomolecular/cellular engineering, these tools will open
up new means of discovery in areas such as immunotherapeutics. The investigators
will contribute to broadening science participation by training undergraduate
researchers in mathematical biology and scientific computing, and will carry out
pedagogical activities with middle school students from groups underrepresented
in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this research will be on
modeling stochastic rare events in molecular diffusion. In many circumstances
where molecular crowding occurs, un-crowding may also be critical. For example,
in T cells, many large surface molecules must evacuate from a local region of
the cell surface to allow for the T cell to interact with its target. This
collective evacuation is a rare event relative to the timescale of individual
molecular diffusion. The goal of this project is to develop a framework to study
stochastic evacuation, including in rare event limits, and apply this framework
to the T cell surface. Specific aims of this project are to: (1) Develop a
combined asymptotic and computational rare event framework to solve diffusional
evacuation in simple scenarios. (2) Develop enhanced spatially-distributed rare
event methods capable of simulating complex scenarios. (3) Use the developed
tools to understand how T cell surface molecules overcome or exploit rare
evacuation. The mathematical novelty of this project is: the extension of
asymptotic methods to effectively high-dimensional problems; the extension of
computational rare event sampling methods, not only handling space but
harnessing it; and the creation of synergies between asymptotic and
computational approaches in a novel combined framework.