* 1715439
* Stochastic Games for Intergenerational Equity in Mathematical Finance
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Yu-Jui Huang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 186,166.00

Intergenerational conflicts of interest are inevitable to wealth and resource
management in a society. This problem is more pressing now than ever as
demographic change has reached a pivotal point. The combined working-age
population in developed countries is projected to shrink continuously until
2050, while the retired population will grow rapidly. The tension between the
two cohorts, working and retired (or, young and old), is almost certain to
exacerbate, as the wealth of the former is used to support the latter, under
Social Security or many other pension schemes. Yet, the precise economic
consequences are not that apparent. This project aims to elucidate how an
evolving demographic structure affects financial planning in a society. This
will be done at two different levels: one from the eyes of the competing young
and old cohorts, the other from the panoramic perspective of a social planner,
such as a government. Graduate students are involved in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project investigates the interplay
between the young and the old cohorts. It is formulated as a two-player nonzero-
sum game in a stochastic Ramsey model, with the dynamics of demographic
structure explicitly modeled. The goal is to understand how the two cohorts
interact through their consumption and saving decisions, and how an evolving
demographic structure affects their decisions, and the resulting welfare. Nash
equilibrium strategies of the two cohorts will be found and analyzed through a
system of coupled Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations with non-Lipschitz
coefficients. This demands new developments in stochastic differential games and
viscosity solution techniques. The second part of the project handles the social
planner's dilemma: a financial planning strategy deemed optimal today by the
current society may not be optimal from the view of the society in the future,
as the evolving demographics continuously change the overall societal
preference. This leads to a new form of time-inconsistent problems, with non-
exponential and time-dependent discount functions, which will be treated under
an intra-personal game between current and future societies. A new method for
time-inconsistency, called the fixed-point approach, is developed in the
project. It provides a new machinery for constructing time-consistent
strategies, while possessing the potential of less mathematical technicalities.