* 1715892
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Molecular and Structural Mechanism of histone binding by the epigenetic regulator UHRF2
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Brittany Albaugh, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 359,776.00

Epigenetics is a layer of information that exists on top of the regular genome
to regulate the expression of genes; the molecules that orchestrate this
information can contribute to human health and disease. Two epigenetic
molecules, called UHRF1 and UHRF2, have distinct cellular functions, but are not
well characterized at the molecular level. The proposed research seeks to
determine the molecular differences by which UHRF1 and UHRF2 interact with
epigenetic material. The project will establish a productive and collaborative
research program that provides valuable scientific training for ~12-14
undergraduate students at Eastern Michigan University (EMU). Strong mentorship
and cross-disciplinary training will provide students with critical thinking and
research skills so they are prepared to succeed in future biomedical careers.
The research plan will also be integrated into undergraduate biochemistry lab
courses to give additional students the learning benefits of research. Together,
the proposed work will strengthen the academic and research environment at EMU
and increase basic knowledge in the area of epigenetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Histone reader proteins engage epigenetic modifications
and play a central role in the regulation of many nuclear processes such as
transcription, DNA replication and DNA repair. The detailed molecular mechanisms
by which many of these proteins mediate histone recognition remain unknown; thus
this represents a major gap in our current understanding of how these proteins
impart specificity and regulate the epigenetic apparatus. This research focuses
on the histone reader protein UHRF2, a close homolog of UHRF1 with distinct
nuclear functions. While UHRF1-histone interactions are well studied, very
little is known on the molecular and structural requirements of histone
recognition by UHRF2. The goal of this project is to determine the molecular and
structural mechanisms by which the histone binding domains of UHRF2 functionally
interact with histone H3. Equilibrium binding assays, mutagenesis and
crystallographic approaches will be utilized to elucidate the mechanisms that
dictate histone-binding specificity between UHRF1 and UHRF2. This research will
provide molecular insights as to how histone reader proteins distinguish and
engage their cognate PTMs and advance fundamental understanding of epigenetic
regulation.