* 1715553
* Ecological and evolutionary constraints on the design of synthetic microbiomes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Benjamin Wolfe, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 700,000.00

Human bodies, food systems, and natural ecosystems are all dependent on the
activities of microbial communities, commonly known as microbiomes.
Microbiologists have identified the diversity of parts (microbial species)
within many microbiomes, but they have a very limited understanding of how these
parts fit together and how they change over time. Without a set of general
assembly instructions for microbiomes, it is difficult to predictably manipulate
these systems. This research will use microbes isolated from three fermented
foods - fermented tea, sourdough, and cheese - to identify how communities of
microbes evolve and the implications of this evolution for manipulating and
designing microbial ecosystems. These food microbiomes are relatively simple
systems (~2-10 species per microbiome) that have been cultivated for many years
in different environments around the world. By identifying how evolution impacts
the assembly of these model systems, this research will begin to provide
microbiome assembly instructions that can be used in medicine, agriculture, and
industry. The popularity of these model systems will be leveraged to improve
public understanding of science and increase participation in microbiome
research. Through the development of the Citizen Synthetic Ecology Network
(CSEN), hundreds of volunteers will submit fermented food microbiomes that will
be used in the proposed research. An Evolution in Your Kitchen education module
will allow high school students to evolve fermented food microbiomes. The PI's
online microbial outreach platform, MicrobialFoods.org, will disseminate
infographics on basic concepts in microbiome science, synthetic ecology, and
systems biology.  &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;High-throughput sequencing surveys have
rapidly unveiled patterns of microbial diversity, but the mechanisms that
control the assembly of microbiomes have not been identified. Using a synthetic
ecology framework, this project will determine the causes and consequences of
the evolution of core microbiome components for the assembly of synthetic
communities. The research will determine how core microbiome species have
diversified functions across microbial communities and how this functional
divergence leads to variable microbial interaction networks and microbiome
assembly processes. The genomic and functional diversity of core microbiome
species from globally distributed fermented food microbiomes will be
characterized through genome sequencing and in vitro community assays.
Experimental evolution will be used to determine the mechanisms that drive
diversification of core microbiome components. Impacts of the diversification
will be measured by assessing interchangeability, invasibility, and stability of
synthetic communities.