* 1715123
* A Spectroscopic and Computational Structure-Function Study of Biosilicification Peptides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* W. James Pfaendtner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 678,872.00

Metal oxides including silicon oxide (SiO2, silica) and titanium oxide (TiO2,
titania) have numerous applications as insulators, textile coatings, catalysts,
chemical decontaminants, solar cell components, medical/dental implants and
chemical sensors. Industrial synthesis and morphological control of these
important hard materials requires extremes in temperature, pressure and pH and
are thus energetically demanding. In contrast, biological organisms accomplish
impressive feats of mineral oxide production with precise control over
morphology that is virtually unmatched by industrial approaches, and do so at
ambient temperature, pressure and at physiological pH in a process called
biomineralization. Biogenic silica (i.e. biosilica) is produced in gigaton
quantities annually by the diatom, a marine microalgae characterized by an
intricately decorated cell wall that is composed of organic material and silica.
Diatoms take in silicon in dissolved form, and convert it to elaborate silica
structures, in an as yet poorly understood process where proteins and other
organic polymers are believed play important roles as catalysts and templates
for silica formation. This research is aimed at understanding the specific roles
played by proteins that are used by diatoms to form silica, with the immediate
goal of making smaller, and less expensive molecules that imitate the diatom's
ability to control silica formation under mild conditions. The long-term goal is
to use similarly designed small molecules to effect the controlled formation of
non-biological oxides like TiO2. This project will provide training for young
scientists and engineers in the use of spectroscopic and computational
techniques to elucidate structure-function relationships in
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will utilize solid state NMR
(ssNMR), advanced non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (MD) computations, and
novel chemical synthesis techniques, to determine the molecular structural
properties and interactions that underlie the silicifying activities of
naturally-occurring peptides. Initial study will be focused on modified and
unmodified forms of the R5 peptide, derived from the bio-silicification protein
silaffin of the diatom species Cylindrotheca fusiformis. Specific questions that
this research project will address include: 1. Do unmodified silicifying peptide
domain derived (e.g. R5) assume specific secondary structures that promote
peptide-peptide interactions which in turn lead to formation of higher order
structures? 2. What is the nature of peptide-silica interactions? 3. How do
amino acid modifications influence peptide structure and peptide-peptide
interactions in silica, and, most importantly, how do these modifications affect
peptide-silica interactions? 4. Can R5, that induce silica formation, also
induce formation of non-biological oxides like TiO2. Are the structural
principles used by R5 to form silica similar to the principles it uses to form
other oxides? Answers to these questions will provide structure-based principles
for the design of peptides and other small molecules that can mimic in vitro the
silicifying activities of naturally occurring proteins like silaffin.