* 1715777
* CCF-BSF: AF: Small: Collaborative Research: The Dictionary Problem Considered
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 266,000.00

The performance of databases, file systems, and other data-storage systems
depends on how the data is organized on disk. The data-organization parts of
these systems are called dictionaries. Even though dictionaries have been
studied for decades, some very basic questions remain unanswered. This grant
will support research to address several of these questions. This research has
the potential to improve performance of data-storage systems and applications
based on these systems in many environments, including large-scale data analysis
and high-performance computing. Dictionaries are so fundamental that theoretical
advances in dictionaries are quickly picked up by practitioners, and thus this
research has strong potential for tech transfer.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will tackle foundational problems in
dictionaries using techniques in write-optimization pioneered by the PIs. How
are systems of dictionaries different than individual dictionaries? How can
dictionaries take advantage of variations in the rate of queries and updates?
How can one comprehensively compare dictionary data structures? How can one
bring the benefits of write-optimization to dictionaries on more complex data
types? Write-optimized dictionaries have fundamentally changed the landscape of
databases, and this research will improve our understanding of the complexity of
operations on such systems.