* 1715572
* Single Molecule Studies to Dissect Allosteric Communication Networks in Protein Kinase A
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Rodrigo Maillard, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,622.00

Signaling proteins are  the core building blocks in the transmission of
biological signals, allowing cells to communicate between the extracellular
environment and the cellular interior.  Understanding how signaling proteins
operate has important and broad implications, from defining how biological
systems detect and transduce signals, to reengineering protein function for
biotechnological applications, to identifying new binding sites for allosteric
inhibitors. The cAMP-dependent Protein Kinase A (PKA) is a major signaling
protein in all eukaryotic cells that incorporates structural and functional
elements seen in most signaling protein complexes, including a modular domain
organization, ligand binding cooperativity, signaling through flexible linker
domains, and ligand-induced conformational changes. This protein will be used as
a model system to quantitatively define how biological signals are transduced
from one domain to another to regulate and activate protein function. This
project will provide research opportunities to undergraduate and graduate
students at the interface of biology, physics and computational
 modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use single-molecule
biophysical techniques in combination with molecular dynamic simulations to
investigate the mechanism of communication between different structural elements
of PKA. The goal of this project is to determine how such communication
mechanisms are established in different biological states (apo, active and
 inactive  states), and how cAMP binding activates the protein. It
is expected that the tools and methods developed from these studies will have
widespread applications to advance knowledge in a variety of related and
unrelated kinases that display modular architectures, such as cGMP-
dependent protein kinase involved in vasodilation and  platelet activation, or
 protein kinase C involved in cell migration, differentiation, and apoptosis.
Lastly, the interdisciplinary nature of this project will provide unique
research opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students from different
backgrounds.