* 1715557
* CNH-L: The Coupled Climate and Institutional Dynamics of Short-Lived Local Pollutants and Long-Lived Global Greenhouse Gases
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Jennifer Burney, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

Potential climate change mitigation is typically framed in both public and
scientific discussions as an undertaking whose costs are local, near-term and
acute, and whose returns are global, far-term and uncertain. This
characterization may be true for long-lived greenhouse gases (LLGHGs) such as
carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane, but it is not true of compounds that
are considered short-lived local pollutants (SLLPs) such as particulate matter,
black carbon, sulfur dioxide and tropospheric ozone. These short-lived
pollutants impact atmospheric conditions and air quality through different
mechanisms over a range of spatial and temporal scales. LLGHGs and SLLPs are
often co-emitted by the same processes, albeit in widely differing quantities
and combinations, but to date, scientists and policymakers have largely treated
these different types of emissions as both interchangeable and separable. This
approach is incomplete because individual emissions species rarely can be
mitigated in isolation and the net global and regional impacts of different
mitigation portfolios should consider the sum of both LLGHG and SLLP effects. A
full understanding of environmental impacts, and of mitigation costs and
benefits, requires that SLLPs and LLGHGs be considered together, and thus is the
focus of this project. Additionally, this project will contribute to the
development of the scientific workforce by training several undergraduate and
graduate students to work on interdisciplinary research of societal
importance.&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize a coupled systems approach to
understanding the joint roles of LLGHGs and SLLPs in the dynamics of natural
(atmospheric) and human (policymaking) systems, as well as in the processes that
connect them. The objectives of this project are to 1) characterize the joint
emissions of SLLPs and LLGHGs across, space, time and sector, 2) build
analytical infrastructure that enables integrated analysis that is useable to
both scientists and policy makers, 3) understand the mechanisms driving regional
differences in the atmospheric concentrations and radiative forcing induced by
identical emissions, 4) build a dynamical framework explaining the spatial
pattern and magnitude of global response to individual SLLP hotspots, 5)
assemble and merge novel state-of-the-art data on environmental conditions with
data on agricultural and health outcomes, 6) use spatial econometrics to derive
location-specific exposure-response relationships for atmospheric conditions on
human health and crop yields, 7) fully couple the human and natural dynamics
systems to iteratively understand how local and global costs and benefits, based
on realistic implementations of national mitigations commitments, their
atmospheric effects, and their locally-specific health and crop yield impacts,
drive national optimal mitigation levels and overall global mitigation.