* 1715157
* RUI: Behavior of Trivalents in Metaphase I and Anaphase I
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Leocadia Paliulis, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,453.00

Every time a cell divides, it must distribute the correct number of chromosomes
to its daughter cells. Chromosomes must be positioned correctly to ensure
correct chromosome distribution during cell division. Failure to correctly
position chromosomes in cell division leads to aneuploidy (extra or missing
chromosomes) and can be catastrophic for the cell and, ultimately, the organism.
Chromosomes must attach to the spindle, typically with one attachment site
facing each spindle pole. This bipolar attachment guarantees that partner
chromosomes will separate from one another in anaphase. In metaphase, after
forming a bipolar attachment, chromosomes of nearly all organisms align in the
center of the spindle forming the metaphase plate. The alignment of chromosomes
in the center of the spindle in metaphase may be simply a consequence of the
"tug of war" that the chromosome is experiencing as a result of a bipolar
attachment, with both sides of the chromosome under equal tension.
Alternatively, the positioning of chromosomes at the center of the spindle could
be essential for guaranteeing correct distribution in anaphase. The fact that
chromosomes align at the center of the spindle in nearly all cell types (the
behavior is nearly universal), and that mutants that fail to align chromosomes
produce aneuploid cells, suggests that that metaphase alignment at the center of
the spindle is important for directing appropriate chromosome separation and
movement in anaphase. The aim of this project is to learn more about how
chromosomes align at the center of the spindle, and how the placement and the
timing of this alignment can impact distribution of chromosomes during anaphase.
The Broader Impact activities will address the problem that there are very few
tools available to biology instructors for teaching cell division. A series of
narrated videos of different types of cell division will be created for use in
the classroom, thus beginning a collection of materials for future projects.
These videos will be distributed nationally to any instructor who desire to use
them in their courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In meiosis I, most chromosomes
connect with one homologous or partially homologous partner to form a bivalent.
Bivalents align on the metaphase plate and then homologues initiate segregation
at anaphase I onset. However, in males from some taxa (e.g., praying mantids and
the cellar spider Pholcus phalangioides), the X1, X2, and Y chromosomes form a
trivalent during meiosis I. The X1, X2, and Y chromosomes each have a single
kinetochore, with X1 and X2 associating with one pole in metaphase I, while the
Y chromosome associates with the other pole. Though the trivalent has two
kinetochores facing one pole and one facing the other, it aligns with all
autosomes on the metaphase I plate. In addition, metaphase I appears to be so
important that anaphase I is delayed for the trivalent, with the autosomes
separating approximately 20 minutes before the X1, X2, and Y chromosomes. This
project aims to determine how forces are balanced to align the trivalent on the
metaphase plate, and then how the chromosomes that make up the trivalent
segregate correctly into daughter cells, using electron microscopy, laser
microsurgery, immunofluorescence staining, and small molecule inhibitors.