* 1715411
* Defining the architecture of the Pyk2 activation complex
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Eric Underbakke, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 801,627.00

Neurons communicate with neighboring neurons through synaptic connections. This
neuronal 'wiring' can change and adapt over time. Many aspects of the mechanisms
controlling the changes in neuronal connections remain enigmatic. Nevertheless,
the ability to strengthen and weaken neuron connections is critically important
because this rewiring is linked to learning and memory formation. Each synaptic
connection hosts a large collection of proteins poised to interpret patterns of
neuronal communication. This research project seeks to discover how one team of
proteins responds to synaptic activity to signal for synaptic changes. The
central hub of the signaling team is Pyk2, a protein kinase. Pyk2 activates by
rearranging its structure to form a large signaling assembly with associated
signaling factors. The goal of this research is to determine the architecture of
the Pyk2 signaling assembly. Understanding the assembly and activation of the
Pyk2 signaling team will yield insights into how neuronal rewiring is initiated
at the molecular scale. This proposal will train graduate and undergraduate
students by using a team-based concept where graduate and undergraduate students
will have an advisor/advisee relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this project are to reveal the molecular mechanisms of Pyk2 signaling linking
post-synaptic Ca2+ influx to the Src cascades that tune synaptic plasticity.
Illuminating the architecture of scaffolded signaling complexes remains a
frontier goal in understanding synaptic plasticity. However, multi-protein
signaling complexes are typically large and highly dynamic, challenging targets
for structural characterization. While structures have been determined for
isolated pieces of the signaling effectors, a critical question remains: how do
the pieces assemble into functional signaling complexes? This project employs
several strategies to dissect the activational signaling complex of the Pyk2
non-receptor tyrosine kinase. By leveraging hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass
spectrometry, protein interactions and conformational changes will be mapped.
Single particle electron microscopy will illuminate the overall shape of the
activation complex. These approaches are amenable to describing heterogeneous
ensembles of accessible conformers and architectures. Structural restraints
derived by the complementary biophysical approaches will be integrated to build
a model of the higher-order architecture of the signaling complex responsible
for activating Pyk2. This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological
Sciences Directorate.