* 1715541
* RUI: Role of Germ Cell Nanoparticles during Germline Specification in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alexey Arkov, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2021
* USD 695,254.00

This project focuses on the biological functions and assembly of germ cell
nanoparticles. These are small molecular structures that may hold a key to
unexplained fundamental aspect of germline, namely its unique ability to give
rise to the next-generation individuals and therefore, ensure the continuity of
life. Germ cells belong to a special class of cells that produce egg and sperm
which unite to generate a completely new organism. Germ cell nanoparticles have
been remarkably conserved across animal phyla indicating their crucial
biological importance. In addition, this research may promote design of
artificial nanoparticles with desired molecular characteristics thereby leading
to technological breakthroughs. This project will involve undergraduate,
graduate students and a postdoctoral scholar and will provide opportunities for
training of future active participants in science and education fields. In
addition, the research topics will be incorporated into genetics courses and a
new cell biology laboratory module will be designed. This research will be
described on the University National Public Radio providing a great platform to
reach out to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
understand the principles of the functional assembly of germ cell molecular
complexes composed of RNA and proteins required for germline development in
diverse organisms. Components of these complexes include Tudor domain-containing
proteins, Piwi proteins, small Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and enzymes of the
glycolytic cluster. These complexes play a major role in the silencing of
transposable elements, which otherwise might lead to harmful mutations. However,
the mechanisms controlling their assembly remains a mystery. To address this
gap, a combination of approaches--including genetics, biochemistry, as well as
in vitro and in vivo experiments--will be used to test the roles of the
component proteins in assembly of these germ cell particles in Drosophila.
Because these structures have been evolutionarily conserved, this research can
serve as a paradigm for studying other large and dynamic ribonucleoprotein
granules. Moreover, the results have the potential to reveal new insights into
how such nanoparticles function to preserve the integrity of the next generation
genetic material.