* 1715216
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E:  Mining Physically Predictive Cosmological Simulations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Claude-Andre Faucher-Giguere, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 289,762.00

By running detailed computer simulations, the investigators are working to
understand how galaxies form. Because of the complexity of this problem, large
computer simulations are needed to follow all the key physical processes. These
investigators are developing a new approach for efficient modeling. The new
methods have proved extremely successful in reproducing many of the observed
properties of galaxies. The investigators will further improve their simulations
to study a much wider range of galaxy types. They will push the frontiers of
galaxy formation modeling on multiple fronts by including more physical
processes and improving numerical accuracy. The new simulations will be used to
study different sized galaxies from dwarf galaxies to galaxy halos ten times
more massive than our Milky Way galaxy. The investigators will train students in
computer modeling techniques that have a wide range of scientific and industrial
applications. They will also produce film-quality animations produced from the
new simulations, which will be the basis for education and outreach initiatives,
including several planetariums. The new modules and optimizations for the
simulation code will be publicly released, which will benefit not only
astrophysics but also other disciplines, such as
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators lead the "Feedback In
Realistic Environments" (FIRE) project and create sets of cosmological
simulations of galaxy formation that explicitly model stellar feedback on the
scale of individual star-forming regions. In these simulations feedback will be
directly anchored to stellar evolution models, significantly improving their
predictive power by reducing the reliance on adjustable parameters. The FIRE
simulations have proven successful in matching stellar masses, galactic winds,
and the dark matter distributions of dwarf galaxies. To reach larger audiences,
the investigators plan to create new musical "sonifications" of the FIRE
simulations. The sonifications will be performed at an annual concert and
highlight time-dependent phenomena.