* 1715200
* CHS: Small: Recommender and Decision-Making Systems Seeking Compatible Sets from Multiple Collections under Varying Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Lucy Dunne, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 507,523.00

Recommender systems that assist in decision-making are increasingly used in a
number of information settings. Most research in this area focuses on algorithms
that predict how much a user will prefer a given item based on their own and
others' past preferences. Such research tends to treat the question as a machine
learning, statistical, or optimization problem; however, this abstracts away
important aspects of making recommender systems useful to people, including
attending to the decision-making processes and contexts being supported. This
project will develop recommender systems that explicitly attend to these
concerns using a smart home as the driving domain. The methods developed for
reasoning in this context can inform similar decision problems in other domains,
such as managing supplies and logistics and accessing information. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop solutions to a number of important but
under-addressed challenges for recommender systems, including (1) recommending
groups of related items that work well together, rather than individual items;
(2) recommending and re-recommending items primarily from an existing set of
items rather than focusing on single-use consumption of new items; and (3)
considering important factors about both the physical and social environment
that affect decision making. The project will explore these issues in the
context of ensemble selection decisions in a smart home. The system will be
grounded in case-based reasoning; this will mitigate the cold start problem that
plagues ratings-based collaborative filtering algorithms and fits well with the
planned attribute-based representations of items, preferences, and context. To
do this, the team will use 3D scanners and rendering software to create
personalized models of items, and both experts and crowdworkers will then assess
the model outputs, accounting for social and physical contexts. This will
generate a case library that, along with rulesets for combining items, can be
used to generate recommendations for both sets of items and individual items
that fit well with already-chosen ones. The system will be based on an existing
prototype, adapted to run on a tablet to support remote data collection. The
deployment includes a setup process where the team will attach RFID tags to
items and photograph them for later analysis and addition of attributes; a
three-month period in which users' choices and context will be logged but no
recommendations are made, and a six-month period where recommendations are
offered. The system will be evaluated in terms of the usefulness of the
recommendations, their ability to suggest novel and liked combinations, and
their effect on the use and recombination of users? existing items. Through
deploying prototype systems in homes, the work will also give insight into
designing smart home applications such as activity and medication monitoring
that involve object tracking.