* 1715053
* Linking social and ecological embeddedness, wildfire risk, and collective action
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Alexandra Fischer, Hamilton                Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 69,000.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship supports a rising interdisciplinary scientist studying
social behavior, risk mitigation and environmental change. Increasingly
hazardous wildfire conditions presents challenges for human welfare, the
sustainability of livelihoods, and the resilience of institutions and societies.
For example, in the western United States, changing climatic conditions interact
with the historical legacy of forest management and contemporary land use
patterns, resulting in large-scale megafires that each year destroy thousands of
homes and burn millions of acres of forestland. The scope and pace of
environmental change requires collective action: coordination to exchange
information necessary for developing responses to novel hazardous conditions as
well as cooperation to implement risk mitigation activities that span private
properties and administrative boundaries. This grant supports an SBE
postdoctoral fellow to improve scientific understanding of how diverse groups of
individuals, ranging from private landowners to decision-makers in federal
agencies, work together to reduce hazardous conditions across wildfire-prone
landscapes. The research also identifies the conditions under which certain
patterns of social interaction help people achieve goals for risk mitigation.
This project advances national health, prosperity and welfare by improving
knowledge of effective risk mitigation strategies and by disseminating
actionable scientific findings to forest and fire management decision-makers at
the federal, state, and local levels, as well as to members of vulnerable
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates factors that shape
the goals, limitations, and outcomes of collective efforts to address risks
associated with environmental change. Specifically, the project advances a
conceptual framework and tests hypotheses about (1) how individuals' goals for
collective action depend upon how they are embedded in social networks, as
indicated by their affiliations to formal organizations and informal groups
concerned with wildfire risk, (2) how specific conditions of hazardous
conditions (spatial scale, uncertainty) shape the costs of these collective
actions, and (3) how outcomes depend on local patterns of interaction among
individual actors. Drawing upon panel data for causal inference modeling, the
research advances understanding of how individuals respond to environmental
change through collective action by identifying mechanisms that shape values and
goals as well as the factors that constrain the efficacy of these actions. By
explicitly studying the diversity of collective actions by which individuals
respond to new environmental conditions within a given region, the research
improves knowledge of how social behavior depends upon network position and how
individuals experience environmental change. The research contributes to
theories of transaction costs by advancing understanding of how behavioral
strategies depend upon the specific transaction costs experienced by individual
actors and how strategies shape collective action outcomes. Knowledge of how
localized causal mechanisms shape collective action and its outcomes across
different social and ecological contexts is necessary for understanding how
social systems self-organize across spatial and institutional scales, with
implications for human and societal welfare under changing environmental
conditions.