* 1715185
* Chemotaxis sensing preference in plant-microbe associations
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Gladys Alexandre, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 04/30/2022
* USD 914,949.00

Future food security will rely on increased crop yields using sustainable
agricultural practices to meet the demands for food of the projected world
population of 9.7 billion by 2050. The microbiome of the plant rhizosphere (the
area around the root is known as the rhizosphere, and the group of microbes in
an area is known as a microbiome), which can be compared to its human gut
homolog, plays a critical role in plant health, ultimately affecting crop yield.
Manipulation of the rhizosphere microbes is a proposed strategy for the
achievement of sustainable agricultural practices. However, little is known
regarding how most beneficial soil bacteria manage to find their target plants,
and how they establish stable associations with the roots of plants once they
find them. This gap in knowledge will be addressed by examining how bacteria
deploy chemical detecting proteins on their surfaces and by studying how the
signals from those sensing proteins enter and move around inside the cell. The
work will provide detailed quantitative information about how beneficial soil
bacteria precisely find their preferred zones on the root surface, and the
results will provide new tools for optimizing design of beneficial plant-
bacteria associations. The project will have educational impact by providing
research training for undergraduate and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds, including those from underrepresented groups in STEM. The project
will also engage deaf and hard of hearing students in research and thus enhance
participation of this critically underserved and untapped pool of talent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of the well-characterized
chemotaxis response of the motile soil bacterium, Azospirillum brasilense, as a
model because it is a suitable representative of root inhabiting bacteria and it
is successfully used to promote the growth of diverse crops in sustainable
agricultural practices. The experimental design combines proteomics, genetics
and computational modeling to address how motile bacteria set sensing
preferences for roots. First, the mechanisms underlying the assembly of distinct
chemotaxis receptor arrays which are typical of many beneficial root colonizing
bacteria will be established (Objective 1). Next, the dynamic changes in the
composition of chemotaxis receptor clusters will be related with changes in
bacteria sensing preference and competitiveness in the rhizosphere (Objective
2). Because chemotaxis emerges from a sophisticated signaling pathway, it is
difficult to predict population behavior from molecular mechanisms. The
experimental data will be integrated with computational modeling to
quantitatively describe how motile bacteria set chemotaxis sensing preference
with change in their metabolism to precisely accumulate at a specific position
in a gradient (Objective 3). Results obtained will uncover the engineering
principles for manipulation of and/or the synthetic design of chemotaxis sensing
preferences in beneficial soil bacteria. This knowledge is critical to develop
future strategies for rhizosphere microbiome optimization for sustainable
agriculture.