* 1715068
* Investigating Gender Development among Children
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Kristina Olson, Gulgoz                  Selin
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 10/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship award
provides a young scientist with the opportunity to investigate the early gender
development in children, with particular focus on the relative contributions of
early parent socialization and children's internal sense of gender identity. It
is crucial to better understand the risk factors that lead to poor developmental
outcomes and to develop appropriate prevention and intervention strategies.

Prominent theories of gender development have discussed the degree to which
gender identity results from an internal sense of gender and socialization
processes. However, tests of these theories have been limited because, for most
children, internal gender identity and environmental socialization substantially
overlap, rendering it impossible to distinguish the relative impact of each
factor on gender development. Therefore, this project will provide a critical
test of extant theory by examining gender development among children with
atypical patterns of gender development. Specifically, this grant supports the
investigation of whether established theories (e.g., Social Learning Theory,
Social Cognitive Theory, Gender Schema Theory) can account for a wider range of
human gender experiences. The project will involve asking 250, 4- to 6-year olds
and their parents to complete a battery of measures assessing early and current
gender socialization, children's internal sense of gender identity, children's
gendered behavior (e.g., preferences for gender-typed toys) and measures of
related gender cognition (e.g., memory for gender-consistent vs. inconsistent
behaviors). These measures will allow the researchers to examine the relative
contributions of internal gender identity and socialization and ultimately
provide a more comprehensive theory accounting for early gender development.