* 1715010
* The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Manisha Padi, Padi                    Manisha
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship award
supports a rising social science scholar studying consumer financial contracts,
focusing on their legal status, their sale and regulation, and their impact on
household financial health. Consumers' financial health has been severely
impacted by the 2008 recession. The most vulnerable populations in the United
States are those that rely on unfair or abusive financial contracts for their
day to day survival. These groups tend to be subject to historical racial
discrimination, have low or highly variable incomes, and have limited access to
financial education. Both law and markets have an important role in protecting
these populations, without limiting their opportunities to advance in society
through homeownership, education, and the creation of wealth. This research
takes a multidisciplinary approach to studying the roles of contract law and the
marketing of financial products in vulnerable households' financial health.
First, it combines textual legal analysis with data analysis to study the laws
governing long term consumer contracts, such as mortgages, annuities, and
student loans. The analysis implies that some consumer contracts are prone to
abusive ex post modification. Second, it uses data to study the role of
intermediaries in consumer financial markets. Intermediaries can provide
valuable financial advice and improve consumer literacy. They also have
incentives, through commissions and low accountability, which push them to give
low quality advice. Using administrative data on mortgage brokers and life
insurance agents, this research will study the effects of different regulatory
interventions on consumer outcomes. Both parts of the research project will
differentially assess the impact of legal changes on consumers who are subject
to short term downturns or who have low financial literacy, providing policy
guidance for federal and state policymakers aiming to protect the neediest
populations.

This research consists of two prongs. The first consists of legal research on
the design of long term consumer contracts. American law allows consumers to
sign standard form contracts, most of which are never read or understood, that
are legal binding for the individual's entire lifetime. This practice is
reasonable for sophisticated parties who have access to legal representation and
financial professionals, and can truly "liquidate" and cease to exist if
necessary during a bankruptcy proceeding. Consumers do not have these
advantages, and despite having access to bankruptcy protection, would never be
completely freed from the consequences of a contract gone wrong due to credit
scores and other mechanisms. Case law on consumer contract modification disputes
in the past twenty years demonstrates the existence of contract dynamics that
consistently lead to consumers being subject to fraud, duress, and
unconscionable treatment during contract modification. Economic models show that
regulatory interventions intended to curb these practices will fail to protect
the neediest consumers. Taken together, this research proposes strengthening
consumer rights within financial contracts and provides some empirical results
that support this conclusion. The second prong empirical methods to study the
effect of regulation on the behavior of intermediaries, such as sales agents and
financial advisors, who sell consumer financial contracts. The work will focus
on two different types of intermediaries - mortgage originators and financial
advisors. In the aftermath of the financial crisis in 2008, many commentators
looked to the structure of the mortgage market and speculated that principal-
agent problems between lenders and originators may be partially to blame.
Empirical analysis will be done using data on individual loans owned by Fannie
Mae or Freddie Mac between 2002 and 2012, comparing default and foreclosure
rates of loans with a dispersed ownership and sales structure to loans sold by a
vertically integrated lender. This research will study whether consumer lawsuits
and state consumer protection laws differentially impact lending by vertically
integrated lenders, relative to lenders with a dispersed vertical structure. In
the case of financial advisors, principal-agent problems have been dealt with by
imposing fiduciary and fiduciary-like duties that give advisors an incentive to
serve their customers' best interests, rather than maximizing their own income.
Using proprietary data from a large life insurance company, this research will
study the impact of state variation in regulation on the sale of variable
annuities and fixed annuities to retirees. The first step will be to build a
comprehensive state-level dataset of laws governing insurance agents, including
changes year by year. The second step will be to estimate the causal impact of
legal stringency on the type and volume of products sold in that state, using
state legal changes to approximate a random shift in legal stringency.