* 1715440
* The role of protein specificity in the evolution of regulatory RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Michelle Meyer, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2022
* USD 676,755.00

Ribonucleic acids (RNA) play many roles in the cell, and one of such roles that
became clear only in the recent years is to control production of metabolites
and to respond to stresses. RNA regulators are often very different in different
organisms; it is thought that they are more diverse, or at least harder to
recognize, than protein regulators. This research will study how similar
ribosomal proteins in different bacterial species have evolved to recognize
different RNA regulators. This project will provide numerous training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and the project team will
continue their work in introducing school girls in the at-risk communities in
Boston area to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
examine the relationship between protein specificity and the diversity of RNA
gene regulators observed in nature. The model systems used in this project are
the bacterial RNA regulators of ribosomal protein synthesis and their protein
interaction partners. Some of these regulators are conserved in most bacteria;
in other cases there is extraordinary diversity across different bacterial
phyla. We hypothesize that proteins interacting with several diverse natural
regulators are likely to have larger pools of RNA partners compared to proteins
that interact with conserved regulators. To investigate this we will first use
in vitro approaches to compare the RNA interaction pools of ribosomal proteins
from different organisms. The protein-interacting RNAs that are derived from
this approach will then be assessed to determine what additional features are
necessary to allow regulation in response to protein over-expression within
cells. By comparing the results from proteins that have many natural RNA-binding
partners with those from proteins that have a single conserved RNA partner, we
will determine the role that protein specificity plays in driving diversity of
regulatory RNAs observed in nature.