* 1715692
* A Multi-Sightline Investigation of the Complex Circumgalactic Medium
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Hsiao-Wen Chen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 12/31/2023
* USD 484,116.00

Astronomers seek to understand how stars and galaxies formed. Galaxies exist in
relation to the diffuse gas that surrounds them. Understanding this relationship
is essential for understanding how galaxies, including our own galaxy (the Milky
Way), came into being. To probe diffuse gas, astronomers use fortuitously
aligned, bright background sources that illuminate it. Chen and collaborators
take this method one step further. They use background sources that have been
gravitationally lensed to yield multiple images. These images probe the gas from
multiple lines of sight simultaneously. This project will produce the first
survey of such galaxies and gas together. Investigators will discover the
properties of this gas, including its spatial distribution. They will understand
the inter-relationship between the surrounding gas and galaxies within. The PI
will interact with underrepresented minority high school students through the
Space Explorers Program. The PI will also engage undergraduates in summer
research and support one PhD thesis. The PI will collaborate with Adler
Planetarium to develop museum displays that communicate key findings of galaxy
evolution. These activities inspire young people and the general public to
participate in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed investigation
utilizes multiply-lensed quasars (QSOs) and projected QSO pairs to resolve the
motion and chemical enrichment of the CircumGalactic Medium (CGM). The galaxies
span a range of morphologies and star formation histories. Specific scientific
objectives include characterizing the diffuse gas halos, particularly its
velocity distribution, its dependence upon galaxy properties, and its mechanism
of formation. This project will produce the first large survey of dozens (~60)
of spatially and spectrally resolved halo maps at projected distance d &lt; 100
kpc around both star-forming and passive galaxies in the range 0.4 &lt; z &lt;
1. This project extends prior studies by going to higher redshift and increasing
sample size by an order of magnitude. It will contribute a deeper understanding
of the relationship between diffuse CGM halo gas and star formation in galaxies.