* 1715582
* Physical Manifestations of Chaos and Regularity Around Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Kathryn Johnston, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2022
* USD 396,189.00

Everything in the Universe is in motion: planets orbit stars, stars orbit within
galaxies, and galaxies orbit each other. We have expectations for how these
orbits should behave. Planets follow elliptical orbits around stars. They repeat
the same path millions or even billions of times over the years with each
revolution taking the same amount of time, known as the 'period'. The stars
themselves follow orbits that form 'rosette' patterns as they move through a
galaxy. These orbits can take hundreds of millions of years to go even once
around. Rosette orbits can be described with two periods: the 'azimuthal period'
encapsulates how long it takes for the star to go around the galaxy; the 'radial
period' describes how long it take for the star to get between the points along
its orbit that are closest to and farthest from the galaxy's center and back
again. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of stellar orbits is set by the
distribution of matter that influences them. Planets move around matter that is
concentrated in the central stars. Stars in the galaxy are moving within the
combined distribution of stars, gas, and dark matter. Both elliptical and
rosette orbits are known as 'regular' orbits since their paths are predictable
and repeating. However, it is also expected that some orbits in the Universe are
'chaotic.' These orbits do not have patterns that repeat with well-defined
periods and hence are not predictable. And---just as the nature of elliptical
and rosette orbits is set by the matter distribution---so is the importance of
chaos. Orbits are more likely to be chaotic if the visible and dark matter
distributions are complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will also
continue her work with underrepresented groups in the sciences. She seeks to
facilitate institutional structures to gain benefits from a diverse workforce;
reduce the challenges of making decisions among diverse groups; provide support
for minorities in leadership roles in academia; and ease the transition as
academic institutions evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the nature of planetary
orbits around stars can be observed within human lifetimes, the vast sizes of
galaxies means that orbits of stars take millions of years. The proposed work
will explore a new mathematical approach to deducing the nature of stellar
orbits around galaxies, whether they are regular or chaotic. Over the last 20
years, streams of stars on similar orbits have been observed around our Galaxy.
In prior work, the proposers have shown that the morphologies of these streams
are sensitive to the presence (or absence) of chaos. Only on very regular orbits
can these streams remain coherent. And the presence of chaos can tell us about
how the elusive dark matter around galaxies is
distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical studies of the nature of orbits---
regular or chaotic---in dynamical systems (galaxies being just one example) are
essential to building a deep understanding of the global structures that the
orbits support. In recent work the investigator has discovered that signatures
of the nature of orbits can be observed in structures around our own Galaxy,
formed from the disruption of satellite systems. They found one stellar stream
associated with globular cluster Palomar 5 that is long and thin with a simple
structure. Another stream of stars in the constellation Ophiucus is
extraordinarily truncated. The investigator will (i) explore the physical
manifestations of regularity and chaos in stellar debris more generally and (ii)
develop methods for making maps of the nature of orbits around galaxies using
these signatures. The project combines tools and techniques from the classical
study of non-linear dynamics with numerical experiments that follow the
evolution of ensembles of orbits starting from initial conditions closely
clustered in phase-space. They will extend their study to two new regimes: the
evolution of chaotic orbits over short timescales (tens of orbits) and the
observable signatures of this evolution in the full phase-space structure of
ensembles of orbits. They will also explore how regular and chaotic orbits can
support stellar structures beyond the traditional study of self-consistent
galactic components, including unbound stellar associations.