* 1715808
* The Role of Neuronal Ionic Current Correlations and Level Sets in Network Activity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Horacio Rotstein, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Neurons generate the activity that drives behaviors thanks to electrical
currents that flow across their membranes through several different but highly
specific channels. These channels are formed by specialized proteins synthesized
by each cell and embedded in their membranes. The activity that one can record
from these cells (such as rhythmic oscillations) is expected to vary if the
number of these channel-proteins varies. Yet, neurons of the same type have been
observed to express extremely variable numbers of each channel-protein type, and
thus extremely variable electrical currents flowing across their membranes, with
relatively minimal effects on their activity (e.g., their oscillation
frequency). Whether their existence ensures that the activity of these cells
will be similar, and what the consequences for network function are, remains
largely unclear. The general goal of this project is to examine what features of
neuronal activity are regulated by electrical current correlations, whether
these features of activity are propagated to the networks they form part of, and
what universal principles or mechanisms these relationships obey. The results of
this project are expected to have impact in various areas of mathematical
biology, and the project will promote interdisciplinary training of
undergraduate and graduate students through involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High variability in the levels of ionic
conductance expressed by identical neurons have been observed in a number of
preparations. In some of the same preparations, a tendency of some of the ionic
conductances to co-vary has been identified. This co-variation appears as
correlations of these currents in populations of neurons, which are thought to
lead to the generation of very similar types of activity despite the variability
of individual currents, in a sort of homeostatic scaling of these currents. This
project will test the hypothesis that the existence of correlations among
subsets of ionic currents determines a stable and robust neuronal activity, and
that this effect propagates to the level of the networks. The features of
activity affected by these correlations are expected to lie close to so-called
level sets of activity for the oscillation attributes (e.g., frequency,
amplitude, duty cycle). The mathematical concept of level sets has been applied
to dynamical neuronal systems to a limited degree and only at the level of
single neurons. The project team will investigate the mechanisms of generation
of level sets, particularly related to the existence of ionic current
correlations, in single neurons of a well-known neuronal network (the crustacean
pyloric network). This project will (i) extend this to determine the
consequences of their existence for network dynamics, (ii) determine if there
are universal mechanisms, understandable in terms of classes of ionic current
properties rather than individual current properties, that determine the
emergence of level sets, and (iii) investigate what other factors determine the
existence of level sets besides the amplitude of the conductances. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in a multidisciplinary investigation of
the properties of neuronal systems, including computations, dynamical systems
theory, and experiments.