* 1715082
* Collaborative Research:  Nonlinear Waves and Vorticity in Oceanic Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Katie Oliveras, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 166,215.00

1715082, Oliveras&lt;br/&gt;1715089, Curtis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
investigators study the role of vorticity in three problems related to free-
surface water waves in the ocean. Vorticity is a measure of the local rotation
of a fluid. The investigators examine how eddies in fluids drive surface wave
dynamics and how underwater currents that vary with depth affect nonlinear
waves. They also study wind-driven waves and the effects of wind gusts. The
first problem is related to the behavior of shoaling tsunamis in the presence of
submerged eddies. The second leads to better understanding of the heights and
velocities of surface waves over underwater currents, and can contribute to
understanding how pollutants and micro-organisms propagate along underwater
currents. The third helps explain how wind causes the formation of waves on the
ocean surface. Undergraduate students participate in the research, and both
investigators have records of engaging students from under-represented
pools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigators study three separate topics
regarding the influence of vorticity on free-surface water-waves: (1) how
underwater eddies influence surface-wave dynamics, (2) how depth-varying
currents exchange energy between density-stratified layers in the fully
nonlinear regime, and (3) the development of a wind-wave generation model. These
topics are approached through use of modified versions of the Unified Transform
Method, a reformulation of Euler's equations of motion due to Ablowitz, Fokas,
and Musslimani. The methods developed here are able to address a range of
unexplored problems related to vorticity and depth-varying currents that are of
interest to the fluid dynamics and oceanographic communities. For example,
better understanding the stability of interfacial waves over depth-varying shear
provides greater mathematical insight into the energy exchange between wind,
currents, and waves beyond the linear regime. Undergraduate students participate
in the research, and both investigators have records of engaging students from
under-represented groups.