* 1715321
* Mechanistic studies of heterochromatin mesoscale structural dynamics with DNA origami nanotechnology
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Michael Poirier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 647,328.00

The physical properties of the genome play a central role in controlling
essential processes, including gene expression, DNA repair, and DNA replication.
All eukaryotic organisms, from yeast to humans, organize their genomic DNA by
repeatedly wrapping it around DNA-associated proteins, called histones, into
small spools known as nucleosomes. These nucleosomes, which are about a
millionth of a centimeter (10 nanometers) in size, are strung like beads on a
string to form long chromatin fibers that ultimately make up chromosomes. The
spatial arrangement of these nucleosomes within the chromatin fibers continually
changes, often through coordinated movements. However, current technologies are
limited in quantifying these structural rearrangements, and this limitation has
in turn limited our understanding of how chromatin controls gene expression.
This project will monitor structural changes in chromatin as gene expression is
switched between the 'on' and 'off' states by developing DNA-based nanometer-
sized calipers to detect structural changes in chromatin at the 10 nanometer to
100 nanometer scale, which covers a critical range for events during the
regulation of gene expression. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive
training in molecular biology, biochemistry, DNA nanotechnology, and single
molecule detection, which will position them to become significant contributors
as the next generation of biotechnology scientists. The PIs will also work with
outreach programs, including the OSU Minority Engineering Program, the Women in
Engineering Program, and the Masters to Ph.D. Bridge Program, to improve
diversity and interest in the fields of biotechnology and
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of chromatin between open
euchromatin and compact heterochromatin is essential for the regulation of
transcription and cellular differentiation. This conversion is regulated by
histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) and chromatin architectural
proteins that recognize these PTMs to dynamically control chromatin structure.
However, the dynamic chromatin structural properties that regulate transcription
are currently not well understood. These properties includes changes in the
distance between nucleosomes, changes in nucleosome orientation, and the time
for these structural changes to occur. To directly investigate chromatin
structural dynamics, this project is using DNA origami nanotechnology to develop
DNA-based nano-calipers that quantify 10 nm to 100 nm distance changes within
large macromolecular complexes. The project will use this DNA nano-caliper
design to: (i) determine the long range structural dynamics of heterochromatin
that is formed by Heterochromatin Protein 1 as it interacts with the histone H3
PTM, lysine 9 trimethylation, and (ii) determine the long range structural and
dynamic response of compacted heterochromatin to the binding of transcription
activating complexes. This approach involves integrating PTM-containing
chromatin molecules into DNA nano-calipers where each end is attached to
opposite nano-caliper arms. The DNA nano-caliper conformational changes will
then be detected separately with transmission electron microscopy to determine
the distribution of chromatin conformations and single molecule fluorescence to
determine the transition rates between distinct chromatin structural states.
These studies will provide key distance and time measurements of the structural
dynamics that occur during heterochromatin formation and heterochromatin
decompaction as transcription activators bind to their target sites. More
broadly, the development of this DNA origami nanotechnology will be widely
applicable to the study of numerous biological complexes that undergo structural
changes on the 10 nm to 100 nm length scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly supported by the Genetic Mechanisms and the Molecular Biophysics
Programs of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, and by the Biomaterials Program of the Division of
Materials Research in the Directorate for Physical and Mathematical Sciences.