* 1715875
* Collaborative Research:   Ergodic Control of Stochastic Differential Equations Driven By a Class of Pure-Jump Levy Processes, and Applications to Stochastic Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Guodong Pang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2022
* USD 211,720.00

Queueing processes in large-scale networks are ubiquitous in society as
exemplified by patient flow in hospitals, telephone call centers, service
networks, and manufacturing and service operations management. This research
will provide fundamental theoretical understanding of these queueing processes
in the presence of batch arrivals. The results of this research will be put into
direct applications to real-world stochastic networks through collaborations
with the health systems and system analysis industry. This research will support
under-represented minority groups and train young STEM graduates with new
mathematical skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research concerns ergodic
control problems for systems described by Ito stochastic differential equations
(SDEs) driven by pure-jump Levy processes. The research objectives are: (1) to
develop a comprehensive theoretical framework for ergodic control for a large
class of controlled SDEs driven by a pure-jump Levy process; (2) to study a
novel fully nonlinear problem that arises in admission control and falls outside
the usual paradigm of stochastic control; and (3) to develop value iteration
algorithms and spatial approximation methods in order to study large time
asymptotics, and also to facilitate the numerical solution of the associated
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations, and the design of learning schemes for
adaptive control in the presence of unknown parameters. This research will
advance the basic science of applied mathematics and stochastic control, and
make fundamental contributions to applied probability and stochastic networks.