* 1715066
* RUI: Characterizing the Role of Regulatory Genes in Adaptive Evolution to Complex Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Karin Kram, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2023
* USD 455,482.00

This work will characterize a fundamental mechanism of evolution, not only
leading to a better understanding of the evolutionary process, but eventually
allowing for prediction of evolutionary outcomes. The investigators will use
experimental evolution, a technique where organisms are evolved in the
laboratory under strict conditions, allowing the PI to probe basic questions
about the evolutionary process. This process will allow the PI to understand the
role of advantageous mutations, including in genes that affect expression of
other genes. These types of mutations may be particularly advantageous for
organisms in changing environments. This work will be performed in collaboration
with undergraduate and master's students at a Hispanic and Minority Serving
Institution (HSI and MSI), where almost 90% of students are from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. Further, the PI will integrate this project
into her upper division microbiology course as an authentic research experience
for 24-48 undergraduate students per year, and perform outreach activities
related to this project with K-12 educators. In these ways, the research will
help to increase the diversity of students entering the STEM pipeline and leave
them better prepared for roles in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in
gene regulation are a driving force for evolution. Cis regulatory elements are
often the cause of evolutionary change when comparing different species, whereas
trans regulatory elements are often altered when organisms need to adapt to
changing environments. Experimental evolution studies with microbes have begun
to probe the role of these factors, but often in unchanging environments where
either functional or cis regulatory changes would be favored. The PI will
explore the role mutations in trans regulatory elements play in adaptation to a
heterogeneous environment by focusing on mutations identified in two regulatory
genes, cytR and sspA, that they have shown are adaptive in long-term cultures of
Escherichia coli in complex media. To characterize their role in adaptation, the
PI will first correlate the adaptive genotype with the transcriptome of the
population to identify gene expression changes, and determine which of those
changes confer the adaptive phenotype. The PI will then perform experimental
evolution on mutant cells to determine how these mutations may change the
evolutionary pathways cells can use to adapt to a heterogeneous environment.
Understanding how these types of regulatory changes affect adaptation will
contribute to the fundamental understanding of evolutionary principles.