* 1715717
* Collaborative Research: Searching for Dark Matter Subhalos in Distant Strong Gravitational Lenses
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Neal Dalal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2021
* USD 341,454.00

This project aims to transform the NSF facility ALMA, the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array, into a powerful probe of the fundamental physics
of dark matter and the astrophysics of galaxy formation, using an effect known
as gravitational lensing first predicted by Einstein over a century ago. The
main goal of the project is to quantify the properties of dark matter, the
mysterious component of our Universe whose gravity binds galaxies together but
which has eluded detection in collider experiments at our most advanced
accelerators. Dark matter represents the most compelling evidence for new
physics beyond the Standard Model of fundamental physics developed over 40 years
ago and has therefore been the subject of intensive study, both theoretical and
experimental, for many decades. Research supported by this grant will be
incorporated into a program for integrating astronomy into 5th grade classrooms
in Illinois, and undergraduates from underrepresented groups will participate in
research activities under this project at Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program involves a suite of theoretical, numerical, and observational
research to lay the groundwork needed to translate ALMA observations of lensed
dusty galaxies into constraints on the microphysical properties of dark matter.
ALMA observations of gravitationally lensed galaxies will be used to search for
substructure in the mass distributions of the lensing objects. Given the scale
of ALMA data sets and the complexity of the lens modeling required to detect
extremely subtle effects of low-mass substructure, this analysis will be
performed on petascale computing facilities like NSF's Blue Waters using a novel
analysis pipeline developed by the investigating team. Numerical simulations
will be used to quantify the abundance of substructure expected in a variety of
dark matter models that explore different physical characteristics of dark
matter including various self-interactions, temperatures, and Compton
wavelengths, using novel simulation software written by the investigating team.
In addition, stacked optical/IR observations of detected dark matter subhalos
will provide the most stringent bounds to date on the mean stellar mass - halo
mass relation in the smallest galaxies, a crucial input for all models of galaxy
formation.