* 1715840
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The role of quality control in microbial translation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Michael Ibba, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 11/30/2020
* USD 599,068.00

Translating the four-letter code of RNA into the twenty-two-letter alphabet of
proteins is a central feature of cellular life. Cells have evolved a number of
so-called quality control strategies to ensure the accuracy of this process and
to prevent accumulation of errors in cellular proteins. However, these
mechanisms do not seem to operate the same way all the time. Rather, they appear
to vary when cells experience environmental stress. The goal of this research is
to understand this variation and its effect on cellular fitness. The results
could reveal new insights on how this quality control pathway could be used as a
key control point for manipulating microbial growth and development. The project
will integrate laboratory research and training programs for students at
graduate, undergraduate and high school levels, including members of
historically underrepresented minorities. The project will also establish a
program for mentoring and lab-shadowing for community college transfer students
to promote their productive engagement in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accuracy of translating the genetic code
determines how faithfully the information in a genome is transformed into
proteins with correct amino acid sequences. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases play a
key role in accurate translation by correctly pairing cognate tRNAs with their
corresponding amino acids. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases select the correct tRNA
with comparative ease due to the unique sequences and structures found in these
small RNAs. By contrast, the simplicity of amino acid structures makes
discrimination between them far more difficult, posing a potential threat to
accurate translation of the genetic code and by extension, to healthy cell
growth. To prevent the accumulation of errors during translation of the genetic
code, many synthetases have several quality control mechanisms to limit the
attachment of incorrect or near-cognate amino acids to tRNAs. These synthetase
proofreading activities provide quality control checkpoints that help to prevent
the formation of an aberrant proteome. Despite the intrinsic need for high
accuracy during translation of the genetic code, the requirements for quality
control vary depending on cellular physiology and changes in environmental
growth conditions. While translation quality control by synthetases has not been
shown to be essential in any organism, both its presence and absence can be
critical for optimal growth and cellular fitness under various conditions in
different organisms. This project will use state-of-the art quantitative and
genetic approaches to investigate to what extent synthetase quality control can
vary depending on environmental conditions and to determine whether such changes
in accuracy are beneficial, detrimental or neutral to cellular fitness.