* 1715671
* CIF: Small: The Interplay Between Convex Feasibility Problems and Minimization Problems in Signal Recovery
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Patrick Combettes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 362,067.00

Signal recovery encompasses the large body of inverse problems in which a signal
is to be restored or reconstructed from the observation of data consisting of
measurements physically or mathematically related to it. The importance of this
field stems from its pervasiveness in numerous areas of science and engineering,
including medical imaging, geophysics, astronomy, electron microscopy,
nondestructive testing, seismology, telecommunications, social media analysis,
and homeland security. This project investigates foundational principles guiding
the formulation of signal recovery problems as convex optimization problems and
develops new strategies and methodologies for data processing that significantly
improve the efficiency of existing techniques and broadens their
scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the interplay between two
prominent frameworks that coexist in relative independence in signal recovery,
namely convex feasibility problems and convex minimization problems. These two
approaches employ different principles to exploit the prior knowledge and the
data, their mathematical formalizations lead to distinct fixed point paradigms,
and the algorithms used to solve them do not rely on the same techniques. The
investigator shows that, despite these profound divergences, fruitful
connections can be established between the two formalisms, that are mutually
beneficial and suggest new models and algorithms. An important outcome of this
research is a relaxation model that bridges the gap between feasibility and
minimization formulations. Another highlight is a novel proximal geometric
framework for solving structured minimization problems using a deep cutting
plane technology adapted from convex feasibility algorithms. The impact of the
theoretical findings and of the new algorithms resulting from this research is
illustrated through applications to concrete signal recovery problems.