* 1715970
* AF:   Small:   Collaborative Research:   A Robust Framework for Overcoming the Tangled Mesh Problem
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Krishnan Suresh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Engineers rely heavily on computer simulation to design and create products. A
critical part of computer simulation is mesh generation, where a virtual model
of, say an aircraft landing-gear, is divided into a large number of simpler
shapes, such as triangles, squares, and cubes. Unfortunately, for complex
models, these simple shapes can get 'entangled' and overlap, which can lead to
erroneous simulation results. This project will address this long-standing
problem by developing: (1) new simulation methods that can work with a mildly
tangled mesh, and (2) new methods of 'untangling' bad tangles. The project will
have a significant impact on simulation in disciplines from biomechanics to
manufacturing, and the team will create software for release to the scientific
community. The PIs will create teaching modules to excite young students on the
interconnectivity between meshes, scientific computing, and engineering. Both
universities will host outreach activities on computer simulation for K-12
students, including underrepresented minority students.

This project will develop a novel finite-cell simulation method to compute
accurate results on tangled meshes that avoid certain types of explicit
tangling. Therefore, in parallel, a new class of nonlinear optimization methods
will be developed to handle tangling in quadrilateral, hexahedral, and high-
order meshes that are significantly more difficult to untangle; the aim is to
handle any input mesh by untangling until a numerically correct simulation can
be guaranteed. The viability of this unified and robust framework will be
demonstrated through targeted applications.