* 1715670
* Collaborative Research: A Large Stellar Library for Astronomical Research
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jon Holtzman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2022
* USD 76,313.00

Astronomers need to know the detailed colors of stars ("spectra") at visible and
infrared wavelengths to conduct research about stars, galaxies, and the regions
outside of galaxies in the Universe (for example, understanding different groups
of stars in galaxies). The libraries of stellar spectra that we have today do
not offer enough high-quality information to use for the studies of today's
astronomers. For this project, the investigators will build a large library of
high-quality spectra for about 6000 stars using observations made on existing
telescopes and instruments. This project will serve the national interest as it
promotes the progress of research in astronomy by providing high-quality
standards for astronomers to use to do their research. The investigators will
make and use a teaching unit with a web app for introductory college astronomy
education that will help students understand how astronomers can learn about
populations of stars using spectra. They will also train graduate students and
run outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stellar spectral libraries
underpin spectroscopic analysis in stellar, galactic, and extragalactic
astronomy; they are fundamental for modeling stellar populations in galaxies.
Existing empirical stellar libraries have poor sampling in several important
parts of the stellar parameter space, do not provide adequate wavelength
coverage and spectral resolution for the state-of-the-art galaxy surveys, and
often have poor flux calibration. Theoretical stellar libraries are not yet
realistic enough to match the observed colors of stars and galaxies; this
reveals an incomplete understanding of important stellar physics. To address
these problems, the investigators will build a large, well-calibrated, high
quality empirical stellar library of ~6000 stars with much more extensive
coverage of stellar parameter space than previous efforts. The spectra will
cover the wavelength range of 3600-10,300Å at a resolution of R~2000, with
better than 3% relative flux calibration. It will be achieved by conducting
parallel optical observations piggybacking on the APOGEE-2 survey as part of
Sloan Digital Sky Survey-IV. The investigators will develop and then use an
instructional unit with a web app for college introductory astronomy education
that will help students understand how astronomers can learn about the stellar
populations of a galaxy from its spectrum. The investigators will also train
graduate students and conduct outreach activities.