* 1715609
* Using Polarization to Reveal the Nature of Lyman-alpha Nebulae
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Ann Zabludoff, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2022
* USD 390,729.00

Astronomers seek to understand how stars and galaxies formed. The early universe
was believed to be pervaded by diffuse gas. All this gas should have collapsed
into stars by now under the influence of gravity. However, most of it is
diffuse. Only a small fraction now resides in galaxies. Zabludoff and
collaborators study mysterious, glowing clouds of such gas that may be the
progenitors of galaxies. To understand their glowing emission, these
investigators will study polarization of their light. Polarization can reveal
the nature of their underlying power sources. This study is enabled by a special
instrument at the 6.5m MMT telescope that is sensitive to polarization while
also recording images. The project will reveal how galaxies interact with their
environments. In addition to this ground-breaking research, the PI will engage
in outreach activities. Such activities will include participating in an
astronomy workshop for teenage girls and research and career presentations to a
native American community. Such efforts support broadening participation in
science among underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
study of Lyman-alpha blobs, which are giant (~100 kpc) glowing clouds of gas
that are associated with rich clusters of galaxies. The source of their Lyman-
alpha emission is not known. Two possibilities include photo-ionizing radiation
produced in situ or resonant scattering of radiation from a central source.
Polarization measurements can differentiate between these mechanisms because
resonant scattering leads to large polarization gradients while in situ
photoionization produces no polarization. Zabludoff and collaborators will study
a statistical sample of dozens of such galaxies with the SPOL imaging spectro-
polarimeter on the 6.5 m MMT telescope. Analysis of such data will be compared
with radiative transfer models to reveal how blobs glow and under what
circumstances different mechanisms are responsible. This research will lead to a
more detailed connection between massive galaxies and the circumgalactic medium
in which they live.