* 1715078
* CHS: Small: Tracking and Unpacking Rumor Permutations to Understand Collective Sensemaking Online
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Kate Starbird, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2021
* USD 510,188.00

This research addresses empirical and conceptual questions about online
rumoring, asking: (1) How do online rumors permute, branch, and otherwise evolve
over the course of their lifetime? (2) How can theories of rumor spread in
offline settings be extended to online interaction, and what factors
(technological and behavioral) influence these dynamics, perhaps making online
settings distinct environments for information flow? The dynamics of information
flow are particularly salient in the context of crisis response, where social
media have become an integral part of both the formal and informal communication
infrastructure. Improved understanding of online rumoring could inform
communication and information-gathering strategies for crisis responders,
journalists, and citizens affected by disasters, leading to innovative solutions
for detecting, tracking, and responding to the spread of misinformation and
malicious rumors. This project has the potential to fundamentally transform both
methods and theories for studying collective behavior online during disasters.
Techniques developed for tracking rumors as they evolve and spread over social
media will aid other researchers in addressing similar problems in other
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer this project's core questions,
researchers will develop novel methods to identify and track rumors over time,
detecting threads within a rumor story as well as permutations in the rumor
itself. This will allow researchers to map rumor trajectories, providing insight
into the structure of specific rumors and broader rumor types. Using these maps,
researchers will employ complementary quantitative and qualitative analysis,
together with conceptual modeling, to better understand online collective
sensemaking processes through the lens of rumor permutations. Qualitative
analysis will involve classifying and understanding the underlying rationale for
different types of permutations, and quantitative models will help researchers
understand aggregate patterns of different kinds of permutations across rumors,
to draw conclusions about collective sensemaking at scale. Through analysis of
social media data and interviews, researchers will refine and extend emerging
methods for doing mixed-method analysis on large-scale, online interaction. Work
to enhance empirical and conceptual understandings of online rumoring and
collective sensemaking will provide an opportunity to extend classical theories
of rumor distortion based on ideas of leveling, sharpening and assimilation and
to develop new theories for the spread of complex stories online, incorporating
story dynamics and factors specific to online spaces.