* 1715630
* Cool Galactic Winds and Gas Accretion: Joint Constraints from Integral Field Spectroscopy and Pencil Beam Probes
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Kate Rubin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 06/30/2022
* USD 276,406.00

Astronomers seek to understand how diffuse gas throughout the Universe formed
into galaxies. Under the influence of gravity alone, all this gas should have
collapsed into stars. However, most of the matter in the Universe is not in
stars; it is diffuse gas. Furthermore, galaxies rarely show gas falling in; it
is almost always flowing out. Study of diffuse gas around galaxies is needed to
understand how some small fraction of this tenuous vapor finally gave rise to
the universe we know today. In this project, Rubin and collaborators take
advantage of new observations of hundreds of galaxies that reveal nearby gas.
Their specialized methods are sensitive to cool gas, which is relatively massive
and dense. They can image its position and determine its velocity relative to
each galaxy. The result will be a large sample of galaxies and gas flows to
provide new constraints for theoretical models. The PI will recruit and train
undergraduates from underserved populations to participate in the analysis.
Suitable projects that fit into the overall research plan have been defined.
These projects make use of modern, inquiry-based teaching
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will draw upon data from the ongoing
Sloan Digital Sky Survey / Mapping Nearby Galaxies at APO (MaNGA) initiative,
which has obtained integral field unit (IFU) spectroscopy of several thousand
nearby galaxies. Rubin and collaborators will study cold, neutral gas via the Na
I transition, which is accessible to ground-based, optical spectroscopy. They
will form two dimensional velocity maps of this gas and compare them to
broadband imaging of each galaxy. These data will be augmented with a
complementary study of Ca II and Na I absorption spectroscopy of a sample of
galaxies with fortuitously aligned, background-illuminating quasars. This
complementary investigation will be performed using Keck telescope observations,
for which partial time has already been awarded. Together, these investigations
will provide a census of the incidence, morphology, and mass of gas inflows.
They will also address whether large-scale outflows can be linked to intrinsic
galaxy properties and orientation and whether supernova ejecta can plausibly
drive the momentum of such outflows. Undergraduates will be recruited from San
Diego State University, a federally designated Hispanic Serving Institution.
Undergraduate research projects will include generating a publishable catalog of
Keck spectroscopy, and analysis of MaNGA derived gas flow morphology and
kinematics.