* 1715103
* Dissecting the molecular players essential for polar growth in Agrobacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Patricia Zambryski, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 02/28/2022
* USD 900,000.00

This project has the potential to change our understanding of growth in
bacteria. During bacterial growth the cell wall is typically understood to
enlarge by the dispersed generation of new wall material. However, it is now
known that some important agricultural and pathogenic bacteria expand their cell
walls during growth by adding new material at the ends (poles) of the cells.
This project will elucidate the mechanisms of polar growth in Agrobacterium and
the manner in which polar growth is integrated with cell division. The project
will provide a postdoctoral fellow and graduate student advanced training in
plant science, and the PI will engage in public outreach with lectures at
museums and during the University's CalDay public open house event. The PI will
also teach a course a course on "The Secret Life of Plants" to non-science major
undergraduates that emphasizes social, environmental and economic aspects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will elucidate the mechanisms of
polar growth in bacteria, addressing the following specific issues: 1) Defining
the proteins that comprise the Agrobacterium polar growth machinery, using full-
length and Agrobacterium specific sub-domains of FtsA, FtsZ, PopZ, PopJ,
LDT-0845, and TipN as bait in yeast two hybrid screens to identify novel
interacting partners. 2) Genetic depletion of essential Agrobacterium cell cycle
factors to determine their primary phenotypes, using riboswitch technology to
acutely deplete cells of FtsA, FtsZ, PopZ, PodJ, LDT-0845, and TipN and using
time-lapse fluorescence deconvolution and high resolution structured
illumination microscopy (SIM). 3) The role of Agrobacterium TipN-At as a
potential polar growth organizing center.