* 1715317
* RUI: Elucidating the mechanisms of site specific DNA cleavage using single molecule methods
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Allen Price, Emmanuel College
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2021
* USD 340,471.00

This project will investigate how protein molecules are able to find specific
locations in the genome accurately and quickly. Since there are over three
billion base pairs in the human genome, this is akin to finding a needle in a
haystack. Scientists have discovered that many proteins slide along the DNA
during their search. Using highly sensitive techniques that can observe single
molecules of DNA, this project will investigate how and why proteins slide. The
proteins studied in this project, known as restriction endonucleases, cleave DNA
into two strands once they bind to their target site. Many proteins that
regulate and maintain the genome cleave DNA in their normal functioning. New
techniques of genetic engineering also require cleavage of DNA at a specific
site. This project will investigate how this process occurs. All laboratory work
will be carried out by undergraduate students who will be trained in cutting
edge technical skills as well as in scientific thinking and problem solving.
Concepts from this research will be included in courses taught by the
investigator. In addition, the investigator will hold workshops for students and
teachers from Boston public schools. The workshops will expose high school
students to scientific research and help teachers to create materials they can
take back with them to use in their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Site
specific DNA cleavage is a crucial step in antibody production, the prokaryotic
adaptive immune system and genome editing. This project will investigate the
target search strategies and cleavage mechanisms of a model system (restriction
endonucleases) using a combination of single-molecule techniques and
computational modeling. In one technique, microbeads tethered with DNA will be
used to measure the exact time of cleavage of individual DNA molecules. In a
single experiment, hundreds of DNA can be measured to yield high resolution
kinetic data. A second technique will use fluorescence to track the diffusion of
individual proteins along DNA. One dimensional diffusion constants, as well as
off-rates, can be determined from single particle trajectories. Theoretical
models of target search will be developed and compared to experimental data.
Computer simulations of random walks, as well as models based on chemical
kinetics, will be explored. The PI will train undergraduate students in
research, scientific communication and scientific writing. Modules on tethered
Brownian motion and DNA cleavage will be introduced into a biochemistry course.
In outreach activities, half day research experiences for Boston area high
school students will be held. In addition, a professional development course for
high school teachers will be created.