* 1715232
* RUI:Protocadherin cytoplasmic interactions, trafficking and anti-adhesion
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Greg Phillips, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2022
* USD 468,124.00

In the brains of organisms as diverse as fruit flies to humans, developing
neurons generally recognize one another through specific types of receptors. It
is well-known that The surfaces of growing neurons can adhere to other neurons
and glial cells through receptors called cell adhesion molecules. However, axons
and dendrites from the same neuron must avoid each other so that they do not
cross. The protocadherins (Pcdhs) are proteins that are related to conventional
cell adhesion molecules, but appear to mediate the self-avoidance process in the
vertebrate nervous system. This project aims to study the mechanism of the anti-
adhesive process by which neurons achieve self-avoidance. This project will
recruit undergraduate researchers, under the guidance of the principal
investigator and experienced graduate students and/or research associates, to
study Pcdh mediated anti-adhesion in cells using cutting-edge molecular
biological and cellular imaging techniques. The project will contribute to the
understanding of neural development. The experience that these undergraduates
receive from this project will be an essential part of their training for
careers in education, biology research, as well as preparation for medical and
dental schools and other postgraduate programs in health care-related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study how an interesting class of neural
cell receptors, the clustered protocadherins (Pcdhs), hallmarks of complex
vertebrate brains, function in wiring neurons during development. The Pcdhs
resemble cell surface adhesion molecules but are prominently trafficked in
internal compartments including the endosome/lysosome system. It is hypothesized
that this intracellular trafficking might be related to the anti-adhesive
properties of Pcdhs. An amino acid segment of the cytoplasmic domain from one
Pcdh family member that controls intracellular trafficking (termed the VCD
motif) has been mapped. The function of this segment and similar segments in
other Pcdh family members needs to be elaborated and how Pcdhs cause cell
membranes to detach needs to be studied. In this project, VCD motifs from
representatives of Pcdh subfamilies will be studied by site-directed mutagenesis
and trafficking assays. The ability of these motifs to physically interact will
also be characterized. Critical residues for VCD motif function will be
identified and used to create trafficking defective Pcdh mutants that will be
used to study the requirements for correct intracellular trafficking in the
anti-adhesive process. The ability of wild-type and mutant Pcdhs to undergo
trans-endocytosis from one interacting cell to the other, a proposed mechanism
for anti-adhesion, will be characterized by correlative light and electron
microscopy. Finally, how Pcdh mediated cell-cell interaction affects the levels
of other cell-surface adhesion molecules by altering the rate of lysosomal
degradation will be characterized and proteins up- or down-regulated by Pcdh
interaction identified by quantitative proteomics. Completion of these
experiments will lead to a better understanding of how Pcdhs affect interacting
cells in neural development.