* 1715202
* III: Small: Novel Statistical Data Analysis Approaches for Mining Human Genetics Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Petros Drineas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,984.00

The advent of modern genotyping and sequencing technologies has revolutionized
human genetics research, allowing researchers to truly understand how different
we are from one another. Large datasets describing the common patterns of human
genetic variation may be easily thought of as matrices, with the rows
representing individuals and the columns representing loci in the genome that
correspond to common polymorphisms. The broader impact of such datasets cannot
be overemphasized: they are a key resource for researchers to use to find genes
affecting health, disease, and responses to drugs and environmental factors, as
well as understanding the evolutionary and biological history of our species.
Extracting useful information from such datasets promotes the progress of
science and, at the same time, advances national health, prosperity and welfare.
This project will bridge the gap between state-of-the-art algorithms for data
analysis developed in the theoretical computer science and applied mathematics
communities and the application of such algorithms to the analysis of the
increasingly larger volume of datasets in the human genetics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the context of this project, first, from an
algorithmic perspective, the project team will design and analyze novel
algorithms for three prototypical, fundamental research topics that combine
linear algebra and randomization, namely sparse Principal Components Analysis,
matrix completion, and linear (or kernel) discriminant analysis. All three
topics have been widely popular in the theoretical computer science, machine
learning, and applied mathematics communities. Yet these research topics have
been essentially overlooked by the population genetics community. Second, from a
population genetics perspective, the team will apply the developed algorithms to
gain novel insights regarding population structure, ancestry informative
markers, and natural selection, as well as improve imputation methods and
Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) data analysis. All three methods will be
evaluated on population genetics datasets that are available to the PIs. The
project will train graduate students and will disseminate the results of the
research to a broad community of applied mathematicians, theoretical computer
scientists, and population geneticists.