* 1715094
* Exploring Identity Formation of Minority Women in STEM through International research experiences
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Holly Okonkwo, Okonkwo                 Holly          O
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This postdoctoral fellowship provides an
emerging scholar-scientist with an opportunity to explore the ways participation
in international research shape the academic and personal development of women
from underrepresented backgrounds in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) fields. Over the past decade, there has been a steady
increase in the rate of international research collaboration and the
representation of international students and scientists within the United
States. Science, now more than ever, requires the ability to navigate global and
local networks of people, technologies and places. Concurrently, the
underrepresentation of women of color in STEM fields is well documented and has
been framed as a challenge impacting our ability to solve the complex problems
of our times and represents a loss of talent and expertise. This research
provides insights into international research programs as an innovative strategy
towards broadening participation in STEM. The findings of this project will
contribute to the development of effective strategies to prepare U.S students to
enter the emerging globalized STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
entitled, Exploring Identity Formation of Minority Women in STEM through
International Research Experiences, explores the ways transnational research
experiences shape the identity formation of women from underrepresented
backgrounds in science, technology, engineering and mathematics(STEM) fields.
More specifically, this research examines the ways in which varying cultural
contexts of scientific inquiry may inform these experiences and the complexities
of identity formation across the intersections of race, gender, class, and what
it means to be a scientist through the cultural and material practices of
contemporary international science agendas and networks. This project takes a
multi-sited approach combining participant observation, free-listing, semi-
structured and structured interviews and experimental research. The primary
objectives are to (1) examine the ways women from underrepresented backgrounds
negotiate and contest multiple ways of knowing, being and becoming (2)
categorize the responses and strategies the women in this study adapt to
navigate both global and local scientific networks, and (3) explore emerging
models of social organization and collaboration in transnational STEM research.
This research aims to advance our understandings of ways the cultural
constructions of race and gender are reconfigured, challenged and preserved in
the context of transnational STEM education and research. In addition, the
findings of this study are expected to contribute to the development of
strategies towards not only increasing gender, racial and ethnic diversity
within the STEM disciplines, but also preparing students for the rapid
globalization of research and technology development.