* 1715187
* AF: Small: Communication Amid Uncertainty
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Madhu Sudan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Modern communication devices possess enormous ability to compute and to store
information. These abilities enable a rich collection of potential ways in which
the device can aid its user and adapt to their preferences. Unfortunately, this
ability to adapt to the user also introduces challenges when communicating with
other similar devices. Each device is now uncertain about the exact knowledge
and behavior of the other devices. This project explores the theoretical
foundations for communicating with such uncertainty. On the one hand, it focuses
on qualitative issues such as "misunderstanding" and explores how
misunderstanding can be detected and corrected before influential actions are
taken. On the other hand, it also explores the quantitative issues behind how
large shared context can lead to efficient (short) communications even in the
presence of uncertainty. The broader intellectual impact of the project will
come from expanded connections between the mathematical fields of communication
and computer science to fields such as linguistics, philosophy, neuroscience,
and communication studies. Broader impact among the scientific community will
also be achieved by the mentoring and education of junior researchers (Ph.D.
candidates) who intend to pursue their own careers in research. Educational
courses and materials will be developed based on this interdisciplinary research
project. Finally, the project will actively seek broad dissemination of the
progress in research by presentation of the research and its outcomes in
seminars at leading conferences, workshops, and academic and industrial research
institutions, and by posting publications on publicly available websites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific foundations for a theory of uncertain
communication lead to questions on a model of communication that is a blend of
the Shannon model from the 1940s, and the Yao model from the 1970s. On the one
hand, the Shannon model leads to a rich collection of problems that can be
solved adequately when there is no uncertainty. The Yao model, on the other
hand, presents a natural model for capturing uncertainty via the setting of
correlated inputs. Blending the two leads to rich questions
including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Can information be compressed down to its
entropy when sender and receiver are uncertain about the priors used by each
other?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Can the ubiquitous use of randomness be replaced
by mildly correlated random variables while conserving the complexity of
communication?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Can communication remain efficient even
if there is uncertainty about the exact goal of the
communication?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores questions such as the
above by ascribing precise mathematical measures that capture the questions and
then analyzing the resulting measures.