* 1715826
* Systems Biology of Plant Heterotrimeric G-protein Signaling in Overlapping Pathways Regulating Stomatal Closure
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Sarah Assmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

This research will study a specialized plant cell type's response to adverse
environmental conditions to provide new insights into how signaling components
within living cells interact with each other to affect cell function. This
specialized cell type, the guard cell, occurs in the epidermis, where pairs of
guard cells enclose microscopic pores called stomata, through which plants take
up CO2 (the substrate for photosynthesis) and, inevitably, lose water. Resultant
improved understanding of the regulatory mechanisms by which guard cells respond
to drought and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels can assist in development of
crop varieties with greater yield under a range of growing conditions. General
insights into biological networks gained in this project will improve
understanding of dysregulated cell signaling, with broad implications for
physiology, agriculture, and biotechnology. Personnel, including undergraduate
researchers, will be cross-trained in emerging approaches in both experimental
and computational biology. The principal investigators will develop a new course
to introduce first year undergraduates to biological networks and other
mathematical biology concepts and encourage STEM participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterotrimeric G-proteins, composed of G-alpha subunits
and G-beta-gamma dimers, comprise a ubiquitous signaling mechanism found in
organisms as diverse as fungi, animals, and plants. This research will study G
protein involvement in guard cell drought and CO2 signaling networks to address
the fundamental question of whether and how G-alpha subunits compete for or
partition their interaction with specific G-beta-gamma dimers. In plants, guard
cells are the best understood single cell system of G protein regulation. In
response to the hormone abscisic acid (ABA; an indicator of drought and other
stresses), and to elevated concentrations of CO2, complex signaling networks are
activated in guard cells that drive stomatal closure. This project will use
genetic analyses to determine competition vs. partitioning of the four G-alpa
subunits for the three Arabidopsis G-beta-gamma dimers during ABA and CO2
responses. The research will apply tests of protein-protein interaction to
assess new candidate G protein interactors and to determine how G protein
signaling interconnects with other known ABA and CO2 signaling components of
guard cells. The project will develop new general reachability analysis and
combinatorial logic methods to describe convergent or overlapping networks, and
these methods will then be applied to the new experimental datasets obtained to
create a new network model of the core components of G protein, ABA, and CO2
signaling. The new combinatorial logic methods for network construction
developed will advance fundamental knowledge in systems biology: they will be
applicable to directional signaling and genetic networks of any organism, and
will enable a paradigm shift from assuming isolated linear pathways (e.g. as in
classic epistasis analysis) to considering all network architectures consistent
with a set of observations. Thus, the results from this research will have
general implications for the common but complex phenomenon of cross-talk in
biological systems.