* 1715246
* Tidal Dissipation and Evolution of Stars Around Massive Black Holes:  An Eccentric Path to Tidal Disruption
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Dong Lai, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2021
* USD 554,553.00

Tidal disruption events (TDEs) occur when a star passes close to a massive black
hole (MBH) and is torn apart by tidal forces. These events produce luminous,
short-lived flares, which can be observed from Earth. Most "normal" TDEs occur
when the star passes within the tidal radius of the MBH, leading to a one-time
shredding of the star. However, it is possible that stars are captured into
highly eccentric orbits with closest approach distance larger than the tidal
radius. These stars will not be immediately disrupted but will undergo multiple
tidal encounters with the MBH.  A research team at Cornell University will study
the physics of such encounters, including the oscillations and waves set up in
the star, and then use powerful computer models to determine how the evolution
of the star and its orbit around the MBH are affected and whether the star will
ultimately be torn apart.  The research team will include both graduate and
undergraduate students and will produce visualizations and animations of the
results for use in educational and outreach programs.

The research team will study a new regime for TDEs, involving multiple
pericenter passages of a star with a MBH, leading to a qualitatively different
evolutionary path toward tidal disruption and a potentially distinct
observational signature.  The projects that will be undertaken range from well-
defined to exploratory and the work has the potential to lead to new
discoveries. The research will enhance the understanding of the interaction
between stars and MBHs at the centers of galaxies and will help interpret
ongoing and future observations of luminous transient sources.