* 1715718
* The Gaia Satellite, White Dwarf Stars, and the Age of the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ted von Hippel, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2022
* USD 215,790.00

The Milky Way is pictured as containing four major populations of stars known as
the thin disk, thick disk, bulge, and halo. All these populations formed more
than 8 billion years ago and must be younger than about 13.7 billion years old,
the age of the Universe. For perspective, the Sun is about 4.5 billion years
old. Yet, the ages of each of these Galactic populations is uncertain to one or
two billion years. Without better knowledge of the ages of these populations,
astronomers cannot answer fundamental questions about the formation of the
Galaxy. To progress on these questions, astronomers need to improve how they
determine the ages of stars. The investigators developed a new technique that
more precisely determines the ages of stars than any prior technique. This
technique takes advantage of data from the Gaia satellite and advanced Bayesian
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train physics, mathematics,
and software engineering students at Embry Riddle Aeronautical University in
modern statistical and analysis methods. The students will gain valuable
experience working with researchers and students abroad. The team includes the
statistics group at Imperial College in London, England, and the Gaia research
group at the Max Planck Institute in Heidelberg, Germany. The project is
committed to including the full participation of women and underrepresented
minorities. Therefore, the project will improve Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education in the United States. It will also
contribute to a diverse and globally competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many types of stars are presently used as age
proxies, yet among them white dwarf stars hold the most promise. A white dwarf's
luminosity directly encodes its age, but this relies on accurately measuring its
distance. The Gaia satellite is currently measuring the most accurate and
precise trigonometric parallax distances ever obtained. Among the ~1.7 billion
stars that Gaia is observing, there will be ~15,000 white dwarfs within 100 pc
with typical distance uncertainties &lt; 1%. This compares to only two white
dwarfs with distances presently known this accurately. The proposers will
combine these Gaia data with optical and near-infrared photometry from ground-
based surveys. They will analyze these data with their well-tested modeling
technique, which relies on Bayesian statistics and state-of-the-art model
ingredients. These unprecedented data and new modeling technique will allow the
proposers to (1) derive ages for thousands of white dwarfs with typical age
precisions of 1 to 5%, and then subsequently determine (2) the star formation
history in the disk, (3) the onset and cessation of star formation in the thick
disk, and (4) the mean age and age dispersion of the halo.