* 1715721
* The Regulatory Consequences of Transcription Factor Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Veronica Hinman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project will explain how evolutionary changes in an animal's DNA sequence
lead to evolution of morphology, and will more fully explain how genomes work.
Genomes are broadly comprised of genes which encode proteins, and the non-gene,
noncoding regions. An important function of these noncoding DNA sequences is to
bind proteins, which in turn will control when, where, and to what level the
genes are activated, or expressed. How these DNA:protein interactions evolve and
direct changes in gene expression is almost entirely unknown. The research here
will contribute to an understanding of how proteins can evolve changes in the
strength, or affinity, of DNA binding, and how this leads to the evolution of
gene expression. The project will also provide training opportunities to a
postdoctoral fellow, including opportunities for training in mentoring more
junior scientists. Undergraduates will be meaningfully engaged in hands-on,
self-directed research training in genomics, genetics, bioinformatics and
evolution. Such cross-disciplinary training is critical for preparing the next
generation of biologists. The lab group will also reach out to local area high
school students by providing a module in animal diversity, evolution, and the
use of genome and bioinformatics tools, thereby extending the existing
curriculum and engaging students early in their biology education. The
sequencing data generated from this research will be housed in an online, openly
accessible database. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the first
comparative, broad-scale, in vivo experimental validation that low- and high-
affinity transcription factor binding sites confer functional differences in
gene expression and will contribute to an understanding of how this has evolved.
Recent technologies have been developed that allow assessment of the range of
DNA binding preferences and associated affinities for transcription factors. Use
of these technologies demonstrated that three orthologous transcription factors
--mouse Eomesodermin, sea urchin Tbrain and sea star Tbrain--have maintained
almost identical high-affinity binding motif preferences but have evolved
changed preferences for a low-affinity motif. The project here directly extends
this work to examine the roles that transcription factor DNA binding affinity
may have in regulating gene expression, and the consequences that this has for
phenotype. Using echinoderm embryos as a model, the project uses whole-genome
ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq, together with a new, medium-throughput "nanotag" method,
to assess regulatory function in vivo. The aim is to determine the association
between motif use and response to changing levels of Tbrain and its putative
cofactor Smad2/3. This will test whether high-affinity or low-affinity motifs
are most responsive to changing levels of Tbr protein, if association depends on
the number of sites, and how this response will differ between the two species.
The work is expected to provide a new conceptual framework for how gene
expression can evolve through use of high- and low-affinity binding sites.