* 1715183
* Locus specific manipulation of chromatin function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Mazhar Adli, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2020
* USD 430,000.00

In eukaryotic cells, the DNA genome is tightly packaged in the nucleus by close
physical association with small proteins called histones. Chemical modifications
of the histone proteins can loosen or strengthen their association with DNA.
Such chemical changes have been correlated indirectly with changes in how the
information in DNA is used, but to date, direct cause-and-effect tests of the
outcome of histone modifications on DNA function have not been feasible. This
project will develop and apply new cutting-edge tools to enable direct
measurements of how histone modifications impact the function of DNA. The
results will provide deeper understanding of normal regulatory mechanisms and
provide a framework for understanding how they contribute to proper growth and
development. In addition to the research goals, the project will also establish
educational outreach activities to attract younger generations to science
through summer research opportunities and seminar series for local high school
students as well as undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regulation of
gene expression is tightly linked to mechanisms that package DNA inside the
nucleus. DNA is wrapped around histone proteins to form chromatin fiber. Small
chemical modifications on histone proteins or DNA, which are called epigenetic
modifications, are associated with gene activation or repression. Understanding
the molecular details of how epigenetic modifications regulate gene expression
has immediate implications for better understanding of crucial developmental
processes in both animals and plants. However, due to technical limitations, the
causal relationship between the presence of an epigenetic mark and gene function
in the chromatin is not proven. This project will utilize cutting edge CRISPR-
Cas9-based genome editing tools to deposit specific epigenetic marks at target
genomic sites to study their functional roles over time. By precisely
manipulating temporal and spatial locus-specific epigenetic marks, the project
will address fundamental cause-and-effect mechanisms relating epigenetic
information to changes in gene expression.