* 1715551
* RECONS Explores the Nearest Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Todd Henry, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2020
* USD 495,997.00

The RECONS (REsearch Consortium On Nearby Stars, www.recons.org) project is
measuring the basic properties of several thousand stars that are nearest to the
Sun, out to about 80 light years. Under this award, the team will concentrate on
the smallest stars, known as red dwarfs, and their slightly less massive
cousins, known as brown dwarfs. Although they are the smallest stars in the
Universe, red dwarfs account for more than three-quarters of all stars; so, it
is important to understand how they compare to the Sun in temperature, size, and
whether or not they are orbited by other stars or planets. Students and
postdoctoral researchers will develop mathematical and programming skills.
Georgia State University serves a large population of students from groups
historically underrepresented in scientific careers, and this project will
provide opportunities for student involvement in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cornerstone of the RECONS effort is the
astrometry/photometry program at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in
Chile underway since 1999. Observations made there pinpoint compelling stars
among a target sample of 500 that are observed in greater detail via
observations from other telescopes such as SOAR, Gemini, and HST to characterize
the natures of the stars and their companions. The project will explore two key
questions in stellar astrophysics: (1) What happens to the population of objects
as masses decline from the smallest stars to substellar brown dwarfs? (2) What
is the companion population - stars, brown dwarfs, and massive planets - on
Solar System scales around red dwarfs?