* 1715009
* Investigating the Principles of Fortification Construction
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Joel Palka, Hernandez               Christopher
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. This project is investigating how people
constructed and placed fortifications in the region of Mensabak, Chiapas,
Mexico. The goal is to discern the underlying martial principles employed to
construct Mesoamerican fortifications and build a more robust methodology for
examining past warfare. Scholars throughout the world have debated the frequency
of war in the past and impact of social conflict on the human experience. Yet,
researchers are often constrained by the limits of written history. If scholars
want to understand the impact of warfare on the human experience, then
archaeologists must contribute to the discussion. Archaeology, as a branch of
anthropology, is broadly concerned with culture and human activity in various
times and places. Therefore, archaeologists have developed cross-cultural models
to build analogies for interpreting past fortifications and artifacts of war.
However, the recent cultural turn in military science and history highlights
that context matters in warfare. To understand war, researchers must examine
social conflict in particular cultural contexts, such as Europe during the
Napoleonic Wars and Mesoamerica during Spanish colonization. This project
investigates fortifications within the Maya cultural context. Dependence on
cross-cultural models means archaeologists are often judging the functions of
Maya fortifications based on patterns derived from other cultures. The proposed
research aims at achieving balance between cross-cultural generalization and a
focus on martial practice within particular cultural contexts. Although the case
study is focused on Maya fortifications, the methods being developed will have
broad application for understanding warfare.

Defensive structures are some of the most important archaeological indicators of
past warfare. Arguments for a peaceful past often hinge on the presence or
absence of fortified sites. For example, the myth of a peaceful Maya
civilization was shattered through multiple studies of fortifications from
across the Maya region. This project will examine patterns in how people
construct defensive architecture and processes that may affect archaeological
detection of fortifications. Mensabak is an ideal region to examine past martial
principles because it contains at least three Postclassic/Colonial period (AD
900-1697) fortified sites and ethnohistoric documents provide evidence of how
the Maya practiced war. Mensabak's chronology is crucial for the application of
ethnohistoric data because the documents under examination were written just
after or while Mensabak's fortified sites were occupied. Intensive review of
documentary sources provides data on how fortifications were constructed and
what processes affect defensive structures from time of construction to their
abandonment. Regional variation in fortifications will allow for the
investigation of common patterns underlying Maya fortification construction. Two
of the Mensabak regions defensive systems contain gaps and stop altogether. This
project focuses on investigating if the Maya relied on slope in place of walls
to defend sites. Moreover, does a predominance of wood as a building material
account for gaps or lack of walls at many sites? These findings can help explain
why a majority of Maya and Mesoamerican sites lack evidence of fortifications.
Moreover, his archaeological methods can be applied and tested beyond
Mesoamerica, since slope and preservation affect most archaeological sites. A
major training goal of the proposed project is to integrate underrepresented
students into the ongoing synergistic collaborative research at Mensabak. This
project will be disseminated to the wider public through professional
conferences and presentations open to the public. The results of this research
will be posted on the open-access websites Mesoweb.com and tDAR.org. Overall,
this project promotes a better of understanding of warfare and the human
experience, while broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in
academia and science.