* 1715794
* Mechanisms of Cytoplasmic Streaming
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Vasileios Maroulas, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2022
* USD 857,914.00

This project will explain the intricate characteristics of intracellular
transport systems by determining the biophysical mechanisms responsible for
organelle movements in plant cells through a combination of biological,
computational, and statistical approaches. Biological systems are characterized
by highly complex traits that result from the interplay of much simpler
components. One of the major challenges in modern biology is to define the
interactions of these basic components in order to arrive at the properties of
the full system. Intracellular transport along cytoskeletal filaments represents
such a biological system that is tractable with today's technology. Importantly,
this transport plays fundamental functions in establishing cell polarity, in
mediating growth, and in responding to the environment or to pathogens.
Therefore, better understanding of the mechanisms underlying intracellular
movements as provided by this project may impact, for example, agricultural
yield or treatment of diseases. This project will also establish a paradigm for
the cross-disciplinary training of graduate students at the interface of
molecular cell biology, computational biophysics, and statistical machine
learning. This training will be extended to undergraduate and high school
students who will participate in carefully selected research projects
appropriate for their background. Broader dissemination of the research findings
will occur via a dedicated website as well as through lectures for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytoplasmic streaming in plant cells is
characterized by the rapid movement of organelles along the actin cytoskeleton.
While it is known that these movements are driven by class XI myosin motor
proteins, the precise mechanism for the propulsive mechanism is still debated.
One model posits that myosin motors directly associate with individual
organelles and pull them actively along actin filaments. Another model proposes
that only a few organelles such as the ER directly bind to motors while all
other organelles are propelled indirectly by binding to the actively moving
organelle(s). A third model predicts that a small number of actively moving
organelles generate a hydrodynamic flow in the cytoplasm that transports other
organelles passively along this stream. This project will test these motility
models by developing a series of rigorous tools to model, measure, and evaluate
intracellular dynamics. First, stochastic models will be developed that
translate the concepts of the three motility models into explicit biophysical
descriptions for computer simulations. Second, novel analytical tools will be
developed that are able to capture and describe the complex behavior of
organelles in living cells with high spatiotemporal resolution. Third, a machine
learning approach based on Bayesian considerations will be designed that can
evaluate motility models based on experimental data. Combined with novel tools
for experimental interference with specific organelle movements and
identification of the cellular cargo of two representative myosin XI motors,
this research will deliver a new level of understanding of intracellular
transport along the cytoskeleton that will impact cell biological
interpretations for all eukaryotic systems.