* 1715375
* Uncovering the molecular mechanism of paramutation, a classic example of non-Mendelian inheritance in maize
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Jay Hollick, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2023
* USD 660,000.00

This project investigates a biological mechanism, called paramutation, which is
responsible for turning selected genes "on" and "off" in highly predictable ways
and for passing these "on" and "off" states to future generations. Similar to
the well-known process of mutation, paramutation generates heritable biological
variation that impacts evolutionary success. Unlike mutations, however,
paramutations occur without changes to the DNA code. The project thus addresses
an exception to an established rule of modern genetics by asking how regulatory
information is altered and transmitted to offspring in the absence of DNA
changes. The work will be carried out in corn, the preeminent model for studying
the paramutation mechanism because the "on" and "off" states of genes
responsible for plant color are visually tracked, controlled matings are simple
to perform, and detailed multigenerational pedigrees can be generated and
evaluated. A working model for paramutation has been proposed based on research
and this project tests specific aspects of that model. The project will also
identify novel molecules and chromosome structures responsible for the "on" and
"off" switching during paramutations. Because paramutation occurs in both plants
and animals, the results of this research could have broad biological impact,
ranging from increased understanding of reproductive biology and genetics to
development of novel strategies for improving agriculture or animal health.
Educational materials such as colorful corn ears will be generated and made
available through existing outreach programs for teaching both basic and
advanced genetic concepts in the classroom. The activities integrate the
training of young scientists at undergraduate and graduate levels as well as
provide research experiences for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paramutation describes a behavior in which specific trans-
homolog interactions result in meiotically-heritable regulatory alterations.
This behavior is potentially mediated by small RNAs but the mechanism remain
largely unknown. A model system was developed using plant and flower color to
define the molecular mechanism of paramutation occurring in maize. Expression of
the purple plant1 gene is monitored with visible pigments. A strong purple state
of the Pl1-Rhoades (Pl1-Rh) allele can change to weaker expression states
referred to as Pl'. When purple types (Pl/Pl) are mated with weakly pigmented
plants (Pl/Pl'), only weakly pigmented progeny - from which only Pl' states are
sexually transmitted - are obtained; this is a classic example of paramutation.
Forward genetics identifies important cis-acting regions and fifteen loci whose
functions are required to maintain repression (rmr) of Pl' states. Prior
projects helped identify five RMR proteins acting in a presumed small RNA-
directed DNA methylation pathway and led to the discovery of a co-
transcriptional repression mechanism operating to maintain meiotically-heritable
regulatory states established by paramutation. This project builds on this
emerging mechanistic understanding by combining forward genetics, molecular
profiling, and mutant analyses to specifically 1) test working models of the
paramutation mechanism by profiling transcription, small RNA levels, and
cytosine methylation patterns during paramutation events, 2) functionally define
cis-acting sequences responsible for paramutation behaviors through structural
characterizations of mutant Pl1-Rh alleles, and 3) discover additional molecular
components governing paramutations through positional-based cloning of
additional rmr loci. Training and outreach opportunities are integrated in these
efforts to provide a greater understanding of fundamental eukaryotic genetics
and genome biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Genetics Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.