* 1715623
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Gas throughout the Milky Way Galaxy and Magellanic System of Galaxies with the WHAM-South Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Ralph Shuping, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2019
* USD 211,627.00

The collaborators on this endeavor will use a telescope called WHAM to complete
a long-term project to map the warm gas in the Milky Way Galaxy and nearby
"satellite" galaxies known as the Magellanic Clouds. The telescope is a rather
unusual design and was built specifically for this purpose. WHAM was constructed
and has been maintained and operated for 20 years primarily with NSF funding.
WHAM has led to Postdoctoral degrees and active careers in science for a large
number of young researchers. After a decade at the Kitt Peak Observatory in
Arizona the telescope is now located in Chile. It is operated remotely (over the
internet) and can map the Milky Way in the light produced by different atoms and
ions (charged atoms). Since this warm gas is an important component of the
galaxy, astronomers can better understand how the galaxy is changing and can
test theories of how it was formed and how it is evolving. Graduate and
undergraduate students will continue to be involved in data collection and
analysis as part of the operations team.

This is a collaborative project from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the
Space Science Institute in Boulder that seeks to continue operations support for
the Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM), a remotely controlled facility that is
dedicated to the detection and study of faint optical emission lines in the disk
and halo of the Milky Way.  The WHAM facility consists of a 15 cm aperture dual-
etalon Fabry-Pérot spectrometer coupled to a 60 cm aperture siderostat, which
together provide a one-degree field-of-view on the sky and produce a 12 km/s
resolution spectrum across a 200 km/s spectral window.  A CCD camera serves as a
multichannel detector, recording the spectrum as a Fabry-Pérot "ring image"
without scanning. WHAM began operations on Kitt Peak in January 1997 from where
it surveyed H-alpha emission throughout the entire northern sky (the WHAM-Sky
Survey, or WHAM-SS). Complementary observations of various regions in other
diagnostic emission lines were also obtained. WHAM has subsequently been
refurbished and moved to Cerro Tololo, Chile, achieving first southern light in
March 2009. The WHAM-SS has since been completed, and observations in other
lines ([SII] and [NII]) have begun. With this award the team will complete
mapping in [SII] and [NII], and extend the WHAM (H-alpha) survey to broader
velocities. The overarching goal is to complete existing surveys and support
current students through to the completion of existing projects. The combined
datasets will be used to probe the composition, temperature, heating, and
ionization of the Diffuse Ionized Gas (DIG) and Warm Ionized Medium (WIM). The
team will investigate the relationship between these components and regions of
active star formation. The WHAM facility can also be used to study the earth's
atmosphere, comets, zodiacal dust, and lunar sodium.