* 1715788
* Support for Astrophysics from the CHARA Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Harold McAlister, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,072,467.00

Georgia State University?s Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA)
is an optical/near-infrared interferometric telescope array located on Mount
Wilson, California. The CHARA Array has six 1-meter diameter telescopes placed
in the shape of a Y, letting astronomers use different lines of telescopes
grouped together from the Y to look at different astronomical objects. The
number and size of the telescopes, the lengths of these telescope lines, the
range of wavelengths covered, and its ability to image targets in astronomy,
make CHARA one of the most powerful telescope facilities of its type. Since
2005, when CHARA started operating regularly, the scientists using CHARA have
had significant scientific results. These scientists are now opening the CHARA
telescope array to astronomers from other institutions. This project serves the
national interest by supporting a unique telescope system to promote the study
of multiple, different astronomical objects, advancing the progress of
astronomy. GSU will develop CHARA-related hands-on experiences for their
introductory and advanced undergraduate classes. Located on Mount Wilson, the
Exhibit Hall telling the story of CHARA?s operation and successes will also be
updated for the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CHARA group publications
include the first direct images of a single, main-sequence star (Altair),
starspots on a giant star (Gamma And), an interacting binary (Beta Lyr), and the
expanding fireball of a nova (Nova Del 2013). Among many current applications,
CHARA instruments measure stellar angular diameters, stellar shapes, map surface
features, detect circumstellar disks and envelopes, and resolve binary stars to
determine stellar masses and probe different stages of the evolution of
interacting systems. With the introduction of adaptive optics at each of the six
telescopes, CHARA Array observations will extend to protoplanetary disks around
young stars, binary star systems (including novae, symbiotic stars, and
microquasars), as well as the accretion disks in some active galactic nuclei.
Each of these applications can be done with both high spectral and high spatial
resolution.