* 1715213
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Galaxy Evolution at High Resolution with Gravitational Lensing and ALMA
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Daniel Marrone, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 265,174.00

This project studies the growth of massive galaxies in the first few billion
years after the Big Bang. The target galaxies are magnified by "gravitational
lensing," the bending of light around intervening galaxies, which allows them to
be detected more easily and studied in greater detail than other galaxies at
similar distance. The primary data come from the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA). With these and other data, the team will
determine how these galaxies form stars so rapidly and shut down their formation
so quickly, look for evidence of black hole growth in the galaxies, determine
the number of such galaxies in the Universe to see how they affect the overall
history of cosmic star formation, and test the modern cosmological paradigm by
exploring their lensing in great detail. This award will support the teaching of
astronomy through examples from this research to fifth grade classes in
Illinois, hands-on radio astronomy technology experiences for high school
students in Arizona, and training of undergraduate and graduate students in
advanced techniques of radio astronomy and
interferometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue several goals using
gravitationally lensed galaxies discovered by the South Pole Telescope: (1)
determine the triggering mechanisms for the most intense star formation events
in the high redshift Universe, (2) study the regulation and termination of star
formation by observing gas dynamics and outflows, (3) study the assembly of
massive elliptical galaxies by determining stellar masses, star formation rates,
and gas content in such galaxies at very high redshift, (4) explore the
coevolution of black hole accretion and stellar mass assembly in these objects,
(5) measure metal enrichment with far-infrared atomic lines, (6) determine the
space density of these extreme starbursts and connect them to state of the art
galaxy formation simulations, and (7) identify substructure in the halos lensing
these galaxies to test the predictions of current cosmology models. These goals
are largely achievable based on the data already promised in ALMA cycles 3 and 4
using the advanced interferometric analysis tools that have been built up over
the past several years. The team incorporates both observers and theorists to
ensure that the lessons derived from these high-resolution views of the early
Universe can be compared against and fed back into state-of-the-art galaxy
formation simulations.