* 1715764
* Establishing a core signaling mechanism for the multi-functional FERONIA receptor kinase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Alice Cheung, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2024
* USD 944,455.00

The ultimate goal of the research is to understand how plants grow, develop and
thrive even when under adverse environmental conditions, thus potentially
augmenting society's ability to ensure sustainable agricultural productivity and
ecological balance. To accomplish the goals of the research, a team of students
comprised of undergraduates, doctoral students and postdoctoral associates will
be trained to carry out a range of projects focused on a cell membrane located
molecule, called FERONIA, known to play key roles in diverse aspects of plant
growth and survival. These projects will provide them with training in
biochemistry, cell biology and molecular biology, the basics of how cells and
organisms function, which will enhance their ability to emerge as teachers and
researchers. Workshops offering hands-on exposure to experiments related to the
project and compatible to a high school laboratory will be offered to teachers
in STEM who will also be offered further mentoring to encourage incorporation of
some of the materials into their classroom exercises or discussions. Topics
related to the research area will be incorporated into a teaching effort that
fosters skills in science writing to inform the public. Together these
activities should broaden society's pipeline for future scientists as well as
improve public awareness of the scientific inquiry process and the importance of
its products. Moreover, FERONIA is conserved among plant species; the knowledge
and research materials generated by this project should stimulate interest and
facilitate similar inquiries in agriculturally important crops and in efforts to
ensure vibrant growth of plants in their native habitats, including under harsh
conditions, thus with the potential to impact global issues such as food
production and a sustainable ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research supported
by this award focuses on understanding how FERONIA, from the model plant
Arabidopsis, controls a broad array of processes critical for plant growth,
development and coping with environmental stresses. FERONIA belongs to a class
of molecules called receptor kinases, which play key roles in sensing changes
outside the cell and translating these signals to stimulate cellular responses
appropriate for the incoming signals. Although the importance of receptor
kinases has long been established in plants by voluminous research, the diverse
functional roles carried out by FERONIA is striking and how it is accomplished
remains puzzling. The goal of this project is to determine how FERONIA
orchestrates what must be a complex network of biochemical and cell biological
processes needed to execute its functions. In particular, the project seeks to
elucidate a core signal transduction pathway capable of serving as a hub with
which the various FER-regulated processes might be integrated. This core
pathway, referred to as FER/LLG-ROPGEF-RAC/ROP, is comprised of FERONIA receptor
kinase, its functional partner, a lipid-modified protein anchored on the cell
membrane called LLG1, and their immediate cellular target ROPGEF, which
activates key cytoplasmic signaling molecules, called RAC/ROP GTPases.
Biochemical and microscopy-based experiments will be carried out in plants grown
under normal growth conditions and when challenged by an environmental growth
regulatory signal, a small peptide hormone called RALF1. Experiments are
designed to examine how these molecules interact, the cellular and molecular
consequences of these interactions and how they together might lead to various
plant growth responses regulated by FERONIA. Together, results from this
research should provide insight towards the mechanistic underpinning of how
FERONIA mediates its diverse functional roles whereby furthering our knowledge
about strategies employed by organisms for growth and survival.