* 1715865
* Calibrating Astronomical Instruments to Improve the Science Gained from the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Darren DePoy, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2022
* USD 372,475.00

The future Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) of the United States will
revolutionize astronomy by obtaining images of objects observed repeatedly over
long periods of time. These observations will be extremely accurate. In order to
get the best science from these observations, two types of additional,
supporting observations will also be used: observations that have been made
using different telescopes and instruments in the past, and observations that
will be made with other telescopes and instruments in the future. For all of
these supporting observations to be useful, they must be as accurate as the
observations that will be taken using the LSST. For this project, the
astronomers will calibrate the telescopes, instruments, and sky conditions of
the observatories where the other observations are or will be made. This project
serves the national interest, as it ensures that the data acquired with the new
telescope will contribute the best scientific results possible, promoting the
progress of observational astronomy. The astronomers are from Texas A &amp; M
University, which draws most of its students from a heavily Hispanic population.
The investigators intend to employ two graduate students and 8 - 10
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
(LSST) project will produce an enormous amount of photometric data that will
revolutionize the field of astronomy. One of the LSST goals is to provide an
unprecedented level of photometric accuracy: &lt;0.5%. Existing and on-going
data from other telescopes will be used for comparison and follow-up
observations with the new LSST observations. These observations, however, will
need to be very well calibrated. The investigators will use existing equipment
to provide accurate spectrophotometric calibration of imaging systems at
observatories around the world. The calibration will include in-situ
measurements of the telescopes, optics, filters, and detectors, providing
detailed knowledge of the transmission profiles of the instruments. The
atmospheric transmission above the observatory sites will also be measured.
Together, these measurements will help to enable exceptionally accurate
photometric calibration of these systems. Based on similar measurements of the
DECam instrument and the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory location, the
investigators estimate that the proposed work should allow for accuracy of ~0.2%
across large surveys and all spectral bands.