* 1715234
* Synthetic Biology Approaches to Elucidate and Exploit Nature's Selection of Lipid Modified RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jia Sheng, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Natural RNA molecules are heavily decorated by various functional groups to
diversify and fine-tune their structures and biological functions. Studying
these RNA modifications has great significance in understanding fundamental RNA
biology, studying evolution and developing new therapeutics. This project is
focused on a recently discovered lipid modification on bacterial tRNAs. tRNA
(also known as transfer RNA or soluble RNA) is the RNA molecule that carries
amino acids to ribosome for protein synthesis in a cell, therefore is a very
critical life molecule. The research will use synthetic biology approaches to
address the fundamental question of why nature uses such a hydrophobic lipid
group in hydrophilic RNA systems by elucidating the metabolic pathways of this
lipid modification, as well as the structural and functional features of the
working enzyme called SelU. In addition, based on this special pathway, the
research will also develop novel molecular tools to detect, label and monitor
specific tRNAs in cells. This project will provide educational and research
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, as well as local
K12 teachers to use cutting-edge multidisciplinary approaches to solve
fundamental biological problems and advance their scientific careers.

The systematic study of post-transcriptional chemical modifications of tRNAs
have great significance in understanding RNA biology and its roles in evolution.
Furthermore, many enzymes that mediate these processes have been demonstrated as
targets for the development of new molecular tools or therapeutics. The main
goal of this research is to explore tRNA geranylation, which is a recently
discovered hydrophobic tRNA modification in several bacteria such as E. coli, E.
aerogenes, P. aeruginosa and S. typhimurium. The geranylated 2-thiouridines are
produced in the first anticodon position of tRNAs specific for lysine,
glutamine, and glutamic acid by the enzyme SelU using geranyl pyrophosphate as
the cofactor. It has been demonstrated that this hydrophobic terpene functional
group affects the codon recognition patterns and reduces frameshifting errors
during translation. Specifically, the geranyl group promotes wobble
2-thiouridine pairing with guanosine over adenosine and the long carbon chain of
geranyl group is necessary to maintain this base pairing specificity in the
context of RNA duplexes. This research will develop new chemical synthesis of
RNA strands containing a series of geranyl-uridine analogues and identify the
general rules for the in vitro codon specificity and ribosomal binding of these
lipid modified tRNAs. In addition, this project will solve crystal structures of
geranylated RNAs to elucidate their detailed structural features; and determine
the structures of SelU-tRNA complexes for the mechanistic studies of this
geranylation step. Furthermore, this research will develop novel molecular tools
to detect, label and monitor specific tRNAs in cells.