* 1715108
* Unraveling the propagation and repercussions of localized perturbations within tissues
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Michael Chevalier, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2020
* USD 799,997.00

The goal of this proposal is to uncover how important signals travel between
cells in epithelial tissues that form the lining of most animal organs. This
communication is essential for maintaining healthy tissues, wound healing, and
responding to infection and cancer. The project will employ a multidisciplinary
combination of experimental and modeling approaches, and will provide
opportunities for education, training, and public engagement. These broader
impact activities include; 1) developing a course that would allow students to
study multi-cellular interactions, 2) provide interdisciplinary training for the
next generation of scientists, 3) allow for undergraduate internships for summer
research experience, 4) create web-modules on the topic for citizen scientists,
and 5) develop museum exhibits related to synthetic biology and cell-to-cell
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to gain quantitative
insight into how localized changes in a tissue propagate and impact tissue
signaling and physiology. In particular, using an integrated experimental and
computational approach, we will study how cAMP/PKA, Ca2+ and ERK signaling is
coordinated within an individual epithelial cell, and how signals emanating from
these pathway propagate from one cell to others in a tissue. Optogenetic tools
will be developed to apply spatially and temporally precise perturbations to
these pathways in designated single cells within a tissue, and then measure the
resulting signaling and transcriptional activities in the sender cells where
perturbations are initiated as well as receiver cells that sense the propagated
perturbation. Emergent phenotypic repercussions of such perturbations, such as
cellular mobility, will be assessed. To organize and interpret the data,
generalize findings, and design maximally informed experiments, mathematical
models that uniquely consider the tissue geometry and impact of spatial
dimensions and heterogeneity on interactions within cell groups will be
constructed. This multidisciplinary approach will allow for the generation of a
quantitative understanding of the fundamental principles of collaboration in
cell communities and the modalities by which local perturbations propagate and
impact tissue physiology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.