* 1715387
* SHF: Small:  ConfigV: Automated Verification of Configuration Files
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ruzica Piskac, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Configuration files allow programmers to easily control many key software
settings, but this variety of settings creates a large surface for potential
errors, with impacts as severe as performance degradation or system-wide
failure. These configuration errors have affected many software-based services,
from social networking to emergency dispatch call systems. The fundamental issue
this project addresses is the need to detect these errors, before they are
released in production, by automatically checking configuration files against a
set of rules that describe safe configurations. Since there are many different
types of configuration languages, all with too many complex rules to be manually
written, configuration file verification must automatically learn rules from
existing examples of configuration files. This project will have broader impact
in the field, expanding the verification beyond just traditional programs, and
allowing for ensuring the safety of both configuration files and other complex
and unstructured objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
develop a fully automated verification framework for general software
configurations. To do this, the user must provide a set of example configuration
files, from which we learn rules that describe various properties that hold on
the given example set. These rules, in general, specify which properties the
keywords in a configuration file need to satisfy. A key challenge in the process
of inferring such a specification is that configuration files are generally an
untyped, unstructured sequence of assignments - making the application of
existing formal methods approaches difficult. To add structure to these files,
the PI uses a probabilistic type inference algorithm to assign each keyword a
type. The learning process then relies on matching the inferred types to a set
of very general templates, which describe the keywords and their relations. This
project further extends the areas where formal verification can be applied and
develops a tool set for configuration file verification that can increase the
productivity of software practitioners.