* 1715443
* SHF: Small: Efficient and Accurate Learning with Low-Precision Components: A Cortex-Inspired Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Yu Cao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Achieving high performance and high-energy efficiency with a small footprint is
a central challenge of computer engineering. This project targets to develop
technologies with cutting-edge nanoscale devices towards a self-learning chip.
It will be integrated with front-end sensors, process the information in real-
time, and consume ultra-low energy. The success is likely to have an impact on
the society, bringing broad benefits to multiple emerging applications, mobile
vision and autonomous vehicles to name a few. The interdisciplinary nature of
this project, as well as the frequent interaction with industry, will provide an
ideal platform for education and training of state-of-the-art science and
technology. It will improve the knowledge base of intelligent system design
through new curriculum development, engaging undergraduate and minority students
in research and practice, and participating in outreach programs that are
customized for K-12 students. Furthermore, this project will advocate the web-
based interface and workshops to disseminate the latest research outcome.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microprocessors have been a ubiquitous and vitally
important part in our modern-day life. However, they are facing severe issues in
artificial intelligent systems, which require tremendous amount of energy and
data to train and operate the sophisticated algorithm. On the contrary, animal
brains at various sizes achieve remarkable feats of learning and accuracy at
energy costs much lower than human-engineered systems. Therefore, the central
theme of this project is to transfer the latest knowledge of the structure and
function of brains into neuromorphic design, generate novel insights for
improvement of the engineered system, and achieve high accuracy and high energy
efficiency despite the severe precision constraints of the nanoscale components.
These neurobiological principles include approximate learning rules with low-
precision synapses, neural motifs of excitation and inhibition, and hierarchical
network models. The goal is to accomplish complex computation with much less
data volume and resources, and promise magnitudes of improvement in energy
efficiency and performance than microprocessors today.