* 1715122
* AstroML: Machine Learning for Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Andrew Connolly, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2022
* USD 398,888.00

Astronomy has entered an era of massive data streams, with catalogs containing
hundreds of millions of stars and galaxies measured at thousands of time-steps
with hundreds of attributes to be analyzed. To extract knowledge from these
large and complex data sets we must account for noise and gaps, and understand
if and when we may have detected a fundamentally new physical phenomenon. The
problem is not solely the size of the data, but a basic question of how to
discover, represent, visualize and interact with the knowledge that these data
contain. Astronomical data provide a popular testbed for developing methods
applicable throughout the physical and life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;astroML is an open source machine-learning
library that addresses all of the challenges, providing a publicly available
repository for fast python implementations of statistical routines for
astronomy, as well as examples of astrophysical data analyses using techniques
from statistics and machine learning. In the three years since its release,
astroML has been installed over 21,000 times. The current project will further
develop astroML into a general machine learning toolkit for the next generation
of astrophysical surveys, adding code examples and tutorials, exploiting
multicore and multiprocessing hardware, and supporting the second edition of the
text "Statistics, Data Mining, and Machine Learning in Astronomy: A Practical
Python Guide for the Analysis of Survey Data". Algorithms to be developed
include approximate Bayesian computation, hierarchical Bayes, an interface to
deep learning algorithms, and modifying the regression and regularization code
to account for uncertainties within the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All developed
algorithms will be publicly available, and astroML has already been used in
cancer research and analysis of the securities market, and to teach data science
in astronomy. The refactored code can be used to teach both the statistics and
software engineering techniques needed for large scale machine learning.