* 1715161
* Mean Field Analysis of Dynamical Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Georgi Medvedev, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 204,793.00

A large number of important structures and phenomena in nature, society, and
technology can be modeled by networks of interacting dynamical systems. Examples
include power and communication networks in technology, neuronal and genetic
networks in biology, as well as social and economic networks, to name a few.
Understanding behavior of these systems requires advanced mathematical
techniques for studying dynamics in complex networks. This project will use
mathematical modeling, analysis, and numerical simulations to elucidate the link
between the structure and dynamics in complex networks. In particular, the
investigator aims to find new ways for describing network organization in
dynamical models and study critical phenomena, such as the onset of
synchronization and emergence and bifurcations of spatial patterns in networks
of coupled oscillators. The results of this research and the tools that will be
developed in its course, will enhance our ability to understand, predict, and
control the behavior of real world networks.

The mean field approximation is one of the most effective analytical tools
available for studying large ensembles of interacting dynamical systems.
Originally developed for problems in statistical physics, this method has been
extremely successful for studying collective dynamics in coupled oscillator
models of various physical, chemical, biological, and technological systems. The
analysis of synchronization in the Kuramoto model of coupled phase oscillators
and the bifurcation analysis of chimera states rely on the mean field equation
formally derived in the limit, as the number of oscillators goes to infinity.
Despite its spectacular success in applications, the mathematical basis of the
mean field approximation of coupled dynamical systems on networks is not well
understood.  In this research, the aim is to derive and rigorously justify the
mean field description of dynamics of coupled systems on convergent families of
graphs. This advances the mean field theory for coupled systems in two ways:
first, by extending the main results of this theory to a large class of random
networks, including those with small-world and scale free connectivity, and,
second, by relaxing the key regularity assumptions, blocking the application of
this theory to real world networks. The new theoretical results are used to
study the onset of synchronization in systems of coupled phase oscillators with
spatially structured interactions, stable dynamical regimes in the Kuramoto
model on power law graphs, and pattern formation in neural fields in random
media.