* 1715284
* Collaborative Research: Beyond O/H: Fundamental Astrophysics with HII Region Abundances
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Richard Pogge, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 433,154.00

Galaxies contain gas and stars. The chemicals in the gas leave fingerprints in
the form of emission lines. The chemical abundances can be measured by studying
the emission lines. These studies show trends between the abundances and the
stellar mass of a galaxy. They also show trends in the abundances between the
inner and outer regions of a galaxy. Such trends carry important clues about how
galaxies form and evolve. But the clues are muddled because the absolute scales
for the trends are uncertain. To make progress, the team will observe galaxies
at optical wavelengths with the Large Binocular Telescope. They will use a new,
NSF-enabled instrument to study the galaxies' emission lines. The team will then
analyze the emission lines to determine absolute abundances. Senior team members
will train junior team members. The team will partner with the State Parks of
Minnesota to give public talks in novel settings. They will also use a
planetarium to reach K-12 students in low-income areas of
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will analyze cutting-edge emission line
spectra of HII regions in 13 spiral galaxies. Their goals are to (1) solve the
decades-old discrepancy between abundances based on collisionally-excited
forbidden lines and those based on optical recombination lines, (2) conduct a
definitive study the abundance gradients in spiral galaxies, and (3) design a
calibration of strong-line abundances appropriate to both unresolved global
spectra and spatially-resolved spectra from the next generation of surveys with
integral field units.