* 1715370
* Zinc finger methyl-CpG binding proteins: Bimodal regulators of cellular transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Bethany Buck-Koehntop, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2022
* USD 624,289.00

The primary goal of this research is to understand the mechanisms by which gene
expression is regulated within the cell. DNA is the long-term storage unit for
genetic information, providing instructions for cellular and life functions.
Access to different genetic regions is partially regulated by reversible
chemical changes to localized regions of the DNA, defined as epigenetic
modifications. This project evaluates the role of a small family of proteins,
the ZBTB family, that are important in making these epigenetic modifications.
The broader impacts for this project include two major aspects: First, the
training of graduate students in an interdisciplinary research program that
utilizes a broad spectrum of techniques to identify and characterize the three
ZBTB. Second, this project includes the development of biochemical and DNA-
focused hands-on and inquiry-based activities at The Leonardo, a museum in
downtown Salt Lake City. In addition to the broader public, The Leonardo
accommodates a significant number of students from underrepresented and
underserved groups from Salt Lake Valley schools. It is well recognized that the
interest of a child in science is best instilled at an early and impressionable
age, and it is expected that development and implementation of hands-on
activities will have a long-term significant impact on the state's diversity
growth in STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA methylation is one form of
epigenetic modification. While insight into how the DNA methylation mark is
established and removed has been gained, there is only minimal knowledge for the
mechanisms by which methyl-CpG binding proteins (MBPs),read DNA methylation
marks and translate this information into a specific transcriptional outcome,
particularly for the ZBTB MBPs. An understanding for how the ZBTB MBPs modulate
transcription is complicated by the fact that they exhibit bimodal DNA
recognition, targeting both methylated and sequence-specific non-methylated DNA
sites, which affords them the capability of functioning as both transcriptional
repressors and activators. Additionally, each of the ZBTB MBPs can interact with
multiple co-repressor/-activator protein complexes at target gene sites. Thus,
an understanding for how each of these proteins elicits selectivity for their
binding partners is central to discerning their role in transcriptional
regulation. To investigate this, a combined in vitro biophysical and in cell
approach will be utilized to delineate the mechanisms by which this family of
MBPs recognize their DNA and proteins targets. The overall goals are to
structurally characterize ZBTB protein:DNA interactions to gain mechanistic
insight into how each protein preferentially selects DNA targets; to utilize
function-specific mutations to probe the molecular basis for bimodal DNA
recognition; and to define protein interactomes for each ZBTB MBP. The outcomes
of this research will provide an essential foundation for the larger goal of
discerning the full mechanisms by which each member of this under studied family
of ZBTB MBPs elicits selective gene targeting, recruits specific protein
complexes to the target site and alters transcription to provide a particular
cellular function.