* 1715061
* Realistic Simulations of Collisionless Black Hole Accretion Flows
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Feryal Ozel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2021
* USD 519,430.00

This project will be the first realistic study of an important type of flow onto
black holes, of special interest in astrophysics. These particular flows, which
are very hot but not very dense, have mostly been treated using methods whose
assumptions are wrong for this particular combination of conditions. This work
will start from first principles to include the important physics at both small
and large scales in new numerical calculations. Junior researchers will learn
about cutting edge techniques, which also help to drive the development of
computer hardware and software systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accretion flows
around nearby supermassive black holes contain hot and diffuse plasmas where the
collisional mean free path is larger than the system size and the dissipative
effects determine their thermodynamic and observational properties. Most
theoretical models of these accretion flows are based on ideal
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), which is a collisional fluid theory. However, a
number of assumptions in this formulation break down in hot, low luminosity
accretion flows around black holes. This project is a first-principles
computational and theoretical study with a focus on energy dissipation,
transport, and particle acceleration. It uses firstly a general relativistic
geodesic algorithm designed to integrate both photon and particle geodesics, and
optimized for special-purpose architectures such as graphical processing units
(GPUs). Massive scale gyrokinetic simulations will study both particle-level and
global-level characteristics of hot, turbulent, collisionless plasmas. Secondly,
a particle-in-cell code will be used for simulations focused on the microphysics
of the plasma. This will study particle acceleration in current sheets in
magnetic reconnection regions of the MHD simulations to quantify non-ideal
effects and include the results in hydrodynamic and spectral studies of low
radiative efficiency accretion flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One graduate student
will be trained and a postdoctoral associate will be supervised in
computational, theoretical, and plasma astrophysics. The study's use of NSF-
supported GPU computational resources will help to maintain cutting edge
technology development in the United States, and the particle integrator
algorithm will be made publicly available. The researchers will also run an
extensive outreach effort, with public talks, popular articles, and
documentaries.