* 1715073
* Neural and cognitive changes in aging and bilingualism: Implications for language production and executive function
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Genevieve Higby, Higby                   Genevieve
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. As people live longer, their lives are
more impacted by age-related cognitive changes. Older adults cite word-finding
difficulties as their number one memory complaint, making communication
increasingly difficult for them. Research on the source of age-related word
retrieval problems has focused on changes in the mapping between word meaning
and word form. The planned research explores how cognitive abilities, such as
executive function, and the pathways in the brain supporting language and
cognitive functions contribute to language production in older age. Taking
advantage of the unique language demands placed on bilinguals, this
interdisciplinary project combines theories and methods from linguistics,
psychology, and cognitive neuroscience to examine the long-term effects of
lifelong bilingualism on language production, executive functions, and the
neural structures supporting them. The proposed research will advance our
understanding not only of age-related changes in language production, but also
of the the neural structures supporting executive function and language. As a
community with a large Hispanic and bilingual population, Riverside, California
is an ideal setting for studying younger and older bilingual adults and for
training and mentoring undergraduate students who come from groups that are
underrepresented in science.

The goals of the proposed research are to investigate factors reflecting
lifelong language experiences and their effects on cognitive and language
functioning in older bilingual and monolingual adults. A specific goal is to
investigate the effects of bilingualism on white matter pathways in the brain,
particularly those involved in language and higher-order cognitive processes.
Past research has demonstrated that the unique cognitive demands imposed by the
lifelong use of two languages results in enhancements in executive control and
protections against the symptoms of cognitive impairment and dementia in the
elderly. Little is known about the long-term effects of these executive control
enhancements on language production. In the proposed research, we investigate
how lifelong bilingualism affects word retrieval processes in older adults and
ask if the potential advantages observed for cognitive control also serve to
help older bilingual adults compensate for language declines in aging. Using
behavioral and structural neuroimaging methods, we explore the neural substrates
of lexical retrieval and executive control in older adults who have used two
languages throughout their lives and those who have used a single language. The
project integrates research on bilingualism that considers the consequences of
dual language use for spoken language and for cognition, together with research
on cognition, language, and neural change in aging.