* 1715984
* Dynamic formation/disassembly of membraneless organelle model systems by post-translational modification: Mechanisms and consequences
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Christine Keating, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2022
* USD 900,000.00

Living cells contain different subcellular compartments that perform a range of
functions necessary for survival. Some of these compartments, such as the
nucleus and mitochondria, are separated from the rest of the cell by membranes.
Others, termed membraneless organelles, lack any obvious physical boundary from
the rest of the cell. It was recently discovered that many membraneless
organelles are actually liquid droplets formed by intracellular phase
separation. This project will investigate the consequences of droplet formation
on biochemical reactions and how cells could take advantage of droplet-forming
phase transitions to regulate biochemical pathways. The findings will uncover
new paradigms for intracellular organization and enable new classes of
artificial microscale bioreactors that incorporate such organization. The
project will directly impact students at the graduate and undergraduate levels,
who will perform this research at the intersection of chemistry, biology,
physics and materials science. By involving K-12 teachers it will also reach
high school and middle school students. Small teams of teachers will work in the
Principal Investigator's laboratory each summer developing grade-level
appropriate hands-on content in emulsion science. Back in their classrooms,
implementation of this new content will engage middle and high school students
with current scientific progress and its connection to their everyday lives.
Emulsions where droplets of one phase are suspended in another liquid phase are
common in consumer products such as salad dressings or sunscreens, and can be
used to illustrate fundamental principles in multiple disciplines including
chemistry, mathematics, physics, biology, and food science. The Principal
Investigator and graduate students will also aid in development of chemistry
content for a K-12 education approach being developed by colleagues in the
Education department to facilitate high-level science
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid-liquid phase coexistence, which
causes biomolecule-rich aqueous droplets termed coacervates to form in the
cytoplasm or nucleoplasm of eukaryotic cells, has only recently been realized as
a pervasive organizational motif for membraneless organelles, and is not yet
well understood. This project will provide new insight into physicochemical
driving forces underlying intracellular organization by liquid-liquid phase
coexistence, as well as potential consequences of coexisting peptide-rich phases
for biochemical reactions. Non-uniform solute distribution between coexisting
phase compartments (coacervate droplets) will impact the rates of biochemical
reactions, providing a mechanism to control reaction rates via droplet formation
and dissolution. Post-translational modifications, specifically phosphorylation
and methylation events in intrinsically disordered regions of key proteins, are
thought to be a major mechanism for regulating the formation and dissolution of
membraneless organelles. This project will use serine phosphorylation and
arginine methylation to control phase separation in peptide-based model systems,
as a means of regulating the rates of enzymatic reactions. This project has
three research objectives: (1) Evaluate mechanisms for reaction control by
droplet formation/dissolution. (2) Develop biomimetic peptide coacervate system
that responds to arginine methylation. (3) Evaluate the hypothesis that spatial
and temporal occurrence of distinct droplet phases can be controlled by
different post-translational modifications, and provides a means of selectively
modulating enzymatic reactions.