* 1715985
* CHS: Small: Novel Method for Vectorization of Arbitrary Natural Images and Its Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Hong Qin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,999.00

Vector graphics offers a compact and lossless image representation with
advantages such as geometric editability, resolution independence, significant
saving in storage and in network bandwidth, image display at drastically varying
resolutions, and ease of animation. This research aims to significantly advance
the traditional boundary of image vectorization based on partial differential
equations (PDEs) and their intrinsic connection with Green's functions and
harmonic B-splines (serving as fundamental solutions for PDEs), which has not
yet been explored for vector graphics, image modeling, image data fitting, and
analysis. If successful, project outcomes will include a novel vector image
modeling methodology and its application for image vectorization and authoring
as well as solid texture and animation. At the core of this project's
theoretical foundation are PDEs and their meshless closed-form solvers based on
fundamental solutions. The novel representation is expected to outperform the
conventional diffusion curve based and gradient mesh based representations. The
new modeling scheme will be capable in theory of expressing arbitrary images
with arbitrary discontinuities. Consequently, this research will advance the
state of the art in both the theory and practice of vector graphics. Beyond the
conventional frontier of visual computing, since this research is solely built
upon PDEs and their fundamental solutions, it is anticipated that other
disciplines such as applied mathematics, the physical sciences, mechanical
engineering, and the earth/space sciences will directly benefit from project
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore a novel image
vectorization modeling scheme: Poisson Vector graphics (PVG), which computes
complex color gradients via a sparse set of geometric primitives and color
constraints. Detailed research activities include: (1) articulation of a sound
theoretic foundation for PVG with non-zero Laplacians, the methodology to be
founded upon PDEs and their meshless closed-form solvers by taking advantage of
Green's functions serving as their fundamental solutions; (2) derivation of a
closed-form solution for Poisson equations based on the intrinsic connection
between Green's function and harmonic B-splines; (3) development of a method for
vectorization of arbitrary natural images by PVG based on numerical
optimization, so that they can be represented with high precision; (4) design of
an authoring tool for PVG with new Poisson curve and Poisson region metaphors,
so that users will be able to design vector images with much more flexibility
than conventional first or second order diffusion curves; and (5) demonstration
that the novel PVG is applicable to animation. Comprehensive qualitative and
quantitative comparison with the current state-of-the-art will be carried out to
showcase the new framework's superiority. Ultimately, this project's integrated
approach combines the merits of diffusion curve and gradient mesh, which is
capable of drastically expanding the applied scope of vector graphics to visual
information modeling, analysis, and processing, where numerical measurements are
prevalent.