* 1715425
* OP: Heterogeneous Optical Media: Boundary Effects, Spectral Properties, and Inversion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Shari Moskow, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 339,999.00

Despite advances in computing speed, the simulation of the propagation of
optical waves through complex materials continues to pose significant
challenges. Fundamentally, the difficulty arises because variations in the
material structure are on the same scale as the optical wavelength. Brute-force
approaches thus require very fine discretization of the materials and a very
large number of parameters, which is frequently computationally infeasible. The
investigator and collaborators aim to develop new mathematical techniques that
allow extraction of important properties and features of a system without the
need for full simulation. In medical imaging, an initial image could thus be
reconstructed in real time. Such an initial image can be useful in itself, or
used as input to speed up the run time of high-resolution methods. In design of
materials, the energy losses of a material can be estimated to provide
qualitative insight into the potential suitability of the material and thus
accelerate the construction of the next generation of optical devices. Several
graduate and undergraduate students will participate in related research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to solve several
open problems related to optics and photonics of heterogeneous materials. The
project will involve four main components. The first is to find a complete
characterization of boundary effects in periodic optical materials. While
boundary corrections in homogenization theory are notoriously difficult to
understand, they have a large effect on the resulting fields. A large class of
periodic optical materials can be studied by new asymptotic techniques that will
allow us to fully characterize the role of the boundary. The second is the
derivation of explicit formulae for various spectral properties of periodic
scatterers. This includes the transmission eigenvalues, which can be read in the
far field and provide information about the medium. The third is to develop a
new reduced order model approach to inversion of elliptic operators. The method
employs ideas from model reduction theory, and originates from a breakthrough in
a previous spectrally matched grid approach that allows application to higher
dimensions and general geometries. The last goal is to derive explicit
calculations of the resonance values for multiple linear and nonlinear scatterer
interactions. The investigator and collaborators use spectral asymptotic
perturbation methods to understand the behavior of multiple-scatterer resonant
interactions, both for linear materials and for Kerr effects.