* 1715012
* Systems of Hyperbolic Conservation Laws and Nonlinear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Geng Chen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2021
* USD 145,000.00

Nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential equations (PDEs) are used for the
mathematical description of wave-like motion, including gas dynamics, water
waves, and traffic flow. For example, the compressible Euler equations of gas
dynamics (which have numerous applications ranging from star formation to
aircraft design) are in the form of a system of hyperbolic PDEs expressing
physical conservation laws. Solutions of compressible Euler equations often
develop discontinuities, which are known as shock waves; the latter are
manifested as a sonic boom when an aircraft moves faster than the speed of
sound. In general, solutions of quasi-linear hyperbolic PDEs can develop finite-
time singularities. In this research, the investigator focuses on the
compressible Euler equations and the nonlinear wave equations whose solutions
form shock waves and cusp singularities (such as those that occur in liquid
crystal equations) in finite time. The project uses both analytical and
numerical techniques to enhance basic understanding of these equations. This
research on singular behavior of waves is expected to lead to better
understanding of fundamental features of hyperbolic PDEs. This research project
seeks to deepen understanding of the structure of solutions with large data
including shock waves. The issues of the variation of solutions and their
propagation, the generic regularity of solutions, and understanding of behavior
of solution near vacuum will be investigated. The second part of the project
focuses on the quasi-linear wave system modeling nematic liquid crystals, where
the solution develops a cusp singularity. The research contains a number of new
approaches. In the study of Lipschitz continuous dependence, a Finsler type
optimal transport metric will be utilized, since the standard Sobolev norms do
not yield useful information. To study the generic regularity, the Thom
transversality theorem will be used.