* 1715515
* Non-local Kinetic Collisional Transport: Analysis and Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Irene Gamba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 309,999.00

The overall objective of this research is to develop accurate mathematical
modeling and methods of numerical simulation for an array of diverse natural and
engineering processes of fundamental scientific interest, such as evolution of
plasmas in fusion devices, dynamics of very cold gases in the intermediate
transition to form Bose-Einstein condensates,  hot-electron transport in
semiconductor devices, design of nanostructures for the solar generation of
hydrogen, dynamics of reacting molecular mixtures associated to aerospace
dynamics of re-entry problems. All these phenomena are unified by the underlying
structure of their mathematical description that involves "particles"
interactions of different kinds. A study of these mathematical structures is the
principal subject of this project. Modelling and simulation will be based on
data obtained by accurate crystallographic calculations, taking into account
atomistic corrections, the presence of rough media, etc. Same of the techniques
that we will develop are pertinent to exciting new applications in biological
and social sciences. They include modeling of self-organized flows in "particle"
swarms like birds or fish, emerging consensus in population dynamics, multi-
agent information transfer and social information dynamics in internet, to name
a few. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research goals of the project comprise a broad
program in the development of analytical and numerical tools associated with
statistical transport equations at the core of applied mathematics in
probability, statistics applied to chemistry, physics and to an extent, to
social dynamics as well. They concern the modeling of complex interactions
systems yielding kinetic frameworks associated to Markovian processes of birth-
death dynamics. Such statistical approaches lead to nonlinear integro-
differential systems of equations of collisional classical or quantum Boltzmann
or Smoluchowski type. Many of these models appear in the collisional theory of
semi-classical transport for short- and long-range particle interactions models
that describing self-consistent phenomena at nano and mesoscales.  New tools
from nonlinear analysis as well as new computational strategies will be
developed to address long-time behavior, stability and decay rates to stationary
modes, as well as qualitative behavior of numerical solutions and optimal
computational strategies.