* 1715534
* Genetic and Molecular Dissection of Meiotic Silencing by Unpaired DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Patrick Shiu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2023
* USD 699,639.00

The goal of this project is to determine the underlying mechanism for how an
unpaired DNA is silenced during meiosis, a process that produces gametes or
spores. The presence of unpaired genes during this part of the cell cycle is
often indicative of a foreign DNA element. Accordingly, the cell usually
benefits by silencing (turning off) the expression of these genes. This pathway
is called 'Meiotic Silencing by Unpaired DNA (MSUD)' and is a unique RNA-based
gene silencing system first described in the orange bread mold, Neurospora
crassa. But since DNA segments lacking a pairing partner are also targeted for
silencing in worms, mice, and humans, the study of MSUD will shed light on how
chromosome pairing affects gene regulation in higher organisms as well. To
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, the investigators of this
project will recruit and train undergraduate students from their own university
as well as from non-Ph.D.-granting and minority-serving institutions. Research
activities from this project will be used to develop lesson plans for various
outreach programs. Efforts will also be made to promote interdisciplinary
partnerships and STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In various organisms, genome surveillance
systems are maintained to control the expression of repetitive elements and
limit their spreading. One of these mechanisms is MSUD, which examines the
pairing of any DNA segment with its homologous partner during meiotic prophase
I. A gene not paired with a similar sequence generates a silencing signal (a
small RNA species), which subsequently turns off the expression from this
unpaired DNA as well as from any other (paired or unpaired) copies in the
genome. MSUD utilizes common RNA interference (RNAi) factors (e.g., Argonaute)
to target specific mRNA transcripts. Using the tools they have developed (e.g.,
protein interaction assays, mutant strains, RNA profiles, and cellular markers)
and various complementary approaches (e.g., biochemistry, cytology, genetics,
and molecular biology), the investigators plan to characterize Neurospora
mutants defective in MSUD and examine how proteins from various sites of MSUD
activity contribute to the silencing pathway.