* 1715115
* Elucidating the molecular mechanism of DEMETER-mediated active DNA demethylation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Wenyan Xiao, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2022
* USD 557,461.00

The goal of this project is to advance the understanding of how genes important
for nutrient accumulation in plant seeds are regulated. Seed production is vital
for agriculture, biofuels, and human nutrition. Cereal grains account for over
50% of the world's dietary energy consumption and most of the grain nutrients
are stored in a seed compartment called the endosperm. The project uses genetic,
genomic, and computational tools to address fundamental seed biology questions,
and provides interdisciplinary education and training opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers. Undergraduate
students will spend three summers in the laboratory and participate directly in
the research activities in plant biology. This project will provide critical
research experience for the undergraduates and important training for the
graduate student and the postdoctoral fellow, thus developing a diverse,
globally competitive workforce in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic imprinting influences seed yield
by controlling resource allocation to the endosperm where the synthesis and
storage of protein, starch, and lipid nutrients occurs. In flowering plants gene
imprinting is established by DEMETER (DME) mediated active DNA demethylation.
DME encodes a large polypeptide with multiple conserved domains, and except for
the well-characterized glycosylase domain, very little is known about the
function of the other domains. Elucidating how DME is regulated and directed to
proper genomic locations is crucial to advance the knowledge on seed
development, and can inspire development of novel molecular strategies for
breeding or engineering desirable traits in important crop plants. This project
aims to elucidate the roles of these conserved domains on DME activity and seed
viability through molecular, genetic, genomic and epigenomic analyses. A novel
bipartite model for structural and functional regulation for DME activity is
proposed. Understanding why DME adopts modular catalytic and regulatory domain
architecture and elucidating how linker histone H1 assists DME mediated active
DNA demethylation will significantly increase the understanding of how
epigenetic information is established and maintained in plants.