* 1715060
* Collaborative Research: Using Observations and Models to Study How Dust Grains Between the Stars Align
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Kristin Kulas, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2021
* USD 134,567.00

This astronomy project aims at improving our understanding of the gas and dust
that exists in interstellar space, i.e., in the space between the stars in our
Galaxy. The team has developed their own theory about how elongated grains of
dust in this "interstellar medium" are lined up. This rather complex process
involves magnetic forces or "fields"---which are known to exist in space---and
starlight. The theory will be tested using observations from a range of
telescopes, including the Herschel and Planck space telescopes, the airborne
Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA), and the ground-based
Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), James Clerk Maxwell Telescope (JCMT), and
Multi-Mirror Telescope (MMT), among others. Magnetic fields affect the way gas
moves through space, and particularly the way clouds collapse under their own
weight to form stars. Understanding magnetic fields is therefore hugely
important when trying to understand how stars and planets like Earth are formed.
Graduate and undergraduate students from Santa Clara University and the
University of Wisconsin will be heavily involved in this project. A young post-
doctoral researcher will also take a leading role in this
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This tri-institute collaborative project will
develop an analytical version of the Radiative Alignment Torque (RAT) theory for
the alignment of irregular, paramagnetic dust grains in the Interstellar Medium
(ISM). The theory has already had some qualitative successes in interpreting
past observations. The awardees now aim to quantitatively test the theory
against a range of observations using an analytical version of the theory that
incorporates realistic source structures. When combined with optical and
infrared polarization measurements, the RAT theory may be a powerful diagnostic
tool for studying interstellar magnetic fields in a variety of environments
(Giant Molecular Clouds, Accretion Disks, etc.). Dust-induced polarization
provides a relatively straightforward probe of the magnetic field if a reliable
understanding of grain alignment is available. Understanding foreground dust
polarization is also crucial to studies of the cosmic microwave background. The
recipients of this award will provide classroom and hands-on training to
students at Santa Clara University and the University of Wisconsin (UW),
developing "polarization classes (schools)" that may also be used by non-
affiliated undergraduate students. The award also supports outreach aimed at the
general public, including programs at the Lick Observatory and as part of the
Lassen Dark Sky Festival. Popular science content will be pursued through
drafted magazine articles, as well as student involvement in popular astronomy
broadcasting in Spanish at UW.