* 1715911
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Developing a metavirome assembler for uncovering the global virome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Pavel Pevzner, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2021
* USD 810,000.00

While viruses are the most diverse biological entities on Earth, challenges in
their genome sequencing have prevented surveys of Earth's virome. The key
obstacle on the way towards exploration of viral diversity is the absence of
computational methods of assembling virus genomes from the short overlapping
sequences of DNA obtained when sequencing DNA from a wide range of environments.
This project will develop such methods to enable a more complete cataloging of
virus genomes and provide a critical new resource for microbiology. In addition,
it will result in a new online learning classes at UCSD and Tel Aviv University
as well as an online capstone project aimed at analyzing viral genomes. This
activity will extend the online Coursera Specializations 'Bioinformatics' and
the Massive Online Open Course (MOOC) "Gut Check: Exploring Your Microbiome" by
including a new metagenomics component. This educational effort will reach
thousands of students from all over the world since these MOOCs have large
enrollments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in new genome
assemblers specifically aimed at reconstructing the viral component of
metagenomes. It will enable the development of a new metavirome assembler aimed
at discovery of complete viral genomes across a wide range of environments. This
research will result in reassembling all publicly available metagenomics
datasets to compile the global catalog of complete viral genomes, which will
enable the exploration of viral diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, Biological Sciences Directorate and the Computational
Biology activity in the Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering
Directorate at the US National Science Foundation and by the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.