* 1715497
* Proposal to Support the International Water Association Resource Recovery Conference IRRC 2017, Linking Global Challenges, August 7th- 9th, 2017 | New York, NY
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Kartik Chandran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 49,000.00

This conference targets to contribute to defining the direction of engineered
resource recovery from wastewater and sewage streams. The conference will
provide a technical, economic and practical framework for implementation of
resource recovery and identify current and future systems, processes and
endpoints for resource recovery. This framework is a significant re-orientation
compared to the removal paradigm practiced widely without heed to the benefits
of appropriately designed and implemented resource recovery. The conference will
expose researchers to the needs and developments from across the globe on topics
related to resource recovery.

Wastewater contains valuable resources such as carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus.
Whereas untreated wastewater threatens human health, ecosystems, biodiversity,
food security and the sustainability of water resources, the carbon present in
the wastewater can be recovered to generate energy while nitrogen and phosphorus
recovery can supplement nutrient demand for agriculture. There are a number of
innovative approaches and technologies for energy neutral, or even energy
positive, nutrient removal and recovery. The drivers for resource and energy
recovery include decreased energy demand and carbon emissions, marketable
commodities, and improved efficiency at reduced cost.