* 1715154
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Formal End-to-End Verification of Information-Flow Security for Complex Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Protecting the confidentiality of information manipulated by a computing system
is one of the most important challenges facing today's cybersecurity community.
Many complex systems, such as operating systems, hypervisors, web browsers, and
distributed systems, require a user to trust that private information is
properly isolated from other users. Real-world systems are full of bugs,
however, so this assumption of trust is not reasonable. The goal of this
proposed research is to apply formal methods to complex security-sensitive
systems, in such a way that we can guarantee to users that these systems really
are trustworthy. Unfortunately, there are numerous prohibitive challenges
standing in the way of achieving this goal. One challenge is how to specify the
desired security policy of a complex system. In the real world, pure
noninterference is too strong to be useful. It is crucial to support more
lenient security policies that allow for certain well-specified information
flows between users, such as explicit declassifications. A second challenge is
that real-world systems are usually written in low-level languages like C and
assembly, but these languages are traditionally difficult to reason about. A
third challenge is how to actually go about conducting a security proof over
low-level code and then link everything together into a system-wide
guarantee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this effort, the PI proposes to design and
implement a new set of formal techniques and tools for overcoming all of these
challenges. First, the PI will develop a new methodology for formally
specifying, proving, and propagating information-flow security policies using a
single unifying mechanism, called the "observation function." A policy is
specified in terms of an expressive generalization of classical noninterference,
proved using a general method that subsumes both security-label proofs and
information-hiding proofs, and propagated across layers of abstraction using a
special kind of simulation that is guaranteed to preserve security. Second, to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the new methodology, the PI will build an
actual end-to-end security proof, fully formalized and machine-checked in the
Coq proof assistant, of a nontrivial concurrent operating system kernel. Third,
the PI will also demonstrate the generality and extensibility of the methodology
by extending the kernel with a virtualized time feature allowing user processes
to time their own executions. The goal is to prove that user processes cannot
exploit virtualized time as an information channel. The technology for building
certified secure system software will dramatically improve the reliability and
security of many key components in the world's critical infrastructure. It will
advance human knowledge in the specification and understanding of software and
catalyze a cultural change in U.S. universities by pushing new courses on formal
methods into the existing cybersecurity curriculum.