* 1715324
* Elucidating Dynamics and Heterogeneity in the Yeast Stress Response
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Audrey Gasch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 699,930.00

The goal of this project is to understand how some cells in a microbial
population can survive environmental stress whereas other identical cells in the
same environment cannot. This phenomenon is referred to as 'culture
heterogeneity'. The goals of the project are to examine how much variation in
stress response and survival exists in a culture of yeast cells, and to then
understand the regulatory mechanisms that give rise to that variation. Using
yeast as a model for free-living microbes, the project will use single-cell
microscopy to study individual cells. Understanding both the sources and
patterns of cell-to-cell variation in stress responses and survival will help
society to understand how to control microbial cultures, which has benefits to
human health, agriculture, and environmental remediation. In addition to this
research, the project will develop an outreach program called 'Ask a Scientist',
which aims to link K-6 elementary classrooms in the Madison, WI area with
professional and student scientists who will serve as a science pen-pal for the
class. The goal of the project is to provide teachers with a mechanism to
increase young students' exposure to science and professional scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine past advances in network
inference with single-cell investigations to understand the dynamics and
heterogeneity in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae stress response. Past work
inferred a systems-level signaling network that controls the yeast
transcriptomic response to salt stress. The network has proven powerful, but
does not capture signaling dynamics or cell-to-cell signaling variation, both of
which are important in microbial stress defense. This project will test network
predictions through single-cell analyses designed to capture signaling dynamics
and culture heterogeneity by: 1) performing single-cell microscopy in living
cells before and after salt treatment to determine the localization dynamics of
pairs of fluorescently tagged regulators of the yeast stress response to
characterize the correlations in regulator localization patterns, and 2) follow
dynamic changes in representative transcripts in single living cells that
express a fluorescently tagged version of the responsible transcription factor.
Results will relate the dynamics of transcription-factor localization to
dynamics of target mRNAs and to the dynamics of cellular stress tolerance in
single cells. Together, results of this research will increase understanding of
the mode and mechanism of culture heterogeneity, which will in turn illuminate
sources of variation in the upstream cellular signaling network.