* 1715385
* III: Small:  Towards a Theoretical Foundation for Diffusion Source Localization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Hanghang Tong, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Diffusion processes have been used to model many real-world phenomena, including
rumor spreading on the Internet, epidemics in human beings, emotional contagion
through social networks, and even gene regulatory processes. Diffusion source
localization is to identify the source(s) of a diffusion process based on
observations such as the states of the nodes and a subset of timestamps at which
the diffusion process reaches the nodes. The solutions to this problem can
answer a wide range of important questions and have significant societal and
economic impacts. For example, epidemic diseases are great threats to global
health. The 2009 H1N1 virus alone resulted in 151,700 to 575,400 deaths
globally. Locating an epidemic source can help identify the transmission media
of the disease. This project develops fundamental theories and effective
algorithms for fast and accurate diffusion source localization in large-scale
networks and with partial information. The results have immediate applications
for identifying patient zero in epidemiology, for tracking the spreading of
computer viruses/malware in cyber security, for locating the sources of leaked
classified information or rumors in social networks, for identifying infusion
hubs of human diseases, etc.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Existing research on social
networks almost exclusively focuses on deriving realistic but mathematically
trackable network models and diffusion models. The problem of locating diffusion
sources in realistic networks has not been well studied. The key to accurately
locating the diffusion source is to identify characteristics of infection
subnetworks that are unique "signatures" of the source. By identifying and
leveraging unique source signatures, this project advances the state of the art
of diffusion source localization by addressing the following three challenges:
(1) On the theory side, this project establishes the fundamental limits of
source localization for realistic networks. (2) On the algorithm side, this
project develops a suite of effective and scalable diffusion source detection
algorithms whose theoretical properties are well-understood. (3) From the
evaluation perspective, this project comprehensively evaluates the proposed
source detection algorithms using both simulation studies and real application
scenarios.