* 1715475
* RI: Small: Integrating Flexible Normalization Models of Visual Cortex into Deep Neural Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Odelia Schwartz, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 349,996.00

Recent advances in artificial intelligence models of deep neural networks have
led to tremendous progress in artificial systems that recognize objects in
scenes, and in a host of other applications such as speech recognition, and
robotics. Although deep neural networks often incorporate computations inspired
by the brain, these have typically been applied in a fairly simple and
restrictive manner, rather than based on more principled models of neural
processing in the brain. Using vision as a paradigmatic example, this project
proposes that artificial systems can benefit from integrating approaches that
have been developed in biological models of neural processing of scenes. The
biological models make use of contextual flexibility, whereby neurons are
influenced in a rich way by the image structure that spatially surrounds a given
object or feature. This flexibility is expected to improve task performance in
deep neural networks, and to impact development of artificial systems that are
more compatible with human cognition. The resulting framework, with its deep
architecture spanning multiple layers of processing, will, in turn, make
predictions about neural processing in the brain, which will impact the
neuroscience and cognitive science communities.

This project focuses specifically on normalization, a nonlinear computation that
is ubiquitous in the brain, and that has been shown to benefit task performance
in deep neural networks. The project will develop more principled strategies for
determining normalization in deep convolutional neural networks. The main focus
will be on learning a form of flexible normalization based on scene statistics
models of visual cortex. In this framework, normalization is recruited only to
the degree that a visual input is inferred to contain statistical dependencies
across space. Performance will be tested for classification and segmentation on
large-scale image databases, and will also target tasks more suited to mid-level
vision such as figure/ground judgment. This will result in better understanding
of normalization nonlinearities in deep convolutional networks, and the
implications of flexible normalization for task performance and generalization
compared to other forms of normalization. Biologically, normalization is poorly
understood beyond primary visual cortex. The models developed will help shed
light on the equivalence of this inference for middle cortical areas, and make
predictions about what image structure leads to recruitment of normalization.
This project will also include launching of an interdisciplinary Deep Learning
Discussion Group.