* 1715591
* Mapping Sequence-Structure Function Landscape by Integrating Evolutionary Landscape Inference with Folding and Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sefika Ozkan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,041.00

Title: Mapping Sequence-Structure Function Landscape by Integrating Evolutionary
Landscape Inference with Folding and
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein-­protein interactions are crucial in all
cellular functions, as they underpin all signaling networks within the cell.
These interactions are mediated by small protein interaction domains (PIDs) that
bring together binding partners in a tightly regulated manner. The sequence of
these PIDs encodes all the features necessary for their function, including
proper folding in a characteristic 3D structure and the ability to recognize
their partner specifically yet dynamically. All these features are the result of
evolution, and thus are encoded in the evolutionary history of the PIDs. In this
project, the PIs will develop well integrated computational and experimental
methods that will analyze existing sequences to extract all the co-evolved
positions and to evaluate quantitatively their contribution to folding and
function. They will use one of the most abundant functional domains that mediate
regulatory protein complexes in various signaling networks involved in cells as
a model PID. Their methods will enable identification of how co­evolved contacts
contribute to the folding of these domains. The PIs will then examine the
binding interactions of these domains to understand how co-evolved positions
contribute to binding. This project closely integrates computational and
experimental approaches, offering unique learning opportunities to students
involved. This project will provide teaching modules, campus visits, and
research internships for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein
interaction domains (PIDs) mediate interactions in signaling networks with
unique functional characteristics such as (i) displaying tolerance to random
mutations yet evolving for new functions, (ii) being involved in allosteric
regulations, (iii) interacting with more than one partner yet showing
specificity in their interaction. All these features are encoded in their
evolutionary history. Recent advancements in sequencing and in evolutionary
inference methods enable us to identify co-evolved positions and also
conservation profiles. In this project, novel computational methods will be
integrated with experimental mutagenesis analysis to evaluate quantitatively the
contribution of co-evolved positions to folding and function. Two objectives
will be pursued. First, a small set of co-evolved contacts that dictates the
depth and smoothness of the folding landscape, ensuring a minimally frustrated
folding landscape will be determined. This will elucidate folding principles of
PIDs. Second, by integrating the residue dynamic coupling method with the co-
evolutionary analysis, the mechanism of co-evolved contacts that govern binding
recognition and allosteric regulations in PIDs will be determined. With this
information, the project will elucidate the how and why a set of co-evolved
positions are critical for fold and function, and provide the blueprints of
PIDs. The WW domain will be used as a model PID. WW domains are independently
folded, small PID modules that recapitulate all the unique characteristics of
PIDs. Moreover, they are one of the most abundant functional modules in cell,
mediating regulatory protein complexes in various signaling networks involved in
physiological and disease states. The long term goal of this proposal is to
devise means for predicting factors that dictate folding and binding recognition
of PIDs, which underpin all cellular functions. This project is supported by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.