* 1715940
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: A General Feature Learning Framework for Dynamic Attributed Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jiliang Tang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2020
* USD 247,899.00

Attributed networks are those networks which are associated with a rich set of
attributes. For example, in online social networks, users post messages related
to what they are experiencing, which can be represented as a series of word
attributes; in health care systems, providers are networked with each other
given their shared patients, and each provider has profile information and may
submit insurance claims as attribute information. Feature learning aims at
seeking effective representations of data instances in preparing the attributed
networks for various data mining tasks. Feature learning algorithms, including
feature extraction and feature selection, have been intensively studied in the
literature. While most existing studies focused on static, pure and shallow
networks, this project aims to develop novel feature learning algorithms for
dynamic attributed networks. The output of the project will be a series of
feature learning algorithms, including shallow and deep network embedding, and
feature selection, specifically designed for dynamic attributed networks. The
developed algorithms, as well as their corresponding theoretical understandings,
are expected to significantly advance data-driven social computing and health
informatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
novel feature learning framework for dynamic attributed networks, which consists
of network embedding and corresponding deep architectures, as well as feature
selection algorithms. The feature learning framework is feasible to effectively
and efficiently address data challenges raised by dynamic attributed networks
from various aspects. Specifically, this project aims to achieve the research
goal through three primary research objectives: (1) performing dynamic network
embedding under challenging scenarios, including the limited label information,
heterogeneous feature spaces, and scalability of the data; (2) designing deep
architectures for dynamic network embedding on various types of attributed
networks; and (3) developing feature selection methods, by modeling dynamic
attributed networks with link weights and cross-media links, to further enable
interpretability in network analytics. In addition, this project will
incorporate the research problems in a new curriculum, and it will also allow
the PIs to continue the ongoing efforts to provide research opportunities to
undergraduate and underrepresented students.