* 1715822
* NSF/MCB-BSF:  Quantitative analysis and modeling of Notch signaling using in vivo synthetic biology
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Gebelein, Children's Hospital Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2021
* USD 850,000.00

How an animal develops complex tissue types during its lifetime is an important
and fundamental question. Many cell signals are required to work together so
this process works flawlessly. This project will systematically build a
theoretical understanding of a cell signaling pathway in developing fruit fly
embryos. Like many genetic pathways required for animal development, this
signaling pathway was initially discovered using fruit flies and later shown to
be essential for normal human development and health. This project will foster
scientific collaborations between the U.S and Israel. Students from biology,
engineering, and physics will examine how an external signal is converted into
specific outputs using experimental and computational approaches. Both graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained by a multidisciplinary research team
that has wide-ranging expertise in laboratory and theoretical methods.
Undergraduate students in Biomedical and Computer engineering will gain hands-on
laboratory experiences and work with advanced students as a team, to achieve a
common goal. This will help them to communicate ideas and results to fellow
students and will promote interdisciplinary training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central aim of this collaborative research project is to understand how
different cell types convert the same cell signaling pathway into distinct
responses during animal development. Defining how a signal invokes appropriate
cell responses is of fundamental importance because signaling pathways ensure
essential cell types are generated throughout an organism's lifespan. The Notch
signaling pathway in Drosophila is iteratively used to invoke distinct responses
in different cell types throughout animal development. The specific goals of
this project are to develop a systematic, quantitative understanding of how the
Notch signal is converted into cell-specific outputs using an in vivo synthetic
biology approach and mathematical modeling. Drosophila carrying a set of
reporters that systematically vary in number and architecture of Notch-regulated
DNA binding sites will be created. Quantitative expression analysis and
transcription factor occupancy data will be obtained using high resolution
imaging of fixed and live tissues. Experimental data will be used to build
mathematical models and computational simulations. Models will be based on a
statistical mechanics description of transcription to describe how key
parameters (DNA binding sites, ratios of effector proteins, binding affinities,
and protein degradation) alter Notch output. Predictions from these models will
be tested experimentally and will be used to improve the mathematical models. A
quantitative description for the core Notch transcription module will provide a
framework to systematically explore the role of additional biological factors on
Notch-mediated transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli
Binational Science Foundation.