* 1715956
* RUI: Architecture and evolution of a conserved bacterial regulatory pathway that influences host and microbe carbon metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Alexandra Purdy, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 513,187.00

All plants and animals exist in close partnership with communities of microbes,
a relationship that is typically highly beneficial but can, in certain
circumstances, lead to disease. Microbial communities provide to their hosts
nutrients as well as small organic molecules that can function as molecular
signals. These molecules generated by microbes are important to the normal
development and physiological function of the host animal. One class of such
nutrients (and signals) produced by microbes is the short-chain fatty acids, of
which acetate is a familiar example. This project involves collaboration between
laboratories at Amherst College (Purdy group) and Northern Michigan University
(Sharp group) focused on understanding the signaling mechanisms in two bacteria
(Vibrio and Pseudomonas) that regulate the levels of acetate and thereby its
function in mediating interactions with microbial communities and animal hosts.
This project will provide authentic research experiences for undergraduate
students (including minorities under-represented in science) in both a course-
based setting as well as in the investigators' laboratories. Women and under-
represented minority students will be recruited and supported by peer-mentoring
networks, and by outreach through public engagement including elementary and
middle-school students, and groups such as Girl Scouts; Girls, Inc.; the Black
Student Union High School Program, and the Marquette Children's
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish how the signaling
pathway initiated by CrbS in Vibrio and Pseudomonas senses and transmits
information to The project will establish how the signaling pathway initiated by
CrbS in Vibrio and Pseudomonas senses and transmits information to regulate
acetyl CoA synthetase and thereby control the levels of short chain fatty acids.
The role of the CrbS-dependent regulon will be investigated to understand its
evolution and role in carbon metabolism and in other diverse cellular functions
in bacteria.