* 1716844
* Systems genetics analysis of photosynthetic carbon metabolism in rice
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Andy Pereira, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 798,725.00

The aim of this project is to discover mutations in rice that increase
photosynthesis efficiency. Plants capture the energy of sunlight through
photosynthesis to produce sugars, starch, and a multitude of biologically active
energy-rich molecules of life. Improving the efficiency of photosynthesis in
plants, making it stable to environmental stresses, would provide us with a
sustainable supply of food and nutrition as well as renewable energy to maintain
the needs of the growing population. This interdisciplinary project will offer
practical training to graduate and undergraduate students. This project also
will produce hands-on laboratory exercises to improve knowledge of undergraduate
and graduate students on plant diversity and environmental challenges affecting
food security, and broadening the impact of plant sciences in STEM education. In
addition, K-12 students from the Arkansas agricultural areas in the Delta region
will be engaged by a STEM literacy outreach program providing experience in
experimental plant sciences aimed at caring for the environment.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will use an integrated systems genetics approach to
dissect the complex pathways of plant photosynthesis driving plant development
and productivity. Genome wide association analysis of a diverse rice population
identified single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers associated with several
parameters for photosynthetic efficiency. These SNPs will be used to identify
the key genes determining important natural variation for photosynthesis. To
understand the regulation of these interacting processes, it is essential to go
beyond individual gene action or biochemical pathways. The integrated network
approach employed will help place multiple genetically defined photosynthetic
parameters in the context of gene regulatory pathways that underpin response to
external factors, growth and development. A diverse set of computational
formulations will be integrated into a consensus network using rank-based
protocols, an approach proven to be robust for prediction of functional
relationships. Predicted transcription factors will be tested in high throughput
assays for their ability to activate photosynthesis genes in vivo, and confirmed
in transgenic plants to unravel their downstream regulatory pathways. The
systems genetic information from these genotypes will be used to reconstruct
improved plants and crops with modular improvements in photosynthetic-based
processes for diverse needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by
the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and by the NSF EPSCoR Program.