* 1716802
* Mathematical Modeling of Honeybee Populations in Heterogeneous Environments: Linking Disease, Parasite, Nutrition, and Behavior
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Gloria DeGrandi-Hoffman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 290,436.00

The honeybee, Apis mellifera, is not only crucial in maintaining biodiversity by
pollinating 85% of plant species but also is the most economically valuable
pollinator of agricultural crops worldwide with value between $15 and $20
billion annually as commercial pollinators in the U.S. Unfortunately, the recent
sharp declines in honeybee population have been considered a global crisis. The
primary cause of colony losses is the parasitic Varroa mites (Varroa destructor
Anderson and Trueman). The study to unfold the mystery of the dramatic decline
in honeybee populations and for developing control strategies for Varroa that
reduce colony losses presents both challenges and opportunities for research and
education. This research lives at the intersection of epidemiology, life
sciences and applied mathematics, which enables the investigators to develop a
template integrating interdisciplinary learning for students through shared
research projects at the undergraduate and/or graduate level. The modeling
framework provides not only a powerful system for examining multifactorial
impacts on the honeybee colony system but also a great opportunity to explore
how behavior, epidemiology and nutritional ecology coevolve within complex
systems in general. This research can provide a basis for new strategies for
controlling Varroa and reducing colony losses for beekeepers, and benefit land
managers. The methods and results will be disseminated through online video
lectures and in-person workshops that can be made available to the scientific
community. Summer research projects will be provided to undergraduate students,
especially underrepresented minority students, with a first-hand research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research between Arizona
State University and Carl Hayden Bee Research Center fosters a culture of
theory-experiment collaboration with aims to develop realistic and
mathematically tractable models that will be validated and parameterized via
using field data. The interdisciplinary collaboration will enable the
investigators to study the integrated effects of disease, parasitism, nutrition
and behavior in changing environments and the effects on honeybee colony
mortality across multiscale in time and space. Rigorous mathematics will be
integrated with extensive field and lab data to investigate: 1. How parasite
migration into colonies via foragers from other hives located at different
landscape structures could affect the honeybee-parasite population dynamics with
stage structures. 2. How the honeybee-parasite-virus interactions with the
honeybee foraging behavior in seasonal environments cause colony losses. 3. How
the crucial feedback mechanisms linking disease, parasitism, nutrient and
honeybee foraging behavior might be responsible for the colony growth dynamics
and survival in a dynamical environment with multilevel spatial components.
Nonlinear nonautonomous differential equations within metapopulation frameworks
and individual based models will be used to model the honeybee population with
spatial scales ranging from the individual, the colony, to the regional level
and timescale spanning from seconds, days, to months.