* 1716279
* Ethylene Signaling and Transcriptional Networks that Control Root Development
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* David John, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 899,997.00

Many organisms rely on hormone signaling networks to control growth,
development, and responses to their environment. In this project a systems
biology approach will be used to reveal the Arabidopsis thaliana gene expression
networks that control plant developmental changes mediated by ethylene, a
gaseous plant hormone. Ethylene has important roles in modulating plant growth
in stressful environments, as well as during fruit ripening. This project will
provide insight into the hormonal controls of root development thereby having
important agricultural implications, as root architecture determines the
efficiency of moisture and nutrient uptake from soil. The molecular biology and
modeling approaches developed in this project can be applied to other signaling
networks and plant species. In terms of broader impacts, undergraduate and
graduate student researchers will receive training at the interface of
biochemistry, genetics, mathematics, and computer science. The project will
support and expand an on-going service-learning program where undergraduate
biology laboratory students teach middle and high school students through an
active learning exercise on Mendelian and molecular genetics using plants with
defects in ethylene signaling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to uncover the transcriptional networks downstream of the ethylene receptors
that control multiple root ethylene responses in Arabidopsis thaliana using null
mutants of ethylene receptors. An ethylene-regulated, genome-wide data set
measuring temporal changes in transcript abundance in root samples will be
utilized to identify sequentially induced sets of transcripts encoding
transcription factors involved in root developmental processes. Bayesian
modeling will be utilized to identify patterns and temporal relationships to
predict transcriptional networks, which will be validated using genetic
approaches, in an iterative fashion. Binding sites of ethylene-regulated
transcription factors will be identified by computational and experimental
approaches. The broader impacts include both student research training and a
service-learning project with the goal of engaging non-major undergraduates in
science through teaching high school students. This project will support the
coordination and organization of school visits, assessment of learning outcomes
for undergraduates, and dissemination of this program to other academic
institutions.