* 1716507
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering Nature's 100 TeV Particle  Accelerators in the Large-Scale Jets of Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Eric Perlman, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 02/28/2023
* USD 266,706.00

Quasars can launch thin structures that stretch over hundreds of light years.
Some of these large-scale jets are unusually bright at X-ray wavelengths. For
more than a decade, a standard model seemed to explain this brightness. But the
team's new observations of a few jets could not be fit by the standard model.
The team developed an alternative model that did fit. In their model, particles
are accelerated to extreme energies all along the jet. The team will examine
many more large-scale jets. They will see if the standard model or their
alternative model best fit the observations. Senior team members will train
junior team members, some from underrepresented groups. The team will develop an
interactive web page to convey the research to K-12 students. The web page will
be submitted for curation by the American Association of Physics
Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will critically examine the prevailing
theory for the nature of the anomalous X-ray emission in large-scale quasar
jets, namely that this emission is due to cosmic microwave background photons
being inverse-Compton scattered by 30-100 MeV energy jet electrons. They will
also investigate the implications of their alternative explanation, namely that
the X-rays are synchrotron emission from 30-100 TeV electrons accelerated in
situ. The team's prior work suggests that the resulting TeV photons could heat
the intergalactic medium, thereby reducing the number of dwarf galaxies formed.
The team will develop this idea further.