* 1716777
* Molecular Characterization of Target Scheduling in Bacterial
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Lydia Contreras, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2023
* USD 540,000.00

In this project, researchers and their students are working to better understand
how living organisms respond to their environments. Determining how external
stimuli affect how cells perform the metabolic functions that sustain life is of
major interest. This project aims to provide basic mechanistic knowledge about
how living systems react to maintain normal "healthy" survival patterns while
exposed to different external stresses that could lead to unhealthy states.
These studies will support the interdisciplinary training of two graduate and
three undergraduate students, including undergraduates recruited from a minority
serving institution. This project will also support outreach to a low-income,
underrepresented community through the existing "Raising Future Scientists"
program, where middle school children and their families visit the research
laboratory for an introduction to science and engineering, and to science
teachers and students at regular "Science and a Movie" events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature of environmental stress responses is
that they are mediated by highly dynamic networks. This is particularly true
concerning the mechanisms by which global RNA-protein networks regulate multiple
metabolic pathways simultaneously post-stress. Given an increasing number of
findings that suggest differential target selectivity, this project seeks to
identify molecular features that lead to the differential regulation of specific
gene subsets at a specific time or after a specific stress. The project will
apply a novel approach that employs recently developed in vivo molecular
characterization tools and quantitative modeling approaches using the Carbon
Storage Regulatory network as a model system to: (i) establish differentially
regulated target networks under different stresses, (ii) characterize molecular
features of different sets of targets that are differentially regulated by this
pathway, and (iii) establish functional relevance of global regulation via
formal network analysis. This work focuses on genes that are drastically
differentially regulated post-stress by the Csr pathway and will contribute to
understanding dynamic networks involved in global metabolic regulation at the
molecular level. These studies will have the broader impact of expanding current
designs of synthetic gene control schemes and of establishing a general platform
for studying the function of global regulators in the context of their entire
native networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.