* 1716352
* SHF: Small: Reclaiming Dark Silicon via 2.5D Integrated Systems with Silicon Photonic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Milos Popovic, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Emerging applications in the growing domains of cloud, internet-of-things, and
high-performance computing require higher levels of parallelism and much larger
data transfers compared to applications of the past. In tandem, power and
thermal constraints limit the number of transistors that can be used
simultaneously on a chip and this limit has led to the ?Dark Silicon? problem.
These difficulties in harnessing the full potential of computer chips exacerbate
the challenge of building efficient high-performance systems. This project
proposes to use 2.5D integration technology with silicon-photonic networks-on-
chip (NOCs) to build heterogeneous computing systems that provide the desired
parallelism, heterogeneity, and network bandwidth to handle the demands of the
next-generation applications. A major outcome of the project will be a set of
optimization methods that will enable efficient and robust design and operation
of 2.5D systems with silicon-photonic NOCs. The project seeks to accelerate the
design of high-performance, energy-efficient systems that are able to cater to
growing bandwidth and performance needs and, in this way, enable a wider
spectrum of cognitive data-intensive applications. Planned educational and
outreach activities include the design of tutorials and workshops focused on
training future engineers on cross-layer design problems, involvement of
undergraduate, under-represented minority, and women students in various aspects
of the research, and interactions with research centers and industry to
accelerate technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of the
proposal is to design novel cross-layer design automation methods for
2.5D-integrated heterogeneous systems with silicon-photonic NOCs, and to
quantitatively demonstrate the benefits of these 2.5D systems with respect to
energy efficiency, robustness, and performance. The proposed work bridges the
gap among device, physical design, architecture, and application layers when
designing systems with silicon-photonic NOCs to dramatically improve system
efficiency and robustness. Specific project thrusts include designing: (1) a
modeling stack to quantify cross-layer interactions (from devices to
applications) in a 2.5D system and inform optimizers to enable energy-efficient
silicon-photonic NOC design and management; (2) design-time methods that
orchestrate architecture design, chiplet placement, NOC design/routing, laser
placement, and cooling design to maximize system performance under power and
temperature constraints; (3) thermally-aware design/runtime optimization
techniques that are aware of silicon-photonic device properties and their
sensitivity to thermal variations; and (4) cross-layer optimization methods that
help navigate a complex space of design choices and runtime knobs.