* 1716229
* Tracing the Cosmic Web in the Far-Infrared Lines as it Builds Massive Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Gordon Stacey, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 247,496.00

The Cornell team uses the far-infrared spectral lines of ionized carbon,
nitrogen, and oxygen to trace star formation and galaxy assembly over cosmic
time with emphasis on the redshift 1 to 4 epoch of peak star formation activity
in the Universe, 7.7 to 12 billion years ago. These lines cool the gas and trace
its physical conditions and reveal the surface temperatures and spatial
distributions of the stars. With previous NSF awards graduate and undergraduate
students designed and built the ZEUS and ZEUS-2 spectrometers used on large
submillimeter telescopes. They discovered that at early times many of the most
luminous dusty star forming galaxies formed up to 1000 stars per year in
extended, multiple kiloparsec (kpc) sized "disks." They speculate that these
enormous star forming disks are created and nourished by gas that is infalling
from the Cosmic Web which contains much of the gas reservoir of the Universe.
They plan to test this hypothesis by searching with their ZEUS-2 spectrometer
for the inflowing gas in its C+ and N+ line emission at near million light-year
scales. To discover this infalling gas is to confirm the major mode of galaxy
and star formation during the epoch when most of the stars in today's Universe
formed and to investigate the formation of the largest galaxies in today's
Universe. Science will be publicly disseminated through teaching and outreach
efforts including the K-12 programs like Focus for Teens and
GRASSHOPR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement of C+ and N+ line emission from
large scale flows will be supplemented by O++ observations of the central
galaxy. The three lines reveal the most massive stars on the main sequence and
the ionizing flux and spatial extent of the stars. The project aims to reveal
how galaxies build up their gas content which is converted into stars that
evolve and die in supernovae that seed the intergalactic medium with metals. The
ZEUS-2/APEX system is optimal for this work because of its surface brightness
sensitivity and large field of view.