* 1716953
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Wireless, Battery-less, Monolithic Tamper Detector for Semiconductor Chip Authenticity
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Eun Kim, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This research explores the feasibility of a submillimeter-sized, battery-less,
tamper detecting chip that can be placed inside a semiconductor package through
a droplet ejector, and which can be interrogated wirelessly from the outside of
the semiconductor package for detecting any recorded tampering activity. The
research paves foundational technology for a paradigm-shifting concept of
individualized detection and recording of tampering activities to ensure
authenticity of semiconductor chips. Also, the packaging technology based on a
droplet ejector opens up a brand-new packaging approach for semiconductor chips.
Thus, the research greatly impacts many industries including semiconductor
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is to study the feasibility of a
single-chip detector that (1) can record any invasive semiconductor-chip-package
tampering activity without need of a battery, (2) can be placed inside
semiconductor chip packages through a nozzleless droplet ejector, and (3) can be
wirelessly interrogated without need to open up the semiconductor package. With
a piezoelectric film supported on a non-piezoelectric cantilever with a proof
mass at its free end, electrical voltage is generated (1) when there is
vibrational energy due to de-packaging or de-layering and (2) when there is heat
due to de-soldering or de-layering. The electrical voltage (induced by vibration
due to de-packaging or de-layering) breaks down another piezoelectric film used
for a passive Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW) resonator built on a silicon
substrate, leaving a permanent mark on the SAW resonator, which no longer works
as a resonator, thus permanently recording the tampering activity. The SAW
resonator is interrogated wirelessly with radio frequency signal.&lt;br/&gt;