* 1716285
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Investigating microbial metabolic and regulatory diversity by modeling gene activity states inferred from transcriptome data
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Matthew DeJongh, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 488,520.00

Microorganisms have profound impacts on the environment, society and the ways
that people interact with the world. This research will advance understanding of
bacterial microorganisms by developing new computational technologies for
combining very large sets of diverse data with models of how bacteria function
in different environments. The results should allow for more accurate prediction
of bacterial metabolism. The project will train a cadre of undergraduate
students in mathematics, statistics, computer science, and life science and
prepare them for careers in STEM fields. The methodological advancements from
this work will be available for use by microbiologists and engineers to help
them design new applications and processes that make use of microbial metabolic
reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breakthroughs in sequencing technology have set
the stage for genome-scale understanding of microbial life. The next great
challenge is to capture gene regulatory information in order to more accurately
model the metabolic response of an organism to its environment. Prior work has
developed and applied automated methods to create genome-scale metabolic models
and developed a robust Bayesian statistical framework for estimating gene
activity states of bacteria. These estimates are used as constraints in an
integrated metabolic and regulatory model (iMRM), effectively incorporating
information from large scale expression data into metabolic models. Additional
work is needed to integrate such metabolic models with a wide range of
alternative data sources, including transcriptional regulatory networks. To meet
this need, this project will apply computational approaches for iterative cycles
of model generation, experimental validation and feedback to generate better
model outcomes. The results are expected to establish a rigorous statistical
foundation for the generation and application of iMRMs by the scientific
community. Further, the project incorporates undergraduate students in all
aspects of the research as the primary research students.