* 1716794
* RUI: The transcriptional response to quantitative variation in RpoS concentration in E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Daniel Stoebel, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2022
* USD 384,002.00

This project develops a quantitative understanding of how bacteria turn their
genes on and off in response to stresses. This project will provide
undergraduate students with experience performing research in microbiology,
molecular genetics, and genomics. In addition, the PI will provide research
internships to high school students participating in an Upward Bound program.
These students are from backgrounds underrepresented in science, and the
internships will give these students a path towards careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project studies two major questions about how
the transcription of genes in the E. coli genome varies in response to the
concentration of the regulatory protein RpoS. First, the project will test the
role of specific transcription factors (TFs) in altering how genes respond to
RpoS levels. This will be done by RNA-seq studies of the response to RpoS levels
in strains lacking certain TFs. These whole genome studies will be complemented
by detailed manipulations of TF binding sites in specific promoters. Second, the
research will characterize the dose-response relationship between RpoS and
transcription, and its influence over a physiological transition. This research
will be done by altering RpoS levels using an arabinose-inducible RpoS system,
and then measuring the effect on transcription using RNA-seq.