* 1716260
* Statistical Ages of M Dwarf Stars from Abundances
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Philip Muirhead, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2020
* USD 373,678.00

Stars smaller and cooler than the Sun - those known as M dwarfs - are the most
common types of stars in the Universe, but not much is known about their
properties. Understanding how stars age is critical for determining how their
planets age and whether these planets can support life. The investigating team
will develop an innovative technique to measure M dwarf ages, using new
observations and state-of-the-art computing tools. Introductory Astronomy
courses at Boston University will directly involve students in all aspects of
observing using the 1.8-meter Perkins telescope at Lowell Observatory with some
students traveling to the Arizona site and others participating from the remote
observing center on campus.

With a method to measure accurate ages for M dwarf stars to a precision of 1
billion years (Gyr), we can begin to study how their properties change with
time. Recent studies of nearby Sun-like stars and distant giant stars show a
strong correlation between stellar age, iron abundance, and alpha enrichment.
The correlation is valid for ages spanning 0.5 Gyr to 13.5 Gyr, indicating the
correlation does not depend on where the stars formed in the Milky Way. Based on
this correlation, iron abundance and alpha enrichment are tools for
statistically measuring the ages of nearby main-sequence M dwarf stars. The
proposed research program will enable these measurements via high-resolution
near-infrared spectroscopy and atmospheric modeling.