* 1716762
* Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Sourav Chatterjee, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 05/31/2021
* USD 468,070.00

Most stars form in dense clusters, the largest of which contain many millions of
stars. Since star clusters can exist for many billions of years, they are
believed to contain large numbers of compact objects, such as black holes and
neutron stars that formed a long time ago as the remnants of dead massive stars.
This research program at Northwestern University will use state-of-the-art
supercomputer simulations to study the formation and evolution of these compact
objects in a variety of star cluster environments. The main focus will be on the
production of close binaries containing two black holes, which can eventually
merge and produce potentially detectable bursts of gravitational waves. The
development of parallel computing techniques and new algorithms will have broad
relevance and be of interest to scientists outside of physics and astronomy. The
astrophysics research will be student-oriented and senior students will help
train new team members, including undergraduate students. Education and public
outreach activities are also planned that will take advantage of the facilities
at the Adler Planetarium in Chicago, and at Dearborn Observatory on the
Northwestern University campus in Evanston. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address a number of key questions concerning the formation and dynamical
evolution of compact objects (black holes and neutron stars) in dense star
clusters. As they experience friction against the background of lighter stars,
massive compact objects are expected to rapidly concentrate in the dense inner
cores of clusters, where the rates of dynamical interactions are very high.
These interactions can both produce binaries and tighten their orbits. In some
cases, through successive mergers, perhaps helped by accretion of gas, an
intermediate mass black hole could eventually be formed. Many of the objects
formed by these processes are potential multi-messenger sources. The project
will use a hybrid approach of combining Monte Carlo and N-body codes to optimize
computing speed, accuracy and realism and overcome the dynamical range problem
of simulating very large star clusters in which most of the interesting dynamics
happens in a relatively small, high-density central region. A library of more
than an thousand new cluster models will be made publicly available at the
conclusion of the project.