* 1716623
* Design Principles of Molecular Computing Using Engineered Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Eduardo Sontag, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Every cell can be thought of as a computing device that takes a variety of
physical and chemical stimuli as inputs, and combines them using an analog
circuit of biomolecular interactions to generate outputs that aid its survival
and perform its physiological function. Building such circuits from the bottom
up, using basic biophysical principles of molecular recognition and chemical
dynamics, provides insights into the underlying physiochemical design principles
of biological systems, and allows predictive construction of useful circuits
with chosen inputs and outputs that go beyond the ones found in nature. This
project will develop a new class of fast biological circuitry that can detect a
variety of chosen inputs, such as light and small molecule chemicals, and
rapidly (and controllably) respond by generating cell survival and function-
determining outputs. The principles being interrogated in this project should
enable the design of artificial circuits for a variety of applications including
controllable biomanufacturing of pharmaceuticals and biodegradation of
pollutants. The project will offer training and research opportunities for
several undergraduate students especially from the underrepresented communities
via involvement of the local SACNAS chapter at Rutgers University started by the
PI. This project will also support teams built by undergraduates to participate
in tri-state area biomolecular design competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several
synthetic biological circuits using transcriptional networks in living cells, to
enable biological computation with living cells, have been built in the last
decade. However, the slow timescales for transcription-based circuit performance
(hours to days), heterogeneity and lack of precise control over the levels of
biological components, limit the speed, applicability and robustness of
transcriptional circuits. The speed of the circuit is especially critical for
applications where rapid sensing-and-response is required. This proposal's goal
is the development of protease enzyme-based circuits using computationally
designed/engineered proteases that can be made responsive to chosen input
stimuli such as small molecule chemicals and light, and mutually orthogonal with
respect to their substrate selectivity. Well-characterized, mutually orthogonal
and diverse class of chemical/light-inducers of dimerization domains (as
sensors), designed split-protease enzymes (as actuators), and a redesigned cell
survival-regulating enzyme (as output) are being used to construct, characterize
and optimize elementary logic gates and circuit elements. This project involves
optimization of the emergent properties of circuit elements using chemical
dynamics modeling methods that will allow combining multiple input signals in
complex ways. Overall, this research develops a combined computational and
experimental design strategy to construct stimulus-responsive, protease-based
logic gates in cells, and involves optimizing their performance using a
mathematical treatment of their emergent behavior in a chemical reaction network
modeling framework. This project is jointly supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and Cellular and Biochemical Engineering
Cluster in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport System
Division of Engineering Directorate.