* 1716066_bk
* CNH-L: Social-Ecological Dynamics of Recreational Fishery Landscapes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Marco Janssen, Institute of Ecosystem Studies
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth R. Blood
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will explore the dynamics of freshwater
recreational fishery landscapes, where social and ecological processes interact
in complex ways to determine the status of fish populations and the human
populations that depend on them. The project will enhance basic understanding
about the dynamics of fisheries systems and the governance of these and other
kinds of common-pool resources. It will contribute to theoretical development in
the social, ecological, and social-ecological sciences. The project will provide
robust tests of theories related to the design principles that allow successful
collective action to avoid common-pool resource problems. It will provide
empirical tests of theories that are central to freshwater and marine fisheries
ecology, and it will explore new economic models designed to examine the
dissipation of social welfare in spatially complex, open-access systems. The
project will help decision makers and citizens to better understand coupled
natural-human dynamics in recreational fisheries landscapes, thereby improving
their capabilities to identify pathways and overcome obstacles to successful
governance of fishery resources. The project also will provide valuable
education and training opportunities for post-doctoral researchers, graduate
students, and undergraduate students.

Recreational fishery landscapes across the United States and other parts of the
world have tremendous cultural and economic value, but they are vulnerable to
degradation, and in many regions, they are suffering collapses similar to the
collapses that have plagued many marine fisheries. Previous research suggests
that the involvement of local organizations in governance may improve outcomes
in common-pool resource systems, but it is not clear whether this arrangement
can be effective. The investigators will focus on identifying pathways and
obstacles for effective governance of recreational fishery landscapes, and they
will study these systems to test and extend social, ecological, and social-
ecological theory. The investigators will conduct fish counts and engage in
large-scale experiments to assess how habitat complexity influences juvenile
fish mortality and the relationship between fish abundance and angler catch.
They will interview anglers and will develop and test economic models to
understand how angler preferences and information sources determine the
allocation of fishing effort across the landscape. The investigators will
conduct interviews with local organizations and will catalog their institutional
arrangements to understand how the organizations make decisions about
investments in fishery quality, and they will analyze the organizational
characteristics that lead to successful collective action. The investigators
will combine stage-structured fisheries models with agent-based social models to
synthesize their work and explore pathways and obstacles to effective governance
of recreational fishery landscapes. This project is supported by the NSF
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.