* 1716413
* CHS: Small: An Integrated Editing Environment for 3D Printing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Stefanie Mueller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2021
* USD 484,916.00

3D printing is rapidly becoming accessible and affordable, and may someday
support a variety of manufacturing, craft, and creative jobs. However, a number
of barriers remain to its more widespread use. One key barrier is the sequential
nature of 3D printing workflows, in particular, the gap between modeling of the
the shape to be printed and "slicing", developing a plan to create the model on
a given 3D printing device. Most 3D printing tools separate these steps, which
can cause wasteful printing or fundamental design problems if there is no easy
way to render a particular model using a given device's capabilities; these
problems are especially vexing for novice makers. This project will develop
tools that provide both modeling and slicing capabilities and interfaces that
help designers better consider device constraints and choose appropriate devices
for their models. The team will leverage existing research on making slicing
tools more efficient and ideas from how 2D design programs incorporate printer
characteristics to address a number of challenges in integrating modeling and
slicing. These include the need to rapidly generate slicing plans for a number
of possible 3D printers, present feedback about potential problems that supports
designers without overwhelming them, suggest alternative designs that address
those problems, and understand how integrating these constraints affects
designers' processes and abilities. In the course of the work, the team will
produce a comprehensive catalog of 3D printing device characteristics that will
support other research and design work in this space, as well as classes that
will use the integrated tools to better teach the relationship between design
decisions and design outcomes.

The team will first classify different fabrication processes, devices, and
materials available for 3D printing, then systematically analyze which
fabrication parameters are useful to know about during 3D editing. They will
both review existing products and manuals as well as interview experienced users
about problems with fabrication that most affect their modeling, and develop a
library of extensible, human- and machine-readable .xml files that incorporate
these most relevant constraints. They will then study effective interaction
models for such an integrated 3D editing environment. This includes both (1) how
to present information about fabrication constraints, comparing the
effectiveness of overlaid or parallel views of the rendered object alongside the
3D model mesh versus textual or audio warnings and (2) ways fabrication
constraints might be embedded into how the tools work with users, such as
snapping to grids based on the resolution of a selected device. Finally, they
will explore how these interactions and tools might support seamless switching
between different fabrication devices and plans for multiple-device environments
such as makerspaces and fabrication labs. This entails developing semantic but
device-independent annotations of a model's functional requirements as well as
methods for generating and metrics for comparing a number of fabrication plans
in order to suggest effective ones for a particular model. The goal is to
leverage locality of design changes to make those methods fast enough to use not
just at the end of modeling, but as a model is being constructed, allowing tools
to present information about design choices that rule out or favor particular
fabrication possibilities and the associated costs in time, materials, and
money.