* 1716559
* Collaborative Research: Connecting 3D Simulations of Magnetized Disks and Jets with Direct Event Horizon Telescope Observations
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Jonathan McKinney, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 05/31/2020
* USD 458,055.00

Black holes (BHs) are the most compact objects predicted by Einstein's theory of
gravity. Despite their tiny size, BHs are powerful actors on the cosmic stage.
Most galaxies have massive BHs at their centers. Such BHs can drive outflows and
jets that extend over galactic scales, and beyond. The processes that link the
most compact and the most extended scales originate near the BH event horizon.
Images of that region have only recently become available, thanks to the NSF-
supported Event Horizon Telescope (EHT). The team will obtain new EHT images
that, for the first time, trace magnetic fields. The team will conduct state-of-
the-art simulations to compare to the new images. This will provide strong
constraints on conditions near the BH event horizon. Senior team members will
train junior team members. The team will also partner with D.C.'s Koshland
Science Museum to engage with students from groups underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will (1) produce state-of-the-art
simulations of BH accretion and jets with fully dynamical gas-radiation
interaction that accounts for kinetic physics relevant to systems like
Sagittarius A* and M87, (2) undertake polarimetric observations with the EHT to
resolve BH emission on event horizon scales in Sagittarius A* and M87, and (3)
apply the simulations to enable realistic modeling of the polarimetry.