* 1716803
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Resilience and Species Persistence in Disturbed Habitats
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Thomas Schoener, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,564.00

Globally, humans are causing substantial environmental perturbations, and these
perturbations are likely to become more frequent and more severe in the future.
Such disturbances can have profound impacts on the structure of ecological
communities (e.g. species diversity and abundance) and on the ecosystem services
that those communities provide. Given the potential significance of such changes
for human well-being, it is essential that we develop effective tools to predict
these ecological and ecosystem impacts. Traditionally, the study of the
resilience of ecological communities to severe environmental perturbations (e.g.
hurricanes, floods) has focused on ecological processes. However, there is
mounting evidence that feedbacks between the ecological and evolutionary
processes (eco-evolutionary feedbacks) occur over commensurate time scales. This
raises the possibility that evolutionary processes may play an important role in
community resilience and species persistence. This project tackles the
challenges posed by this possibility by developing a mathematical framework for
analyzing models of disturbance which account for eco-evolutionary feedbacks and
applying this framework to two real world systems whose properties have not been
synthetically treated. In addition, this project will also support multiple
outreach activities to K-12 education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will develop new analytical methods models accounting for environmental
stochasticity, eco-evolutionary feedbacks, and demographic stochasticity.
Stochastic difference equations (SDEs) will be used to model eco-evolutionary
feedbacks in disturbed habitats. For these SDEs, new methods will be developed
for verifying persistence of species and exponential rates of convergence to
positive stationary distributions (which provides a measure of resilience). For
models also accounting for finite population sizes, large deviation methods will
be used to prove that stochastic persistence for the mean field SDE implies that
the mean time to extinction of any species or genotype increases exponentially
with habitat size, and the meta-stable behavior of the system dynamics are
characterized by the positive stationary distributions of the mean field SDE.
These mathematical methods will be applied to a nested set of common models
associated with two prominent empirical systems: Anolis lizards on Bahamian
Islands recovering from hurricanes, and stickleback fish in streams on Vancouver
Island recovering from catastrophic floods. Using such different model systems
provides the unique opportunity to more readily find generalities and plays to
the two systems' complementary experimental strengths. Field experiments and
observations as well as existing data will be used to parameterize the
individual-based eco-evolutionary models. These models will be used to examine
the impact of an environmental disturbance on (1) local adaptation of a focal
predator (Anolis or stickleback), (2) community resilience, (3) long-term
species persistence, and (4) projections about the rate and nature of ecological
and evolutionary recovery under present and future climatic conditions. For
outreach, the investigators will run and develop material for the modelling in
the life sciences cluster of the California State Summer School for Mathematics
and Science, will develop short educational videos about field research,
ecology, and evolution for K-12 students in Austin, and create additional
educational opportunities for local Bahamian school children in collaboration
with Friends of the Environment (a Bahamian conservation organization).