* 1716445
* Collaborative Research: Persistence, Stability and Control of Populations in Heterogeneous Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Zhisheng Shuai, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Spatial nonuniformity of the environment is important in the survival or
extinction of many large-scale ecological and epidemiological systems. This
project studies how movement of organisms in the environment affects ecosystem
survival or epidemic outbreak/extinction. Examples of such movement include
dispersal of marine larvae between different reefs under water flow, spreading
of infectious diseases via holiday travel or environmental pathogen movement,
and infection through movement of insects that carry disease. Several user-
friendly quantitative indices and their computation will be introduced to
biologists and other scientists as tools for detecting and preventing ecological
extinction or epidemic outbreaks. The research will model and optimize the
effect of vaccination, medical treatment, and quarantine in epidemic events, and
harvesting and harvesting restrictions for agricultural/fishery/forestry
systems, to provide answers to important questions about sustaining high quality
living environments and preventing epidemic outbreaks. Sample applications of
the proposed research include (a) preventing cholera epidemics spreading through
a common water source and (b) restoring Chesapeake Bay oyster populations. The
outcomes from application projects will provide actionable strategies for
government agencies, and the results will improve economic productivity of
fisheries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The impact of spatial heterogeneity and
dispersal on key ecological indices and properties will be quantitatively
defined and calculated, and a unified mathematical framework will be developed
to study the persistence, stability and control of both single and interacting
species in heterogeneous environment or networks. The focus is the impact of
asymmetric movement on the dynamical behavior of the biological systems, and
infusing graph theory, matrix theory and their continuous counterparts into the
study of corresponding dynamical systems is a key to the new theory. Several
classical concepts in dynamical systems and mathematical biology such as
Lyapunov stability theory, basic reproduction number, maximum sustainable yield
and a new concept of target reproduction number will be defined in a broader
context and analyzed with the additional network structure and spatial
heterogeneity. The project will train graduate students and undergraduate
students, and the modeling skills and new mathematical techniques that students
acquire from the project will make them part of a future workforce with strong
quantitative and analytical ability.