* 1716909
* CNH-L: Socioecological System Dynamics Related to Livelihood, Human Migration, and Landscape Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Jonathan Gilligan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,498,721.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine the relationships among
river and coastal processes, landscape dynamics, and human activities and
migration in a densely populated river delta. It will enhance understanding of
the scales and associations among physical and human system dynamics, including
complex feedback loops among those systems. The project will identify how these
relationships shift over time, and it will provide new insights regarding the
ways in which variable river discharge or land modifications by humans may
influence system interactions in the future. The project will yield a diverse
set of products that will have future value in both basic and applied research
contexts, including data about migration, livelihood activities, land-use, and
adaptation from communities living on a shifting coastline; detailed
characterization of the role of land-water governance in shaping both
contemporary and historical social-biophysical dynamics within river deltas, and
open-source computer models of migration and landscape patterns that emerge in
an environment where land is constantly created and destroyed. The project will
provide valuable interdisciplinary education and training opportunities for
graduate students. Other educational activities related to the research will
involve students in comparable regions of the U.S. and
Bangladesh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River deltas are complex systems facing the
challenge of balancing sustainable development, resource use, and land security
in a continually shifting environment. As land and economic opportunities are
created (and sometimes destroyed) through evolving landscape dynamics, risks
from floods and conflicts over land tenure are intensified, forcing community
upheaval and migration. The investigators will use an interdisciplinary approach
that integrates household- and community-level surveys, qualitative interviews,
collection of sedimentological and geochemical field data, time-series analyses
of landscape and institutional change, and scenario modeling. They will combine
established empirical methods in the social sciences and the earth sciences with
computational modeling to study coupled dynamics of human activity and
environmental change in rural communities living along channels in a low-lying
delta, where sediment deposition and erosion create a constantly changing
landscape. The investigators will focus on population movement as a crucial
process on the human side of these coupled dynamics. They will characterize
different types of migration as responses to environmental and socioeconomic
stress and to opportunities related to changing environmental conditions. The
impacts of migration on livelihood activities, which in turn affect the physical
environment through land use, also will be assessed. With respect to physical
systems, sediment transport, and the rates of deposition and erosion will be a
central focus, because the creation or destruction of agricultural and homestead
land are expected to strongly affect migration dynamics, particularly as
changing climatic regimes produce unpredictable precipitation and flooding
patterns. Observational data about the changing biophysical landscape and human
activity will be integrated in coupled agent-based and sediment transport models
to explore the role of migration as a potential adaptation to climatic stress
and as a source of resilience in vulnerable populations. Although the bulk of
the project will focus on dynamic interactions among biophysical and human
systems in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna Delta of Bangladesh, project findings
will have relevance for other densely settled deltas around the world, including
the Mississippi River delta of the southern U.S. This project is supported by
the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.