* 1716865
* Collaborative Research:  What Controls Calving? A Greenland-wide Test of Terminus Change Mechanisms
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Timothy Bartholomaus, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 140,234.00

Retreat of the leading edge of marine-terminating glaciers is often associated
with ice flow acceleration, increases in iceberg calving rates and discharge to
the sea, and glacier thinning. The associated ice mass loss is responsible for
approximately half the contribution of the Greenland Ice Sheet to sea level rise
thus far this century. For the remainder of the century and beyond, gaps in our
understanding of iceberg calving and glacier retreat result in large
uncertainties in predictions of mass loss and consequent sea level rise. This
collaborative project is designed to reveal the factors controlling terminus
retreat and iceberg calving in the diverse settings of Greenland's marine
terminating glaciers. The project contributes to STEM workforce development by
providing support to two early-career scientists from EPSCoR states,
undergraduate student participation at both institutions, and for training of a
graduate student. The principal investigators will continue their active
outreach, including museum and classroom visits in the rural settings around
their universities, presentations to non-technical groups, and media
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will substantially improve our
understanding of marine terminating glacier dynamics via the analysis of
recently-available observational datasets. Through these data, the project will
evaluate the performance of terminus parameterizations used in numerical ice
sheet models, known as "calving laws." Application at 49 diverse marine-
terminating glaciers around Greenland (nearly a quarter of the ice sheet total)
ensures that project results will be representative. Calving laws applied to
conditions at and near glacier termini will predict terminus locations.
Predictions will be compared to terminus positions observed in satellite and
time-lapse images to identify model misfits. This calibration and validation
analysis will reveal when and where specific calving laws reliably reproduce
terminus positions and calving rates. Furthermore, extensions of this approach
will (1) yield insight into the impact of crevasse water storage on iceberg
calving, (2) guide the inclusion of submarine melting to improve prediction by
calving laws, and (3) quantify the critical timescales over which glacier
properties must be characterized for the prediction of calving rates and
terminus positions.