* 1716567
* Improving and Extending Models of Gamma-Ray Burst Afterglows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andrei Beloborodov, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2022
* USD 457,776.00

Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are the most luminous cosmic explosions. They are some
of the more extreme objects in the Universe, both mysterious and fascinating.
Understanding their origin and development provides insights into star formation
and evolution, as well as tests of basic physics. The afterglow left after a GRB
goes off is due to interactions in the material around the explosion and can be
observed long after the initial blast. This project will probe the afterglow
phase in new ways using extensive computer simulations to go beyond the simple
models and explain otherwise puzzling recent
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the way the spectrum of the
afterglow changes with time, the dominant emission mechanism was thought to be
synchrotron radiation from shock-accelerated electrons. However, the detection
of photons with energies that violate the maximum synchrotron limit shows that
theoretical understanding of the afterglow emission is still incomplete. Current
models have little predictive power due to ignorance of the underlying
microphysics. This work will go beyond standard phenomenological approaches,
building on recent results by this research team that have started to unveil the
microphysics of GRB afterglows. Self-consistent particle-in-cell simulations
will provide physically grounded microphysical parameters at every stage. This
study will (1) settle the question of the origin of the magnetization; (2) study
the shock physics in early GRB afterglows, investigating the electron-positron-
proton plasma shocks; and (3) explore the shock physics in late GRB afterglows.
The research will assess the efficiencies of electron and proton acceleration in
late GRB shocks, and the decay length of the generated and amplified
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the complex physics involved, this work
contains several projects for undergraduate students, and even high school
students can be exposed to the latest developments about relativistic shocks
through day-long workshops. The team is committed to significant involvement
with established educational and mentorship programs, including support for
children and adolescents from disadvantaged neighborhoods.