* 1716533_bk
* CNH-S: Experimental Investigation of the Dynamic Human-Environmental Interactions Resulting from Protected Area Visitation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sarah Reed, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Janice Bossart
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,914.00

Protected natural areas, such as national parks and local preserves, are the
primary strategy for conserving the world's biological diversity. Protected
areas also provide important health and economic benefits to human communities,
for example, through outdoor recreation and nature-based tourism. Visitation to
protected areas is thought to be associated with public support for
conservation; in other words, people will not care about protected areas, or the
wildlife that depend on them, if they do not visit them. This project will test
the hypothesis that visiting a protected natural area leads to pro-conservation
behaviors, or people engaging in specific actions that lead to successful
conservation of ecologically-important lands and species. The researchers will
collect in-person and web-based survey data from visitors to Adirondack Park in
northern New York, and field data on the effects of visitations on the park's
bird communities. Results of the project will increase our understanding of how
visitor activities affect biological communities, how changes in biological
communities affect protected area integrity, how protected area integrity
affects visitor experiences, and how visitors' experiences affect their
conservation related behaviors. This research will provide training and
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and will
inform policies to manage protected lands and wildlife. Outreach engages citizen
scientists and includes public seminars, meetings with land and wildlife
managers, and press releases to media outlets.

Using an integrative socio-ecological approach and experimental treatments, the
project will investigate the dynamic human-environmental interactions that
result from people's visitation of protected areas. Researchers will employ
additive treatments of instructional (e.g., environmental education) and
experiential (e.g., citizen science) activities for visitors to the Adirondack
Park in northern New York. They will conduct social surveys to assess the
effects of visitor activities on place attachment and ecological literacy, and
subsequently, on intentions to engage in pro-conservation behaviors. These
social surveys will be paired with field surveys and geospatial analyses to
document multi-scale ecological integrity of bird communities in relation to
varying intensities of human activity. The researchers will analyze the
collected data within a coupled human-environmental model of protected area
visitation to understand how visitor activities affect biological communities,
how changes in biological communities affect the health and function of a
protected area, how protected-area integrity affects visitor experiences, and
how visitors' experiences affect their behavioral intentions regarding
conservation.