* 1716195
* III: Small: Facilitating Search in the High-Dimensional Space of Molecular Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Lydia Tapia, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 507,956.00

The binding of proteins (receptors) to small molecules (ligands) is often the
underlying mechanism behind biological processes such as immune response and
cell signaling. Understanding how receptors and ligands bind is fundamental to
explaining these biological phenomena, and for innovative drug discovery and
design. The exploration will include designing methods for analyzing binding
pathways and kinetics, focusing on the extraction of computational features from
multiple user runs. The product of this will be used in outreach activities
performed by the PIs in K-12 schools and local museums. In addition to being
potentially applicable in cutting-edge computational biophysics research, the
resources will also provide the ideal interface to teach the public about
molecular interactions and the role they play in biological processes such as
allergic reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will develop methods for
simulating binding of biomolecules via an interactive collaborative interface
that harnesses and integrates multi-user exploration of the energetic landscape
through haptic interfaces. This will address the current limitations of
molecular docking simulations by facilitating search in the high-dimensional
energetic landscape of molecular docking. Results will include a crowd-sourced
high-dimensional dataset of energies and molecular configuration from which to
extract biophysical properties of binding events. The long-term objective of the
work is to develop a fast, accurate system to aid drug discovery by identifying
docking pathways and ligand-receptor conformations using crowd-sourced
information.