* 1716532
* Functional genomics of evolutionary conserved long noncoding RNAs in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Carlos Machado, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2022
* USD 690,000.00

Biologists have recently discovered that a large fraction of the genomes of most
organisms, previously thought to be "junk DNA", has biochemical activity and may
be functional. Some of the genetic elements found in those regions of the genome
do not code for proteins (the building blocks of cells) and have thus been named
"non-coding RNAs". A few of these non-coding RNAs are known to play important
roles in the biology of organisms, mainly by their capacity to turn other genes
on or off. However, it is not clear if most of the non-coding RNAs that have
been catalogued are even functional. This project seeks to address that gap in
understanding by using patterns of evolutionary conservation in two fruit fly
species to identify candidate non-coding RNAs for functional characterization.
Because non-coding RNAs are found in many organisms, from flies to plants to
humans, the results could have far-reaching impact. The work will be carried out
by college students at graduate and undergraduate levels, thus providing them
with valuable training experiences. In addition, the project will provide
research experience and support with curriculum development for K-12 science
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most exciting recent advances in
molecular biology has been the discovery of a large number of long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs) in the transcriptomes of eukaryotic organisms. Although about a
dozen lncRNAs are known to play important roles in a broad spectrum of
developmental and physiological phenomena, our understanding of lncRNA function
lags significantly behind our ability to quickly catalog them using RNA
sequencing and computational approaches. Given that there are thousands of
lncRNAs in any given genome, one essential approach to select relevant lncRNAs
for functional characterization is to focus on lncRNAs with strong patterns of
evolutionary conservation. This project will focus on a group of lncRNAs that
are conserved between Drosophila melanogaster and D. pseudoobscura, species that
diverged from their common ancestor 25-40 million years ago. These lncRNAs show
small but detectable levels of DNA sequence conservation, conserved synteny, and
conserved developmental expression patterns that suggest shared function in the
two species. This project will characterize the phenotypic effects of that group
of evolutionary conserved lncRNAs in Drosophila. Aims will include first
confirming that the conserved putative lncRNAs are independent untranslated
transcripts using a combination of IsoSeq and Riboseq data, then identifying
their patterns of tissue-specific expression in both species using RNAseq, and
finally targeting a group of the lncRNAs for functional analysis using using
transcript disruption enabled by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing in D. melanogaster.
The methods developed in this study should have broad applicability across other
organisms, and the functional studies should add substantially to our
understanding of what lncRNAs do.