* 1716913
* Integration of stress-regulated transcription, mRNA turnover and translation in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2022
* USD 602,412.00

Plants thrive in highly variable environments because of their ability to
modulate growth and reproduction in response to environmental factors including
light, temperature, oxygen, moisture, and nutrient availability. When
environmental conditions are sub-optimal, for example during a drought or flood,
plant switch on or off a subset of their genes to control cellular metabolism
and adjust development. The molecular processes involved in this switching are
not well-understood. This project will use high-resolution genomic technologies,
including ones developed for this study, to define the coordinated regulation of
networks of genes in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana that function under
low oxygen stress, a condition associated with flooding. The results will
provide a greater understanding of how plants sense and respond effectively to
short periods of low oxygen and floods. The genetic resources, methods and
datasets spanning multiple steps of gene activity will be a valuable community
resource for plant biologists. The research will be carried out at a Hispanic
Serving institution where postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate researchers
will receive interdisciplinary training in biology and bioinformatics. Trainees
will also gain experience in teaching and mentoring, and will participate in
science communication. The project will develop a lab module for a biology
course at a Hispanic-serving community college and engage undergraduates and 5th
graders in exciting hands-on research related to
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant responses to external stimuli range from
rapid temporal changes in cellular metabolism to seasonal adjustments in
development. These changes are induced by toggling up and down of gene
expression at multiple steps, including transcription, mRNA decay, and
translation. This project will examine the hypothesis that low oxygen-activated
gene transcription fast-tracks mRNAs for translation, limiting their
destruction. The study will focus on specific classes of proteins that promote
transcription under low oxygen stress or facilitate the turnover of mRNAs. A
suite of genomics datasets--including measurements of chromatin accessibility,
transcription, mRNA degradation, and translation efficiency--will be collected
and analyzed by predictive modeling to obtain an integrated, systems-level view
of how plants respond to low-oxygen conditions.