* 1716269
* The molecular mechanisms of the Mre11/Rad50 DNA repair complex
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Scott Nelson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 651,737.00

The research goal of this project is to achieve a detailed understanding of how
the Mre11/Rad50 (MR) DNA repair complex carries out and regulates its enzymatic
activity. The MR complex is involved in the processing of DNA double-strand
breaks (DSBs), which are among the most harmful forms of DNA damage and their
improper repair may lead to cellular dysfunction or death. The completion of
this project is expected to provide insights into how organisms maintain their
genetic material over many generations in the face of internal and external DNA
damaging agents. This project will also provide high quality training
experiences for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The PI
actively participates in several internship programs with the goal of increasing
the diversity of talented individuals choosing science as a career. The PI is
partnering with the Science Bound program at Iowa State University and will
create a laboratory module for visiting high school students that involves UV-
induced DNA damage and repair. Finally, the PI is working to increase scientific
literacy by developing and teaching introductory science lecture and laboratory
courses designed for non-science majors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this research project is to define the catalytic and regulatory
mechanisms of the MR complex. Previous studies carried out in the PI's lab
strongly suggest that the underlying mechanisms that operate in the MR complex
are well conserved among homologs. It was found that the nuclease activity of
the bacteriophage T4 MR complex can be altered depending on the nature of the
divalent cation used. While Mn2+ supports a robust 3' to 5' dsDNA exonuclease
activity, Mg2+ may support a more physiologically relevant nuclease activity. A
series of in vivo and in vitro experiments will be carried out with the goal of
determining the identity of the divalent cation used by Mre11 to perform its
activity in vivo. The PI has proposed that the Rad50 coiled-coil domain
alternates between ring-like and parallel conformational states, which are
driven by the ATP hydrolysis cycle and serve to regulate the ATPase and nuclease
activities of the complex. A combination of biophysical techniques that report
on the conformation and dynamics of the coiled-coil domain will be employed to
test this hypothesis. The entire ensemble of conformational states that the
coiled-coil adopts and their rates of interconversion will be determined.
Similar methods will be used to monitor conformational changes in Mre11 and to
determine how these are controlled by the activity of Rad50. The results of
these studies are expected to significantly enhance our understanding of the MR
complex and how its activities are coordinated during DSB repair.