* 1716219
* Collaborative Research: Physical parameters controlling viral DNA packaging and ejection
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Douglas Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Viruses are small infectious agents that only replicate inside the living cells
of other organisms and can infect all types of life forms. This research will
improve the understanding of key steps in the life-cycle of many viruses, the
packaging of the DNA during viral assembly and the ejection of the DNA during
infection of a host cell, as well as how these processes depend on the physical
behavior of the tightly packed DNA. The project will not only shed light on the
fundamental biology of viruses, but also on the physics of tightly confined DNA
and the regulation of biological molecular motors which transport DNA. Graduate
and undergraduate students will receive interdisciplinary training in the
application of physics techniques to biology research and new experimental
laboratory course materials will also be developed. K-12 outreach activities
will be conducted and grade-school educational materials, including science
books, kits, and games, will be evaluated for quality and scientific accuracy to
provide online recommendations to schools and
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have shown that the kinetics of the
packaging of double stranded DNA in bacterial viruses is dominated by the
dynamics and energetics of the tightly packed DNA. In the biological regime to
be studied, with repulsive DNA-self interactions, the DNA relaxes only very
slowly towards an equilibrium conformation. Large forces build that resist DNA
confinement and later help drive ejection during infection of a host cell.
Bacteriophage phi29 will be studied as a model system and the packaging of
single DNA molecules will be directly measured with optical tweezers. The
dependence of packaging kinetics on initial motor velocity, dependent on ATP
concentration, will be studied. Lower initial velocity is hypothesized to reduce
formation of highly unfavorable DNA conformations, yielding decreased
heterogeneity in the dynamics, lower relative slowing during filling, and less
motor pausing, slipping, and stalling. A hypothesis to be tested is that
allosteric regulation of the portal motor helps packaging complete as fast as
possible by throttling down the motor velocity to mitigate formation of
unfavorable DNA conformations. How packaging kinetics, force, and DNA relaxation
depend on temperature and ionic conditions will also be studied. Motor velocity
increases significantly with temperature, and motor slowing during filling
depends on ionic screening conditions. Whereas faster initial velocity may cause
greater relative slowing during filling, increased temperature or ionic
screening may accelerate DNA relaxation. How packaging conditions and aging
affect DNA ejection and viral infectivity will also be studied. Conditions
affecting the DNA conformation during packaging, and aging, may impact DNA
ejection. Conditions that increase forces resisting packaging or decrease DNA
relaxation time may enhance ejection. The biological impact of these parameters
will be investigated by examining their effects on virus infectivity.