* 1716337
* Defining a molecular mechanism for paralogous compensation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Richard Cripps, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to study gene-pairs, and how the expression of one
gene changes when the expression of the other gene in the pair is reduced or
lost. This process, called paralogous compensation, is commonly observed in
biology, but is poorly understood. Understanding how this process works inside
the cell will provide insight into how cells sense and respond to changes in
gene expression, and more broadly will define how gene expression changes in the
course of evolution. This project will also train students in new genome-editing
technology, which is a method to alter the DNA sequence of cells in a very
specific and controlled manner. The technology is expected to have a major
impact upon biological research in the coming years, and the students trained
will be among the first to learn this technology in a classroom setting.

The specific goals for this project are to understand how expression of one gene
changes when the function of a related gene is lost, a process termed paralogous
compensation, and can contribute to genetic redundancy. This research will help
to determine how the expression of duplicate genes changes during evolution, and
will be informative in determining how cells detect and respond to changes in
gene expression. To define what component of the first gene needs to be non-
functional to trigger expression of the second gene (for example, accumulation
of mRNA or of protein from the primary gene), different mutant versions of the
primary gene will be created and expressed in a mutant background for the
primary gene. The engineered lines will be analyzed to define the circumstances
under which paralogous compensation is triggered in the cell. In parallel, the
transcriptional regulation of the secondary gene will be analyzed, in order to
define sequences and regulatory factors that control the different phases of the
expression of the secondary gene. The studies will provide mechanistic insight
into the common but relatively understudied process of paralogous compensation.
In Broader Impacts, undergraduate and graduate students will learn new CRISPR-
based genome editing technology, in a hands-on curriculum where students knock
out Drosophila genes. The class trains students in molecular, genetic and genome
editing techniques and approaches.