* 1716925
* How Do Genome and Capsid Fluctuations Determine the Translation Efficiencies of RNA Viruses?
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* William Gelbart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2021
* USD 766,097.00

Many viruses, including animal and plant pathogens, have very simple genomes and
life cycles, and yet little is known about how their genes start working once
they have infected their host. This project studies plant virus made of a single
RNA molecule packaged inside a spherical shell of protein (capsid), and this
virus will be investigated using methods and techniques of molecular biology and
physics. The main question that will be answered is how virus genome (which is
made of RNA instead of DNA) is pulled out of the capsid inside the cell.
Programs currently in place between UCLA and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU), California State University Dominguez Hills (with its 70%
population of under-represented minorities), and China (through UCLA's Cross-
disciplinary Students in Science and Technology [CSST] program) will enable the
participation of diverse undergraduate students in research during the next
three summers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific aims of this research are
focused on viruses whose genomes are directly translated into protein products
in the cytoplasm of infected cells, as opposed to more complicated viruses whose
genomes involve DNA replication and transcription and hence need to enter the
nucleus of their host cells. The particular hypothesis being tested in this work
is the possibility that the viral genome can engage with the ribosomal machinery
and have its genes expressed even as the capsid protecting it remains intact.
Several single-virus-particle methods will be used in attempts to catch an end
of the genome as it fluctuates out of the intact capsid and initiates its gene
expression (translation into protein products). State-of-the-art physical
techniques, including high-resolution cryoelectron microscopy structure
determination, and optical and magnetic "tweezers" capable of manipulating
separately both the viral genome and its capsid, will be exploited throughout
the project.