* 1716833
* Regulatory networks for integration of catabolism and behavior in a complex chemotaxis system
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Michael Savageau, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2023
* USD 912,317.00

Aromatic compounds are among the most prevalent and persistent pollutants in the
environment. A group of bacteria called the pseudomonads are adept at detecting
and degrading aromatics, and hence have potential as agents for the
bioremediation of sites contaminated with aromatic compounds. The aim of this
project is to understand how pseudomonads sense, respond and break down aromatic
compounds using experimental and computational approaches. This study will
contribute to the development of open source modeling software that will be made
available to the general scientific community. The project will also provide
interdisciplinary research training to students at the high school, college and
postgraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many aspects of bacterial
chemotaxis systems are conserved, previous work from this group demonstrated
that the aromatic acid chemotaxis system in Pseudomonas putida is different in
that it is intricately linked to both uptake and catabolism of aromatic
substrates. This project will utilize a newly developed 'phenotype-centric'
mathematical algorithm to model the complex integrated gene circuitry
controlling aromatic acid chemotaxis, transport and catabolism in P. putida.
This systems-level quantitative mathematical modeling strategy will be used in
combination with experimental analysis to dissect these interacting phenotypes.
The modeling system will be used to predict the complex temporal series of gene
expression events that underlie the sophisticated gene circuitry and resulting
cellular phenotypes. The study will test the idea that control of inducer
production modulates entry of substrates into the cell through the action of
additional transporters. The merit of this study lies in its interdisciplinary
approach to understanding the complex relationship between genotype and
phenotype. This integrated approach to model prediction and experimental testing
of a complex biochemical system has broad implications for organisms in complex
microbiomes. The quantitative analysis of this complex integrated system will
allow for further refinement of the open-source modeling software tool 'System
Design Space Toolbox', thereby increasing its utility to the general scientific
community for systems and synthetic biology studies.