* 1716828
* SI2-SSE: GraphPack: Unified Graph Processing with Parallel Boost Graph Library, GraphBLAS, and High-Level Generic Algorithm Interfaces
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Andrew Lumsdaine, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,386.00

Modeling and simulating physical phenomena with computers is now an important
tool for development and discovery in almost all fields of science and
engineering. Joining theory and experimentation, computation is now recognized
as the "third pillar" of scientific research. More recently, data analytics (the
science of examining raw data with the purpose of drawing conclusions about that
information) has emerged as an important computational tool for scientific
discovery - a tool that is likely to be as important as, if not more important
than, modeling and simulation. Within the broad domain of data analytics, the
use of graphs is a powerful conceptual tool that describes relationships between
discrete objects. Because of the growing importance of data analytics, many
research groups have turned their attention to developing new approaches for
solving large-scale graph problems. While the research results in this area have
been valuable, the software products that have been produced tend to be limited
in scope and/or not of sufficient quality to be reused. This project will
address this problem by creation of GraphPack, a comprehensive unified graph
library with a coherent user interface and support for multiple state-of-the-art
compute platforms. This work will have broad impacts in scientific and
engineering application areas, larger social and economic areas depending on
graph analytics, and in education. GraphPack will improve the ease of use and
broaden the applicability of graph algorithms. Application areas include such
diverse areas as knowledge discovery, genomics, proteomics, electronic design
automation, forest management, Internet routing, power grid management, and many
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GraphPack will be a reliable and comprehensive
toolkit applicable across a wide variety of problems and architectures that will
unleash the capabilities of the community by making the current state of the art
readily available. GraphPack will develop a consistent and comprehensive set of
abstractions necessary to express a wide variety of (generic) graph algorithms
and data structures in the context of unimodal as well as hybrid parallelism.
These abstractions will be incorporated as abstract concepts, and selected
concrete efficient implementations will be provided. While genericity is an
important goal, GraphPack will also provide a simplified user interface for
graph algorithms for the situations where simplicity is more important than
fully tuned performance. GraphPack will also provide a GraphBLAS interface based
on the recent efforts to provide a standardized set of graph operations based on
the concepts of linear algebra. By providing multiple interfaces with efficient
parallel implementations, GraphPack will enable a wide variety of applications
to take advantage of high-performance graph algorithms.