* 1716945
* NeTS: Small: Migration Towards Terascale Flexible-Grid Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Biswanath Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Fiber optic networks are deployed worldwide in telecom backbone networks to
carry the huge and exponentially growing amount of Internet traffic. However,
this traffic growth is straining the capacity of fiber optic networks, which has
led researchers to explore new ways of using the bandwidth available in them.
Traditionally, a fiber's spectrum is divided into a fixed grid of equally-spaced
optical channels. To squeeze more out of the available spectrum, this
conventional fixed grid is evolving towards a flexible grid, where individual
channels can be placed anywhere in the spectrum, and sized to match the traffic
they carry. This research will investigate novel migration strategies from
fixed-grid towards next-generation flexible-grid fiber networks, and strategies
for maximizing the traffic a network can carry. This will enable high network
efficiency, thus lowering the cost of the communications networks that underlie
the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flex-grid technology holds enormous
potential, but also brings with it significant complexity. This project tackles
the two main issues associated with incorporating flex-grid technology into
communications networks. First, it will investigate potential fixed-to-flex grid
migration strategies, taking into account the complexities of device
characteristics, detailed node architectures and physical (signal) impairments
in network optimization studies. The project will systematically address
possible upgrade paths, including which node(s) should be upgraded first,
whether and where flex-grid 'islands' should be created within networks, and how
many nodes should be upgraded for current network state. The project will use a
24-node nationwide network with aggregate terabit-per-second traffic demand to
explore the relative advantages and disadvantages of each approach. The
project's second major thrust is to tackle the problem of traffic grooming in
such networks. While traditional traffic grooming is essentially a combined
routing and (fixed-size) bin-packing problem, the focus here is on novel
strategies to efficiently aggregate traffic as container (bin) sizes vary in
time.