* 1716298
* Investigating midbody mRNA function during mitosis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Ahna Skop, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2020
* USD 897,406.00

Cell division involves two fundamental process. In the first step, genetic
information is partitioned to opposite sides of the mother cell, while in the
second step, the mother cell physically partitions into two separate daughter
cells at a region known as the midbody. This project will investigate the
observation that some genetic information accumulates at the midbody. The work
employs interdisciplinary approaches that can be widely employed for making
rapid progress in understanding the functions of poorly understood cell division
genes and mRNAs. The Broader Impact activities include a public outreach
component in which microscopy images generated from this research will be used
to create a moveable 20-foot scientific art installation called "Genetic
Reflections". This piece will be installed in a public, high-traffic area in the
UW-Madison Biotech Center and then the Wisconsin Science Museum. Portions of
this installation will be constructed to travel locally around the state of
Wisconsin and then nationally. The goal is to have scientific artwork that is
beautiful, informative and promotes future public engagement projects between
scientists and the public.

In certain cells types, midbody factor mis-regulation and midbody accumulation
leads to altered growth and development, suggesting that the factors (proteins
and mRNAs) associated with midbodies when mis-handled by the cell, can lead to
dramatic and detrimental proliferative and cell fate changes. Necessary
reagents, techniques, and datasets will be generated and shared, providing the
foundation to determine how midbody-associated mRNAs are regulated during cell
division. With such knowledge, it will be possible to probe the dynamics of
midbody-specific mRNAs during mitosis. The PI has made an unexpected preliminary
discovery in the midbody transcriptome of an enrichment of the mRNA of an
important kinesin widely known to function on the protein level. This discovery
challenges current understanding of the mechanisms of molecular motor regulation
and transport, and also likely cytokinesis. If successful, the knowledge
generated from this research will transform current understanding about the
regulation of molecular motors and cell division in all aspects of human and
organismal biology.