* 1716948
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Mechanism of Heme Extraction by IsdH
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Robert Clubb, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

In order to establish an infection bacterial pathogens ingest nutrients that
enable them to proliferate. Iron is an essential nutrient that is actively
acquired by bacteria from human hemoglobin during infections. A key step in
microbial iron acquisition is the extraction of iron-laden heme from hemoglobin.
Using biophysical and computational approaches the investigators will learn how
the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus uses the IsdH surface receptor to extract
heme from hemoglobin. This process is clinically important, as it enables
methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) to cause infections. The results of this
work will provide a detailed view of the mechanism underlying extraction and it
will have a broad impact as other bacterial pathogens also use a similar
mechanism to acquire iron during infections. The proposal will facilitate
undergraduate and graduate student outreach programs of students from under-
represented groups at the PhD level. The grant will be used to support outreach
efforts to community college students and promote diversity, inclusion, and the
elimination of barriers to participation in bioscience research careers.

In this project a team of investigators will apply computational and
experimental methodologies to decipher the structural, dynamic and energetic
basis through which the Staphylococcus aureus IsdH protein extracts heme from
human hemoglobin (Hb). This process is highly conserved and used by many
bacterial species to obtain the essential nutrient iron. Recent structural data
and newly developed experimental tools make IsdH a powerful model system in
which to explore the heme extraction mechanism. The overall goal of this
research project is to elucidate how heme is transferred from Hb to IsdH, and to
learn how this process is facilitated by inter-domain motions. In Aim #1,
simulations and experiments will define the pathway of heme transfer, and
uncover specific receptor contacts that facilitate transfer and distort Hb to
trigger heme release. In Aim #2, the role of inter-domain motions will be
determined by quantitatively assessing their effect on the local concentration
of the receptor, and the kinetics and thermodynamics of transfer. Because IsdH
is paradigmatic, the results of this project will provide broad insight into the
extraction mechanisms used by a wide-range of bacteria.