* 1716425
* How Cyclophilins both Regulate and are Regulated by RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Deborah Wuttke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Cyclophilins are a family of protein chaperones (molecules that assist in the
folding/unfolding and the assembly/disassembly of other macromolecular
structures) and signaling molecules found in every domain of life. In humans,
cyclophilins play key roles in numerous signaling pathways, are involved in
viral life cycles for viruses such as HIV, and play roles in inflammation and
cancer. Recently, this family of proteins has been identified as RNA-binding
proteins, and subsequent studies suggest RNA regulates the activity of this
important family of proteins. These findings provide a wholly new avenue of
study to understand how cyclophilins are regulated and how they regulate key
cellular processes important in health and disease. The goal of this research
project is to identify the specific RNA molecules to which these proteins bind,
what that binding interface looks like, and to determine the role(s) of these
interactions in cyclophilin biology. This research program will have a broad
impact on the scientific communities interested in cyclophilin and RNA biology
and lead to the development of tools that will benefit studies by others that
seek to understand the full array of RNA/protein interactions. This program also
strongly promotes teaching, training and learning while advancing scientific
discovery. These activities occur through well-designed and thoughtful mentoring
strategies as well as through significant teaching innovations in the
undergraduate classroom, including development of active learning environments
and introduction of research-based labs in introductory science
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is becoming apparent that many proteins are
regulated by RNA in unforeseen ways. The cyclophilin-like domain (CLD) is
consistently revealed as a non-canonical RNA-binding domain in every unbiased
mammalian and yeast in vivo cross-linking study reported to date. Cyclophilins
are a key cellular regulator and play important roles in numerous biological
pathways. Their discovery as RNA-binding proteins suggests novel roles for RNAs
in cyclophilin biology which have been hinted at by other observations, but as
yet have not been fully explored. Targets include the CLD of cyclophilin A
(CypA), a well-studied representative of CLDs that consists solely of this
domain, and its yeast homolog Cpr1. Cyp33 was also selected for study because it
contains both an RNA recognition motif (RRM) and CLD domain. RNA motifs
responsible for interacting with the CLD will be identified initially by using
in vitro selection strategies. In vivo binding sites will be identified using in
cell photocrosslinking followed by pull down and deep sequencing of the
associated RNAs. The mechanism of RNA activated CLD enzymatic activity will be
elucidated. An unbiased transcriptome analysis in the absence of CLDs will
reveal whether the transcripts found to be associated with CLD are directly
impacted in vivo. The in vitro binding and enzymatic strategies employed will
facilitate the development of a set of highly validated separation-of-function
mutants. These tools will allow the correlation of CLD activity directly with
transcriptome levels and also to uncover what aspects of the RNA life cycle are
impacted by CLD action. Overall, this comprehensive research plan will help
elucidate the novel roles cyclophilins play both directly and indirectly in RNA
biology.