* 1716232
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of information processing in the Vibrio fischeri pheromone-signaling network
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Eric Stabb, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Pheromone signaling controls many important bacterial behaviors, ranging from
benign symbiotic relationships between bacteria and their hosts to colonization
of human tissues and organs by bacterial pathogens. The aim of this project is
to understand how the local environment (e.g., the environment in the host)
affects pheromone signaling and bacterial behaviors such as colonization. This
project combines molecular-based microbiology methods with physical and
mathematical tools to develop a more complete experimental and theoretical
picture of this process. The project will enhance education by training graduate
and undergraduate students to perform cross-disciplinary laboratory research.
These research experiences will prepare the students for a wide range of careers
in the biosciences. The project also includes a formal training experience for
secondary science teachers, primarily from high schools with large numbers of
students from under-served populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important
elements of Vibrio fischeri pheromone signaling are the LuxI/LuxR signal-
synthase/receptor, which produces and detects a 3OC6 homoserine lactone (HSL)
pheromone, and the AinS/AinR synthase/receptor system, which employs a C8 HSL
pheromone to drive a different signaling cascade. The complexity of these
systems is enhanced by the crosstalk generated by LuxR's recognition of both HSL
signals, by the fact that both Lux and Ain are modulated in response to the
environment, and by the presence of positive feedback in both the Lux and Ain
cascades. The primary goal of this project is to understand how the system
gathers and integrates information from its environment. The specific aims are
to (i) understand how the pivotal regulator LuxR and its variants integrate
information from the two HSL signals, (ii) identify the activation states of the
broader pheromone-signaling circuitry and explore how environmental inputs lead
to specific outputs, and (iii) test the hypothesis that the architecture of this
signaling system allows spatially-heterogeneous environments to trigger
population-wide responses over extended distance and time scales. The project
will use cytometry and gene reporter methods to characterize LuxR interactions
and system states. It will also use microfluidics and microscopy to explore
signaling dynamics in heterogeneous environments. The results are expected to
yield new insights into how bacteria use environmental cues to control
population-level behaviors.