* 1716927
* Applications of Scalable Bases in Kernel Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Thomas Hangelbroek, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 133,549.00

1716927 Hangelbroek

This project concerns research in the area of kernel-based meshless
approximation methods, and applications to some large-scale scientific computing
problems: numerical solution of partial differential equations (e.g., equations
governing fluid flow), tomography (e.g., medical and seismic imaging), and
scattered data approximation (modeling of irregularly sampled scientific data).
The main focus is on generation and use of scalable bases for kernel spaces;
this is a new mathematical tool meant to stabilize and accelerate kernel-based
algorithms. Graduate students participate in the work of the project.

The classical kernel approach is prized for its ability to provide accurate
solutions to computational problems with complicated geometry; in this sense, it
is a meshless method, which does not require sampling at uniformly placed sites
or the careful construction of triangulations, meshes, or other apparatus.
However, it can suffer from instability and heavy computational costs when the
underlying problems grow in size. It has been shown that in some cases these
drawbacks can be mitigated by construction of scalable bases (as developed by
the investigator and collaborators), which can be efficiently generated and lead
to stabilization of the underlying calculations. The primary applications
considered are threefold. First is the development of an adaptive, meshless
method for treating elliptic PDEs. The notion of adaptive refinement of meshes
is well understood for classical finite elements; this aspect of the project
seeks to use the scalable bases local construction (where basis functions decay
at a rate determined by the local density of the scattered centers) to develop
an adaptive algorithm where the centers are refined, but no remeshing is needed.
Second, the investigator employs kernel-based quadrature, accelerated by using
the scalable basis as a preconditioner, to treat tomographic problems. The aim
here is to develop parameter selection and error analysis for approximate
filtered backprojection of tomographic data acquired from a certain class of
phantom images. Third, the investigator develops algorithms for scattered data-
fitting that reflect local sampling density of the data. Graduate students
participate in the work of the project.