* 1716699
* Collaborative Research: Experimental assessment of dental microwear formation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Larisa Grawe DeSantis, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 72,548.00

It is widely understood that the evolution of hominins was strongly influenced
by diet, and yet there continues to be a debate about precisely which types of
foods were eaten by them. In particular, it is unclear whether the massive jaws
and huge teeth of these early humans evolved to process hard foods like nuts and
seeds, or tough, fibrous foods that might have included grasses. An important
piece of evidence in this debate comes from the microscopic damage done to teeth
by food, and particles of grit that may adhere to food. This study conducts
experiments designed to evaluate how patterns of such microscopic damage should
be interpreted in order to reconstruct diet in fossil humans. This study will
have broad implications, including 1) improving our understanding of why humans
evolved, 2) evaluating established methods, and developing new methods, of
reconstructing diet in extinct animals, which in turn may influence our
understanding of ancient environments and how they changed over time, and 3)
providing an experimental basis for interpreting feeding behavior in both
prehistoric and historic human populations. The project also supports the
research of PIs at diverse career stages, including an early-career female
researcher, as well as graduate, undergraduate, and volunteer high school
students (in collaboration with local university and community programs like the
Vanderbilt School for Science and Math). All students will receive mentoring in
performing and communicating results of scientific research (high school
students will also publish in the Young Scientist journal), professional
development skills, and improving their ability and desire to implement
research, education and outreach activities as future
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will use suid and ovid models to
evaluate the effect on tooth surfaces of varying toughness and hardness of
foods, as well as the hardness and size of abrasive particles like sand, seed
shell fragments and other very hard plant parts. The microscopic damage done to
teeth will be assessed using surface scans and nanomechanical force microscopy,
and statistical methods will be used to determine whether foods, particles, or
an interaction between them drives patterns of damage. This, in turn, will allow
an evaluation of the causes of damage patterns seen in the teeth of fossil
humans, which will in turn allow a more precise assessment of the diets of early
humans. The damage on the teeth will then be assessed on a nano-scale in order
to determine if a new method of dietary reconstruction can be developed based on
a characterization of individuals wear marks.