* 1716975
* Integrable Partial Differential Equations Beyond Standard Assumptions on Initial Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alexei Rybkin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 272,783.00

This project is concerned with some fundamental problems of soliton theory which
deals with nonlinear wave propagation in various media. Solitons are very
special solitary waves that move with constant speed without changing their
shape; the most prominent example is a tsunami wave. The first scientific
description of a soliton was given in 1834 by Scott Russell. The equation
describing what Russel had observed was derived in 1895 by Korteweg and de Vries
(KdV), but it was not until 1967 when the KdV equation was solved in closed
form. The method of solution, the inverse scattering transform (IST), is
regarded as a major achievement of the 20th century mathematics. It gave rise to
soliton theory that is dealing with broad classes of physically important
differential equations which can be solved by a suitable IST (such equations are
also called completely integrable systems). The range of applications is
enormous: from hydrodynamics and nonlinear optics to astrophysics and elementary
particle theory. Integrable systems have been primarily studied in the
connection with propagation of waves initiated by rapidly decaying or periodic
initial data (the "classical" data). The corresponding solutions have a
relatively simple wave structure of traveling solitons accompanied by radiation
of decaying waves, or periodic wave-trains and their modulations. However, any
deviation from classical data leads to fundamental difficulties; it is the main
focus of the project to overcome them. Entirely new types of solutions, with
much more complicated wave structure and far-reaching practical applications,
are expected to arise. The results could be used for understanding rogue waves,
soliton propagation on different backgrounds (including noisy), tidal waves,
certain meteorological phenomena (i.e. morning glory), or the study of
propagation of coherent structures in noisy media (or in a general wave
setting), in such diverse disciplines as hydrodynamics, telecommunication,
atmospheric sciences, nonlinear optics, plasma physics, astrophysics, etc. The
project will have a very large educational component. The principal investigator
(PI) will continue his research experience for undergraduates program to
identify and mentor young scholars in the field of applied mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the KdV setting the PI has reformulated the IST in
terms of Hankel operators and Weyl m-functions. It lets one extend the IST to a
surprisingly broad class of initial data. The PI plans to continue using these
powerful tools to identify the broadest possible class of initial data for which
a suitable analog of the IST exists. Another objective is asymptotic analysis of
the underlying solutions. The most powerful approach is based on the Riemann-
Hilbert (RH) problem which also breaks down on such initial data in a number of
serious ways. The main thrust will be put on understanding how to make the RH
problem work far outside of the realm of classical problems. The results are
expected to be instrumental for various applications. The accompanying
mathematical problems are also very important to the theory of the Schrödinger
operator, and the theory of Hankel and Toeplitz operators, fundamental objects
of operator theory. Uncovering connections between soliton theory and Hankel
operators is of great independent interest and could potentially have a profound
influence on both theories.