* 1716594
* An evolutionary approach to enable reprogramming of non-ribosomal peptide enzymology
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Michael Thomas, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

Non-ribosomal peptides are naturally produced by many bacteria and have been an
excellent source of therapeutics, most notably new antibiotics. The synthesis of
many of these peptides involves a class of enzymes called non-ribosomal peptide
synthetases. These enzymes function in a manner analogous to an assembly line
with enzyme workstations or 'modules' that coordinately build the peptide one
amino acid at a time. The goal of this project is to learn the rules for mixing
and matching the workstations from different non-ribosomal peptide synthetases.
Ultimately, this would allow researchers to construct hybrid enzymes that
synthesize novel peptides and then screen the peptides for therapeutic
properties. This research will provide cross-disciplinary training due to the
collaborative effort between faculty in the biological sciences and engineering
sciences. This cross-disciplinary approach will be integrated into a formal
undergraduate capstone course, an undergraduate summer research program, and
outreach to K-12 students. This approach will also expose the students to basic
scientific questions (e.g. substrate recognition) and show the students how this
information can be applied to an important goal (e.g. production of designer
molecules).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During non-ribosomal peptide assembly, the
adenylation (A) domains recognize specific amino acids and tethers them to
partner peptidyl carrier protein (PCP) domains. Condensation (C) domains
subsequently form amide bonds between two neighboring PCP-tethered amino acids
in a directional manner, forming the peptide backbone. Structural and
biochemical studies have identified A domain specificity codes that define the
amino acid recognized by the domain. While this code has proved enormously
useful in predicting the amino acid activated, a number of studies have shown
that altering the residues that define this code nearly always fail to switch
substrate specificity. Furthermore, complete domain or module swaps generating
chimeric non-ribosomal peptide synthetases generally fail to function
efficiently, likely due to improper protein-protein interactions or substrate
specificity of the associated C domains. This project will investigate the
reprogramming of both A and C domains of non-ribosomal peptide synthetases using
in vivo directed evolution approaches. Using these approaches, this study aims
to define a means for generating functional chimeric A domains, identify new A
domain specificity codes for altering amino acid recognition, and understand the
residues governing substrate recognition by C domains. Results from these
studies will aid our ability to rationally reprogram the biosynthesis of this
important class of natural products to generate designer molecules for a variety
of applied purposes, while also gaining insights into how nature has
accomplished this goal.