* 1716763
* Diffusion-Driven Fracture
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Blaise Bourdin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 311,974.00

Fracture mechanics is often concerned with predicting the development and
propagation of cracks in materials subject to given forces. In some situations,
however, the actual forces depend strongly on the geometry of the cracks
themselves. A classical example is that of mud-crack patterns induced by
evaporation, which is itself strongly influenced by the development of new crack
surfaces. Other problems of this class are commonly encountered in hydraulic
fracturing, fracture in ferro- and piezoelectric materials, corrosion stress
fracture of metals, environmental stress fracture of glass and polymers,
fracture of electrodes in lithium-ion batteries, thermal cracks, and ion
diffusion in cements. In this project, the investigator constructs rigorous
models for such diffusion-driven fracture problems, develops computer codes for
the models on parallel supercomputers, and uses the models and codes to study
specific problems of interest in industrial, engineering, and scientific
applications. Graduate students participate in the work of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variational phase-field models of fracture,
originally devised by the investigator and further developed in the applied
mathematics community, have seen an explosive growth in the last few years.
Their main strength is their ability to address two of the most critical issues
in the quasi-static fracture of brittle materials: crack path identification and
crack nucleation. While mathematicians are typically concerned to find the
equilibrium displacement and crack configuration of a solid under a given load,
in many situations the loadings must be derived from a secondary problem and may
be affected by the fracture geometry. These include hydraulic fracturing,
fracture in ferro- and piezoelectric materials, corrosion stress fracture of
metals, environmental stress fracture of glass and polymers, fracture of
electrodes in lithium-ion batteries, thermal cracks, and ion diffusion in
cements, which have been studied in a largely ad hoc manner. The goal of this
project is to establish a strong theoretical foundation for phase-field models
where the fracture is driven by a diffusive process. The investigator and his
students implement these models and release them as open source software. They
use these mathematical and computational tools to study three-dimensional crack
nucleation under diffuse loads in two and three dimensions. Graduate students
participate in the work of the project.