* 1716039
* DNA repair by alternative end-joining in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Mitch McVey, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2022
* USD 784,881.00

When breaks occur in DNA, cells activate repair mechanisms to join the ends back
together. Usually DNA repair is a precise process that serves to preserve the
integrity of the genome. Surprisingly though, some types of repair used for
joining broken DNA ends are very prone to errors. How and why this occurs is not
clear. This research seeks to discover what makes end-joining repair so error-
prone and what DNA sequence contexts might favor such imprecision. The results
will provide crucial information that could prove useful for researchers who
want to intentionally prevent or promote inaccurate repair, such as when
conducting genome editing manipulations. Furthermore, the research will provide
undergraduate and graduate-level scientists with transferable skills in
molecular biology, genomics, computational modeling, and effective mentoring
techniques. Finally, the project will engage a network of current and former lab
members as public ambassadors for basic science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alternative end-joining is an error-prone
mechanism of DNA double-strand break repair, which leads to small deletions and
insertions at the break site. Accumulating evidence suggests that these DNA
changes may result from the iterative action of the specialized translesion DNA
polymerase, theta, with various accessory proteins. However, little is known
about how these proteins interact with DNA sequences in the vicinity of the
breaks and what role the DNA sequences themselves might play. One hypothesis is
that the DNA on one side of the break forms transient secondary structures, such
as short loops and hairpins, which drive production of new single-stranded DNA.
The nascent strands then pair with microhomologous sequences on the other side
of the break and serve as templates for completing the repair, thereby leading
to a variety of repair products. This hypothesis will be tested in the fruit
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, an organism that relies heavily on alternative
end-joining repair and is uniquely amenable to studying how different tissue
types or developmental stages might influence this error-prone process. A
systematic combination of genetic manipulation, high throughput amplicon
sequencing, and computational modeling will be used to characterize different
types of secondary-structure forming sequences and the various classes of repair
junctions they produce as a result of alternative end-joining. Finally, a
possible role of alternative end-joining in repair of breaks induced by the
genome editing tool, CRISPR-Cas9, will be assessed; the results of this
experiment could provide an avenue for extending the basic understanding of this
type of DNA repair to improving current practices for genome editing.