* 1716131
* Intrinsic Alignment Models for Precision Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Tiziana Di Matteo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 01/31/2021
* USD 426,291.00

One of the key mysteries in modern cosmology is the nature of the dark energy
that is responsible for the accelerated expansion rate of our Universe. Weak
gravitational lensing, the coherent distortion of galaxy shapes due to
deflection of light by mass, is the most promising observational method for
uncovering the nature of dark energy. As a result, large upcoming surveys such
as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) have been planned to measure weak
lensing very precisely. The objective of this project is to provide accurate
theoretical predictions that will eliminate a key source of uncertainty in weak
lensing measurements and test their use in analysis of data from an ongoing sky
survey. Work such as this, that will contribute to the solution of the biggest
mystery in modern cosmology, will clearly promote the progress of science. As an
additional benefit, the investigators will extend an existing, highly successful
educational outreach program ("Space Public Outreach Team" or SPOT) to the
Pittsburgh area, focusing on schools with a significant fraction of under-
represented minorities. This project will have an impact both on K-12 education
and undergraduate and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weak
gravitational lensing has great potential to solve some of the major outstanding
issues in cosmology, such as the nature of dark energy. However, a major source
of uncertainty is that these measurements are typically interpreted assuming
that all coherent galaxy shape alignments are due to weak lensing, but
unfortunately, galaxies do exhibit coherent "intrinsic alignments" with large-
scale density fields. The alignments contaminate weak lensing measurements at a
level that will significantly exceed the statistical error bars on weak lensing
measurements with the LSST. This project has three main objectives. The first
objective is to use large volume, extremely high resolution hydrodynamic
simulations to further our understanding of the physics behind intrinsic
alignments and build improved intrinsic alignments models. The second objective
is to produce mock galaxy catalogs with intrinsic alignments for use in testing
intrinsic alignments mitigation schemes. The final objective is to carry out
cosmological weak lensing analysis including strategies to marginalize over
intrinsic alignments using improved intrinsic alignment models that are
motivated by state-of-the-art simulations, analytic theory, and observations.