* 1716541
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Hardware Architectures for Post-Quantum Cryptography
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Jakub Szefer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 259,957.00

This research project develops new hardware designs and implementations for a
class of post-quantum secure cryptographic (PQC) algorithms. While today's
algorithms used for public key cryptography, e.g. the RSA algorithm, or digital
signatures are vulnerable to being broken through "cryptanalysis" using quantum
computers, PQC algorithms offer protections from such cryptanalysis as they
cannot be broken on a quantum computer. To understand how to create the most
efficient hardware PQC designs from energy, area, and performance perspective,
this project realizes the new algorithms as custom application specific
integrated circuits. This work focuses on hardware design aspect of PQC
algorithms that has been largely unexplored. This project especially promotes
development and exchange of ideas between hardware security and integrated
circuit researchers and among a broader audience through development of
professional and educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance the
understanding of the PQC algorithms, this project develops FPGA implementations
of the code-based algorithms for evaluation. Novel designs for modules such as
Gaussian Elimination, or polynomial evaluation with Additive FFT are developed,
to create new and efficient hardware primitives. The designs are taken through
VLSI design flow to realize the integrated circuits that are evaluated for
power, area, and performance. Issues of large memories, needed for the large
keys used by the PQC algorithms, are addressed as well as incorporation of the
integrated circuits with other computing platforms to create hardware
accelerators for the PQC algorithms. This project may contribute to the ongoing
US and international algorithm standardization efforts.