* 1716251
* Establishing the Properties of the First Stars and Supernovae and the Origins of the Heaviest Elements with Stellar Archaeology
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Anna Frebel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 650,659.00

The Big Bang left behind the Universe made from just hydrogen, helium, and tiny
amounts of lithium. With time more and more of all heavier chemical elements
from the Periodic Table were produced in stars, supernova explosions, and
mergers of neutron stars. Astronomers study old stars to understand the cosmic
history of the elements and how their presence has influenced star and galaxy
formation throughout cosmic time. These stars are over 13 billion years old and
thus formed very early in the Universe soon after the Big Bang. These low mass
stars change very slowly with time and so preserve a "chemical fingerprint" of
the Universe at the time they formed. The investigator intends to organize
observations of stars into a chemical sequence leading to a better understanding
of the elements that we find on Earth. The investigator will expand upon her
public education efforts by working with undergraduate students to produce
videos describing the astronomical connection to common consumer products. The
videos will be distributed through the institution's outreach program and the
students will gain skill in media work and science
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will use the large
Magellan telescope in Chile to observe these old stars in the Milky Way galaxy
and small satellite dwarf galaxies. This will enable her to unlock critical
information about the very first stars that first lit up the Universe and the
associated first element production events that cannot be obtained with any
other method. It will also provide long-missing details about the production
sites of the very heaviest elements, e.g., silver and gold. She will also search
for surviving first galaxies using stellar chemical composition as a key
indicator. Altogether, this enables her to reconstruct how the Universe evolved
from just a few stars into today's rich and complex Universe. Her results will
guide many research areas such as early star and galaxy formation, nuclear
physics, stellar nucleosynthesis, dwarf galaxies, formation of the Milky Way,
and complement far-field observations to be obtained with current and next
generations of telescopes.