* 1716102
* Plastid transformation in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Pal Maliga, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 734,912.00

Engineering the chloroplast genome is key to improving the efficiency of
photosynthesis, the process that converts sunlight energy into biomass in crops.
In most plants, chloroplast engineering is very inefficient. However, a recent
breakthrough has revealed the genetic bottleneck for this process, and this
project will leverage the new information to develop methods for efficient
engineering of chloroplasts in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. The
experimental design will be directly applicable to crops in the evolutionary
related Brassicaceae family, broccoli, an important vegetable, and oilseed rape,
an important source of edible oil. The ability to engineer chloroplasts in these
crops could lead to significant production improvements. The project will also
have educational impact by providing research training for undergraduates,
including women and underrepresented minorities. Undergraduates will be
recruited from Rutgers University through The Douglass Project for Rutgers Women
in Math, Science and Engineering, and The Rutgers Aresty Research Center for
Undergraduates. Under-represented minorities, low-income, and first-generation
college students will also be recruited from the Collegiate Science and
Technology Entry Program or the First in the World Grant programs at Farmingdale
State College, Farmingdale, NY. A summer research experience in chloroplast
biotechnology will be offered to an undergraduate student from the University of
Sao Paulo (USP), Brazil as part of a plan to recruit students for the joint
Rutgers/USP PhD program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformation of the plastid
genome is routine in tobacco, but 100-fold less frequent in the model plant,
Arabidopsis thaliana, preventing its widespread use for studying questions in
plastid biology. Recent data have revealed that plastid transformation
efficiency is 100-fold enhanced in Arabidopsis plants with a defective ACC2
gene. This mutant line is hypersensitive to spectinomycin, the selective agent
used for plastid transformation. Proof of principle for increased plastid
transformation frequency was obtained in the Columbia background, because ACC2
T-DNA knockout lines are available in this accession. However, the Columbia
accession is recalcitrant to plant regeneration from cultured cells where
plastid transformation is carried out. The goal of this research is to provide
Arabidopsis plastid transformation research tools for the plant community. This
will be achieved through (1) obtaining ACC2 knockout lines in the regenerable
RLD and Ws accessions; (2) developing plant regeneration protocols from
transplastomic cells to obtain fertile transplastomic plants; (3) obtaining
regenerable forms of the Columbia ecotype; and (4) constructing plastid
transformation vectors that are suitable to achieve these goals. The results
will accelerate studies of plastid function, thereby allowing better
understanding of the 'rules' that govern interactions between this important
organelle and the nucleus and contribute to essential plastid
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems; both programs are in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.