* 1716130
* CNH-L: The Dynamics of Water Supplies, Land Use, and Disadvantaged Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Anjali Gupta, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,599,999.00

This interdisciplinary project will analyze the complex relationships between
surface and groundwater supply, agricultural land use decisions, and economic
wellbeing in rural disadvantaged communities. Some of the most productive
agricultural regions in the United States are threatened by unsustainable
groundwater pumping. This leaves large landowners and disadvantaged communities
highly vulnerable to unexpected shortages in surface water supply for personal
and agricultural use. Regions such as these face difficult tradeoffs between
economic and water security. This project will identify and quantify the
feedback between water supply sustainability and economic productivity in
agricultural areas and will enhance support for decision making regarding
infrastructure and regulation, thereby helping to improve the robustness and
resilience of these communities. The project will yield models that integrate
ground and surface water supplies with land use and socioeconomic information to
develop future scenarios that can be used for management and planning. The
models will be informed by participatory involvement of stakeholders and policy
makers, which will help improve decision-support tools and advance communication
among different groups based on the findings from the scenarios. The broader
impacts of this project will focus on assisting local disadvantaged communities
participate in the governance of water resources, including the formulation of
"Water Schools" to increase the participation of K-12 students from
underrepresented groups in science and policy issues. The project will provide
interdisciplinary research education and training for graduate and undergraduate
students who will be involved in all aspects of the research and community
engagement activities. The project will generate knowledge that can better
inform agricultural management decisions in rural areas, their impacts on water
consumption, and approaches for mitigating the inequities in disadvantaged
communities that can accompany these environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research objectives are the
development of a coupled hydrologic and land use model to illustrate the
feedback between the natural and human systems, the inclusion of stakeholder
perspectives on drought resilience, and the development of adaptation strategies
that will be tested using the integrated model reflecting stakeholder
preferences. Model development will require the integration of components that
typically are treated separately, including rainfall-runoff processes,
groundwater flow and contaminant transport, and agricultural planting decisions,
all of which impact the management of surface and groundwater storage. A
participatory modeling process will engage stakeholders to inform the model
assumptions, uncertainties, its development and analysis tools, resulting in a
transparent way that integrates local knowledge with scientific data to produce
effective policy action. Finally, the value of adaptive strategies will be
assessed using a cooperative game-theory approach to understand the tradeoffs
between stakeholders with conflicting preferences. While this project will focus
on the Tulare Basin in California's Central Valley, a region which exemplifies
the challenges of extensive agricultural production, limited water supply, and
significant disadvantaged communities, the project will provide new insights and
approaches for other regions of the United States facing similar difficult
tradeoffs between economic and water security. This project is supported by the
NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.