* 1716466
* Hydrodynamic Stability, Boundary layers, Free boundaries, and Polymeric Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Nader Masmoudi, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Understanding the behavior of fluid flows is of fundamental importance in many
scientific and technological fields, including engineering, geophysics, and
biophysics. At the basic level, the dynamical behavior of fluid flow is
described by the Euler or the Navier-Stokes equations. These complex systems of
nonlinear partial differential equations are very difficult to study using
classical techniques and only a few exact solutions are known to this day. In
many applications, an exact solution is not needed and a main goal of this
project is to give a qualitative description of solutions to these equations in
some limiting cases. Indeed, when taken in some limiting situations, due to the
presence of a small parameter or when considered for large time, these complex
sets of equations may be reduced to simpler models. These simpler models are
capable of providing important qualitative descriptions of the behavior of these
solutions without having to compute them explicitly. This general method has
applications in the study of the long-time behavior of complex systems, the
development of singularities, the formation of special patterns, the transition
between stability and instability and the first steps of transition towards
turbulence. This project will involve the training of graduate students and
postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main problem to be addressed in this project
is the study of the asymptotic stability of some shear flows for the 2D Euler
and the 2D Navier-Stokes equations. Some important progress was made recently in
the study of the inviscid damping around Couette flow in a periodic setting for
Gevrey regularity. A main goal of this project is to expand this study to the
case of more general shear flows. A new difficulty comes from the fact that the
linearized problem is more difficult to analyze and some deep ideas from
functional analysis will be needed to overcome the lack of a simple explicit
description of the solution. The second project is the study of the problem in
the whole space (i.e. ,without the assumption of periodicity). The major
difficulty here comes from the lack of uniformity of the mixing for low
frequencies. The third project is to understand the behavior under rougher
perturbations, namely perturbations which are only in Sobolev spaces. Some new
nonlinear cascades should be discovered here. The fourth project is to study the
case when damping does not occur, and try to identify special solutions such as
cat's eyes flows. These four projects can also be formulated for the Navier-
Stokes evolution and the major problem here is to understand the small viscosity
limit.