* 1716159
* Collaborative Research:  Water Waves--Nonlinearity, dissipation, and forcing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Diane Henderson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 114,000.00

Waves on the ocean's surface play important roles in weather forecasting and
climate modeling, in the safety of coastal communities and offshore industries,
and in overseas shipping. In this project, the investigators focus on physical
effects that are often approximated or neglected altogether, but that are needed
to predict accurately the observed behavior of ocean waves. Examples include the
dissipation of ocean swell during propagation across the deep ocean and
subsequently onto the shoreline; the time-dependence of wind in the wave-
generation process; and dispersion of waves in shallow water. The inclusion of
dissipation will lead to a better understanding of how wave energy evolves. The
inclusion of time-dependence in the wind that generates waves will allow for a
better understanding of the initial period during which energy is transferred
from air to water. The inclusion of dissipation and dispersion in models for
shallow-water waves will allow for better predictive capabilities of waves in
coastal areas. The research tools of the investigators include modeling,
analysis, computer simulations, and laboratory experiments. While the emphasis
is on water waves, for which they can conduct laboratory experiments, the
mathematical analysis is more broadly applicable to other physical systems and
is of interest in the study of partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose analytic, numerical,
and experimental investigations of the following: (A) Deep-water waves. They
consider the frequency downshifting of freely propagating waves and wave
generation due to wind. They are considering two models of frequency
downshifting that differ in how the rotational part of the flow is modeled. To
model wind-generated waves, they are allowing for time-dependent shear flows in
both the air and water. The resulting stability problem for waves is non-
standard, and understanding how to address it is a central mathematical
question. (B) Shallow-water waves. They seek accurate models of dispersion and
of dissipation due to the bottom, wall, and surface boundary layers. They will
start with a Whitham equation and generalize it to include surface tension
effects, dissipative effects, nonhorizontal bathymetry, and bidirectional waves.
They will look, both analytically and numerically, for small- and large-
amplitude solutions, and study their stability. They will further investigate
how best to include dissipation that is due to the bottom boundary layer by
comparing numerical simulations and experiments. (C) Three-wave partial
differential equations. The three-wave partial differential equations, which
arise in many physical applications, describe the simplest possible nonlinear
interactions among dispersive wave trains, without dissipation. The
investigators propose a solution method using a Painleve-analysis to obtain the
general solution for arbitrary boundary conditions. There are few examples of
general solutions of partial differential equations, so their adding one more
example would be a mathematical breakthrough.