* 1716335
* The Formation and Impact of Nascent Globular Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kelsey Johnson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 404,054.00

Star formation is one of the most important processes in determining the
properties of our Universe. The formation of stars changes galaxies in a variety
of ways. For example, the density of massive stars affects how much material in
a galaxy is blasted into intergalactic space. The number of massive stars
determines the abundance of heavy elements available to form complex molecules,
including those that are the basis of life. The mode of star formation that has
the strongest impact on its environment takes place in "super star clusters"
(SSCs). These super star clusters pack thousands of violent massive stars into
small volumes, and these dense regions of massive stars act as bombs in their
host galaxies. Over the last few decades we have gained a wealth of knowledge
about super star clusters. For example, it is now known that super star clusters
were formed in large numbers at early times in the Universe. It is also known
that ancient super star clusters (called "globular clusters") are present in
great numbers in the Universe today. However, it is not yet known how these
clusters form. Nor is it known how their properties depend on the environment
they are born in. This project will use new capabilities of the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) and NSF's Very Large Array to advance our
knowledge. Observations with these facilities will enable the investigation of
the environments in which super star cluster are formed. The investigator will
expand her education and outreach program, called "Dark Skies, Bright Kids." The
investigator will extend the program to rural communities in Southern
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from ALMA have provided tantalizing clues
about the origin of super star clusters, including the first known example of a
molecular precursor for such a cluster. Follow-up observations are underway to
constrain the physical conditions in the molecular cloud before stars have
formed. Additional ALMA observations of nascent SSCs (after the stars have
formed) have revealed an apparent trend in molecular line strengths and ratios
with respect to the evolutionary state of the cluster. The main scientific goals
of this program to be addressed with this program include the following: (1)
Identify additional molecular precursors to SSCs (increasing the sample size
from one), (2) Constrain the physical environments required to form super star
clusters, (3) Quantify the star formation efficiencies of these extreme star-
forming regions, and (4) Codify the relationship between molecular line
strengths and ratios and cluster dynamics. These results will provide templates
to help interpret molecular line ratios from unresolved sources in the more
distant universe. The observations at radio, millimeter, and sub-millimeter
wavelengths required to address these issues are already obtained, currently
underway, and planned for proposals this year.