* 1716243
* Role of the SERRATE protein in regulation of miRNA biogenesis and transposable element silencing in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2022
* Xiuren Zhang, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 10/31/2022
* USD 880,000.00

The goal of this research is to discover how a single plant protein, called
SERRATE (SE), carries out two very different functions in the cell. One of SE's
functions is to make small microRNAs (miRNAs) from larger RNA molecules, and the
other function is to quiet the activity of certain potentially harmful DNA
elements in the genome. The bi-functional nature of SE is thought to arise from
its ability to interact with different protein partners, and this research aims
to test that idea. Because SE is conserved in both plants and animals, the
results could have far-reaching benefits for many fields of science and for
society, such as in plant biotechnology where the results could contribute to
improvement of agricultural traits. This project is well-suited for
undergraduate student participation and provides hands-on training in genetics,
genomics, and biochemistry. The project also offers opportunities for graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows to develop their professional careers at the
forefront of an emerging field, and thus the research will contribute to
building a creative and highly skilled workforce to support the steady growth of
the U.S. economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SE is known to be a core component of
the miRNA processing machinery (microprocessor) in plants. The SE ortholog in
mammals is known to function as a transcription factor. Preliminary evidence
suggests that interaction of SE with a chromatin-remodeling factor is associated
with its function in miRNA processing, whereas interaction with a histone
methyltransferase may mediate its function in silencing transposable elements.
Experimental aims will explore the mechanisms underlying these two functions.
Results that implicate SE activity in miRNA biogenesis could provide new
strategies to better regulate miRNA production and to improve the efficacy and
safety of technologies and therapies that depend on small RNAs. Moreover,
exploring the novel function of SE in regulating transposable elements will lead
to new discoveries uniting the fields of RNA metabolism and transcriptional
silencing, and may also provide new ideas about how to conquer disorders in
plants and animals that result from the mis-regulation of chromatin-level gene
silencing.