* 1716033
* Folding and Mechanical Response of Single Proteins Probed at High Spatio-Temporal Resolution
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Thomas Perkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 794,394.00

Proteins are essential to life. For humans to walk, hear, or touch, proteins
must generate and respond to forces after folding into their correct three-
dimensional structure. Yet, traditional biochemical techniques do not measure a
protein's response to force, hindering progress in the emerging field of
mechanobiology. Inside a cell, force can induce subtle change in a protein's
structure, fully unfold a protein, or disrupt the interaction between two
proteins. These effects all have biological consequence. To exert a force on
individual proteins and measure these tiny signals, this project will use novel
atomic force microscope (AFM) cantilevers, which are micron-scale, diving-board
like force sensors. This project will help elucidate the response of proteins to
force, a critical but understudied signaling mechanism in biology. More
generally, studying the process of protein folding with these novel cantilevers
will provide insight into how proteins fold, an ongoing challenge despite five
decades of effort. By using the tools of physics and nanoscience to solve
exciting problems in biology, this project will provide excellent
interdisciplinary training for high school and colleges students just starting
their research career. As statistics are vital to interpreting experiments but
are poorly understood by many young researchers, this project will also generate
novel training tools focused on statistics and data analysis using biological
examples. These interactive education simulations will be developed in
conjunction with the CU-Boulder PhET program and thereby leverage their
expertise in such simulations and world-wide
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The twin scientific goals are (i) to
characterize structural transitions in two widely studied mechano-sensitive
proteins, titin's I27 domain and the focal adhesion kinase, since previous
studies have either yielded conflicting results or failed to resolve a predicted
mechanically induced transition; and (ii) measure a model two-state protein's
folding transition time with 1-microsecond resolution. The key technical hurdle
is that traditional AFM studies lack the spatial precision to resolve subtle
changes in protein structure and lack the temporal precision to characterize the
conformational dynamics of a traditional globular protein during the brief time
the protein moves along its transition path. This project will overcome these
obstacles by applying a state-of-the-art combination of force precision,
stability, and time resolution enabled by focused-ion beam modification of AFM
cantilevers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics.