* 1716563
* AF: Small: Geometric  Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ketan Mulmuley, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Geometric complexity theory is an approach towards the most foundational
outstanding conjecture of computer science, P vs. NP, which implies that
theorem-proving cannot be automated. Its current focus is on the algebraic
variants of this conjecture. The approach was initiated by the PI in projects
supported by two earlier NSF grants. It has revealed deep connections between
the algebraic variants of the P vs. NP conjecture and foundational problems of
algebraic geometry and representation theory, the two fields of mathematics most
relevant to this project. The goal of this project is to study, strengthen, and
exploit these connections to advance this approach
further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boundary between the tractable and intractable
problems in mathematical and physical sciences is defined by the P vs. NP
problem. Hence the study undertaken in this project is of central intellectual
relevance to computer science, as well as to several other areas of mathematical
and physical sciences. Since geometric complexity theory reveals deep
connections among the foundational problems of computer science, algebraic
geometry, and representation theory, this study may help in bringing these
fields together to advance simultaneously on their foundational problems. Effort
would also be made to mentor and train post-doctoral researchers in geometric
complexity theory, and to disseminate the work in this emerging field through
journals, conferences, and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algebraic variant
of the P vs. NP conjecture that this project focuses on is the VP vs. VNP
conjecture, which says that the permanent cannot be computed by algebraic
circuits of polynomial size and degree. The project supported by the earlier NSF
grant CCF-1017760 revealed a foundational difficulty, called the geometric
complexity theory chasm, at the interface of algebraic geometry and complexity
theory, which needs to be overcome by any realistic approach to this conjecture.
This chasm exists because we do not know at present if the complexity class VP
is equal to its closure. Hence the most urgent problem in the context of the VP
vs. VNP conjecture now is to either show that VP is equal to its closure, or
else construct specific candidate families in the closure of VP that are not in
VP. This project seeks to investigate this problem using the techniques of
geometric complexity theory developed in the earlier project, in conjunction
with the advanced techniques of algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project also seeks to revise the existing geometric complexity theory approach
to the VP vs. VNP conjecture, using a refined notion of multiplicity-based
obstructions, to take into account the recent negative results. These
obstructions are gadgets in algebraic geometry and representation theory that
serve as proof certificates of hardness of the permanent. The project will
investigate the problem of proving their existence, through a sequence of
intermediate problems at the interface of algebraic geometry, representation
theory, and complexity theory.