* 1716121
* NeTS: Small: LayBack: Layered SDN-Based Backhaul Architecture and Optimization Framework for Small Cells and Beyond
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Martin Reisslein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 11/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless networks typically connect users with a technology-specific chain of
components to the Internet at large. These isolated networking chains limit the
resource sharing and optimization across different wireless technologies. The
resulting bottlenecks in wireless Internet access stifle a myriad of wireless
network applications in our smart-phone based society. For high-speed wireless
Internet access it is increasingly important to efficiently utilize and share
wireless networking resources across different technologies, e.g., between the
cellular wireless and WiFi technologies. This project develops LayBack, a novel
Software Defined Networking (SDN)-based layered backhaul access network
architecture and novel multi-stage optimization framework. LayBack will
judiciously share the wireless resources of multiple technologies, thus
fundamentally speeding up wireless Internet access. LayBack can be overlaid in
an evolutionary manner on top of existing wireless networks and can thus
effectively work with the installed network infrastructure. The project will
support the engineering talent pipeline through innovative outreach activities
to middle school students in grades six through eight, who will learn network
engineering principles through English Language Arts and Physical Education
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to significantly improve
the flexibility and efficiency of radio access networks through the LayBack
architecture and optimization framework. The intellectual merit contributions of
this project include the development of the LayBack wireless access network
architecture, which unifies heterogeneous radio access networks and their
gateways through a Software Defined Networking (SDN)-based backhaul. The project
also develops the LayBack multi-stage optimization framework, which is tightly
integrated with the LayBack architecture. The LayBack optimization framework
combines a Lyapunov drift-plus-penalty approach with multi-layer decomposition.
The proposed optimization framework will be developed and evaluated to account
for the different operational time-scales of the LayBack architecture layers.
The project will examine specific case studies that exploit the LayBack
architecture and optimization framework, e.g., signaling, coexistence of
multiple heterogeneous wireless technologies (LTE and WiFi), and optimized
content distribution. The broader impacts of this project include the public
distribution of a LayBack software package. The project will also include
outreach to middle schools (grades 6-8). The outreach activities will be
thoroughly evaluated, refined, and distributed.