* 1716018
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermo-mechanical analysis of chopped fiber-reinforced plastics for the design engineer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Andrew Hansen, Teton Composites
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2018
* USD 224,194.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project may be characterized by major advances in
analysis of injection-molded parts, providing notable societal benefits through
innovative new uses of these materials. Of particular note in this regard is the
automotive industry. Despite the long held promise of composite materials in
automotive applications, the industry has been slow to adopt widespread use of
composites due to uncertainties in performance under challenging loading
conditions. A successful rollout of the envisioned software will bring
transformational change to this industry, leading to notable long-term societal
benefits related to energy efficiency and safety. Beyond the automotive
industry, chopped fiber structural components are ubiquitous in consumer
products, aerospace components, and electronics. The company's goal is to
provide accurate solutions involving complex material behavior, producing parts
designed for maximum efficiency and achieved at initial fabrication rather than
after multiple production iterations. The result is a disruptive technology that
will dramatically lower the cost of production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the immense technical
challenge associated with nonlinear material modeling to failure of structural
components made using chopped fiber composite materials. The fiber volume
fractions and orientations of a chopped fiber composite material produce wild
microstructural configurations that may vary throughout the structure. The
problem is significantly amplified by the complex deformation mechanisms
occurring in typical polymer matrix materials. Moreover, polymer behavior is
dramatically influenced by environmental and loading conditions. Existing
software solutions for the engineering analysis of chopped fiber structural
components are either inadequate due to gross oversimplifications or, at the
other extreme, overly complex to implement, thereby rendering them useless to
the typical design engineer. Lack of an adequate software solution results in
expensive over-design and dramatically longer cycles to market. The company's
goal is to provide accurate solutions involving complex material behavior,
producing parts designed for maximum efficiency and achieved at initial
fabrication rather than after multiple production iterations. A hallmark of the
company's software is an emphasis on simplicity while still producing high
fidelity stress analyses simulating complex nonlinear material behaviors.