* 1716965
* Exploring the Time-Varying Universe at Millimeter Wavelengths with the South Pole Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2020
* William Holzapfel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 12/31/2020
* USD 232,085.00

Telescopes designed for observing signals made by the Cosmic Microwave
Background also provide a unique opportunity for long-term monitoring of large
areas of the sky for variable astronomical sources at millimeter-sized
wavelengths. This is a spectral region of observational astronomy now largely
unexplored. The investigators will use the South Pole Telescope to conduct the
first systematic survey of the sky in the millimeter band. This survey could
reach sensitivities that would allow the first detections of Gamma Ray Bursts
made by the first generation of stars during very early stages of the
development of the universe. It will also produce a wealth of detailed data on
variability within active galaxies with time, and has the capability of
detecting very fast radio bursts. These data will generate many opportunities
for university undergraduate students to work with a large, novel, and ready-to-
analyze data set.

This program uses the South Pole Telescope to conduct a real-time survey of 2500
square degrees of sky in the 90-220 GHz band for transient and variable sources,
targeting in particular gamma ray burst afterglows, active galaxies, and fast
radio bursts. Using the 3rd-generation receiver (to be deployed in the 2016-2017
austral summer), this survey will cover 6% of the sky hourly over a period of
two years. This has the sensitivity potential to make the first detections of
gamma-ray burst afterglows unassociated with a gamma-ray trigger. This program
will improve on the existing best sensitivity in this spectral range by a factor
of 50, address a number of open questions in high-energy astrophysics, and
firmly establish Cosmic Microwave Background telescopes as tools for time-domain
astronomy.