* 1716841
* Evolving chromatin functions through metabolic enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Lorraine Pillus, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2022
* USD 946,200.00

The 23 pairs of chromosomes that carry human genetic information contain both
DNA and proteins that package the genome to protect it and regulate its use
within cells. This protein-DNA material, known as chromatin, and the complex
linear chromosomes, are very different than genetic packaging in simpler
organisms like bacteria, which ordinarily carry their genomes on a single,
circular molecule. It has become increasingly clear that chromatin-based
processes are deeply tied to ancient metabolic activities. Understanding these
links, including defining novel, unsuspected functions of metabolic enzymes,
holds the promise of revealing critical aspects of the evolution of genomic
processes and stability. Major impact of the project comes from the training
opportunity provided for the students and fellows performing the research. They
will participate in frontline interdisciplinary research to foster both
experimental and computational skills. Importantly, the students and fellows
will contribute to the lab's work to promote diversity in science through
mentoring high school and undergraduate students identified through outreach
programs, including students transferring to UCSD from the community college
system, a population with a significant component of first-generation and under-
represented college students. The participation of these students in a mentored
and meaningful research program will contribute to the development of a more
highly trained and diverse scientific community for the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the proposed
research is to define the chromatin-directed functions of metabolic enzymes with
previously unsuspected functions in epigenetic transcriptional silencing and DNA
damage repair. These studies build upon progress with the model eukaryote,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae in which, in proof of principle studies, the
investigators discovered previously unsuspected nuclear roles for two enzymes
with earlier defined functions in amino acid metabolism. The objectives for the
research are to define chromatin-directed functions of a panel of newly
identified metabolic enzymes with nuclear roles, using the strategies that the
investigators have successfully developed. By probing long known but
incompletely understood metabolic enzymes, the progress made in this research
will be of fundamental significance defining proteins that have contributed to
the molecular and cellular evolution of nuclear processes in the course of
genomic evolution. Significantly, study of these enzymes will establish a
framework defining the interplay between metabolism and chromatin functions that
are critical for gene regulation, response to DNA damage, and maintenance of
genome stability. The project employs a combination of classical functional
studies, genome-scale analysis and newly developed microfluidics and single-cell
imaging technologies that enable visualization of the silencing dynamics in
single cells.