* 1716956
* Interfacial and osmolyte-induced modulation of protein folding, assembly and adhesion
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Joan-Emma Shea, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Proteins are fundamental building blocks of life, serving a multitude of
functions in our body, from antibodies protecting us from infection, to enzymes
catalyzing biochemical reactions. Protein function is intimately tied to the
conformations (or shapes) that proteins can adopt. This project seeks to develop
new computational tools to probe how surfaces and solution conditions affect
protein structure and function. These simulations will guide the design of a new
class of proteins for biomaterial applications, including biologically-inspired
wet adhesives and protein scaffolds. Codes developed in the context of this
project will be made freely available. The PI and her group are actively engaged
in outreach activities, including a chemistry program geared at 5th grade
students, the development of hands-on modules related to wet-adhesion that will
be presented at the Santa Barbara zoo, and the involvement of underrepresented
minority high school students in a summer research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on intrinsically
disordered peptides, a class of proteins that can take on a multitude of
disparate conformations, adopt transient secondary structures, and carry out
multiple functions. With their lack of a native fold, they are also prone to
self-assemble into structures ranging from fibrils to coacervates. In this
project, the structure, function and assembly of model intrinsically disordered
peptides will be probed using a hierarchy of simulations techniques, from ab
initio molecular dynamics to coarse-grained models. The project will address
three specific aims. The first aim will focus on a molecular understanding of
wet adhesion, using the intrinsically disordered mussel-foot protein as a model
system. Working closely with leading experimental groups in the field of
biological adhesion, the PI will investigate how sequence and surface
composition affect adhesion. This research will lay the groundwork for the
development of a new class of biologically inspired peptides that can serve as
underwater adhesives. In a second aim, the PI will use molecular dynamics
simulations and the Kirkwood-Buff theory of solutions to determine the mechanism
by which the osmolyte TMAO counteracts the protein denaturing effects of the
osmolyte urea. An optimized force field for TMAO/urea interactions will be
developed and validated based on experimental measurements, and used to study
the effects of mixed osmolytes on the aggregation of intrinsically disordered
peptides. In a third aim, the PI will develop novel hybrid kinetic Monte
Carlo/Molecular Dynamics algorithms that will be applied to the study of fibril
elongation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics.