* 1716602
* Eyes on the future: optimizing science output for next generation surveys with joint crowdsourced and automated classification techniques
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Claudia Scarlata, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2021
* USD 654,657.00

The successful use of citizen science to carry out "crowd-sourced" galaxy
classifications from imaging data has shown clearly the availability of a vast
resource of volunteer labor. Future surveys will also produce spectra, breaking
down light into its wavelengths to reveal the physical state of the galaxies.
The present, ambitious, project will extend the involvement of volunteers into
these spectroscopic data, providing a richer experience for participants and
addressing research in galaxy formation impossible to accomplish any other way.
If the scalability problem of handling massive amounts of spectral data can also
be solved this way, the impact for the community and for the scientifically
literate public will be enormous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While crowdsourced galaxy
classifications have proven their worth with a decade of images from the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), several next generation surveys will be
spectroscopic, which substantially increases the complexity of the data sets,
while providing a much larger space for discovery. Although having spectra for
tens of millions of objects will allow a wide range of science, new tools are
needed to maximize the scientific return. Automatic algorithms alone will either
struggle in identifying difficult features or produce highly contaminated
samples to try to maximize completeness. The volume of data from forthcoming
surveys renders human scrutiny impractical. This project will meet these
challenges, extending to spectroscopic data the successful crowdsourcing
approach used for imaging by the suite of Galaxy Zoo projects, and expanding
previous NSF-supported work by this team. There will be two components: (1)
Galaxy Nurseries will build an emission line catalog through crowdsourced
classifications of spectroscopic data; and (2) Clump Scout will identify clumpy
galaxies in the SDSS. Investigations with these catalogs will constrain galaxy
formation models by (1) quantifying the fraction of galaxies with giant star-
forming regions; (2) characterizing the internal variation of physical
properties of such regions; and (3) comparing the gas metallicity of galaxies
with and without these regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As with the previous image
work, the high-level catalogs to be produced, and the new classification
algorithms to be used, are to be released publicly, and will be a valuable
resource for the community. The study also continues the work to implement
Galaxy Zoo in undergraduate astronomy courses, involving both graduate and
undergraduate students.