* 1716198
* Mathematical Analysis of the Dynamics of Complex Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Thomas Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 309,903.00

Ordinarily, quantum phenomena are exhibited on very small micro-scales, while on
large macro-scales nature is well described by classical, Newtonian mechanics.
One of the principal subjects of investigation in this project is a Bose-
Einstein condensate (BEC), for which macroscopic quantum phenomena become
apparent. A BEC is a new state of matter that was first predicted theoretically
by Bose and Einstein in 1924, and was produced experimentally in 1995 by Cornell
and Wieman. Particles of a gas, cooled very close to absolute zero, occupy the
lowest quantum state; then the gas forms a BEC. This state of matter has very
unusual properties: for example, light in a BEC can be stopped entirely or
slowed down significantly to the velocity of 17 meters per second. This project
investigates dynamical properties of important quantum systems from a rigorous
mathematical viewpoint, by using a wide variety of methods from mathematical
analysis, applied mathematics, and mathematical physics. One of the phenomena to
be studied theoretically is the emergence of quantum friction, when a particle
passes through a BEC. The purpose of this work is to advance the understanding
of physical phenomena based on first principles, whereby giving theoretical
physics a rigorous mathematical foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mathematical study of interacting Bose gases is an active research topic at the
interface between dispersive nonlinear PDEs and Mathematical Physics. The mean-
field description of a BEC is given by the nonlinear Schrödinger or nonlinear
Hartree equations. In this project, the dynamics of a quantum mechanical tracer
particle in interaction with a BEC will be investigated. Of particular interest
in this model is the emergence of quantum friction. Furthermore, the dynamics of
thermal fluctuations around a BEC will be examined based on the Hartree-Fock-
Bogoliubov equation that is obtained from the quasifree reduction of the
original system. Other continuing projects focus on the dynamics of electrons in
a weak random potential (describing materials such as semiconductors), and
dynamics of a system of infinitely many fermions in the vicinity of a thermal
equilibrium. As a new research direction, the well-posedness problem for the
Boltzmann equation will be studied in its Wigner-transformed representation.
This makes the model accessible to methods developed for the analysis of
nonlinear Schrödinger equations and Gross-Pitaevskii hierarchies, such as
Strichartz estimates for density matrices. These projects involve collaborations
with various leading senior researchers, with a postdoctoral researcher, and
with graduate students.