* 1716408
* Assembly and Function of the Cyanobacterial Photosystem II Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Robert Burnap, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 794,159.00

The photosystem II (PSII) complex found in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria is a
chlorophyll-protein complex located in specialized internal cell membranes
called thylakoids. PSII catalyzes the crucial water-splitting reaction that uses
solar energy to produce the activated hydrogen required for food and energy
production throughout the Earth's biosphere. At the same time, the PSII is
responsible for the production of essentially all the gaseous oxygen on Earth.
Despite its global importance, PSII can also be considered the "Achilles Heel"
of photosynthetic organisms. This is because it is prone to damage from the very
light that it uses as an energy source. Consequently, PSII is under a constant
state of repair owing to this incessant light damage. The project will elucidate
the poorly understood repair mechanism with a focus on the assembly of the
catalytic metals necessary for oxygen evolution. In addition to the fundamental
research, the project will provide extensive training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students in in the areas of biochemistry, biophysics,
and molecular genetics. Moreover, the is a large outreach component of the
project that is designed to provide research opportunities for pre-service and
in-service high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate the multistep assembly of the metal cluster (Mn4CaO5) catalytic
center of the PSII water-splitting complex. Recent work has revealed the
migration of damaged PSII to specialized "repair zones" located in the
peripheral regions of the cell. The project tests the hypotheses that (1) loss
of the the Mn4CaO5 triggers the migration to repair zones and (2) the assembly
of the Mn4CaO5 cluster occurs efficiently only after migration of the damaged
PSII complex to these repair zones. Because light also drives Mn4CaO5 assembly,
the process can be precisely controlled using flashes of light, which will allow
new insights into the broad problem of metal cluster assembly in proteins. The
work will use a genetically transformable cyanobacterium and an array of
techniques that probe the assembly process with molecular resolution. State-of-
the-art biophysical and molecular genetic techniques are being developed and
utilized by the PI and collaborators. These include synthetic DNA, high-speed
polarography, EPR, and FTIR techniques.