* 1716986
* RUI: Structural and Functional Substrate Binding in Iterative Non-ribosomal peptide synthesis Independent Synthesis (NIS) Enzyme DesD
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Jason Kingsbury, California Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 230,841.00

Bacteria, like humans, require iron to function optimally. For many bacteria
that iron must be stolen from the host organism, often through the use of small
chemicals called siderophores that bind iron. The most virulent bacteria create
siderophores through a series of steps that involve one or more of an
understudied family of proteins called NIS Synthetases. This project is designed
to better understand this family of proteins due to their remarkable unique
chemical behavior and the unusual ability to enact chemical catalysis multiple
times on the same target (iterative action) as well as a never before seen
structural property. The immediate goal for this project is to establish
experimental methods to quantify and describe binding of targets, the structure
and iterative behavior of the protein. The long-term goal of the research is to
describe the mechanism of NIS synthetases in detail, to contribute understanding
not only to this understudied field, but also of iterative proteins more
broadly. This project will provide training and education primarily to members
of underrepresented groups and first generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prokaryotes scavenge iron using small molecule
chelators called siderophores, made through a novel chemistry of peptide bond
formation. One type of siderophore synthesis mechanism, increasingly associated
with bacterial virulence, uses Non-ribosomal peptide siderophore Independent
Synthesis enzymes (NIS synthetases). Within a sub-category in this family, an
additional remarkable kinetic behavior exists whereby the formation of multiple
bonds may be catalyzed on the same substrate (iterative.) The iterative activity
is correlated with broad substrate specificity, but this has never been
delineated nor quantified. This project will characterize the structure,
function, and elasticity of the iterative proteins in this novel family of NIS
sythetases. Functionally important residues will be identified by site-directed
mutagenesis and the use of synthetically prepared substrate analogs.
Thermodynamics of ligand and cofactor binding and changes in structure with
iterative substrate binding will be determined. Kinetic assays will be performed
to quantify and compare iterative vs. single bond formation. This project is
supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate.