* 1716992
* CHS: Small: Blending the Virtual and the Physical: Understanding and Designing Crowd-Based Open Innovation Systems for Physical Products
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Pamela Hinds, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Firms often turn to external contributors to perform vital functions, including
"open innovation" scenarios in which firms create challenges or competitions
where external crowd workers develop and submit creative ideas. This project
will study a number of open questions around crowd-based open innovation around
complex physical products, which pose challenges above and beyond the software
and simple design contexts in which open innovation has been studied before.
These include (1) How do external contributors successfully align their
contribution to an organization of which they are not a part and propose designs
for a physical context to which they do not have easy access? (2) How do
internal employees source, import, and adapt the inputs of external contributors
whose assumptions, processes and tools might be entirely different? (3) How can
systems and practices be designed to facilitate creative work from external
contributors and effective integration into the the firm's processes? To address
these questions the project team will work closely with a firm that uses
advanced engineering technologies to develop and manufacture new vehicles,
observing the firm and related crowdworker communities during several innovation
challenges. They will also develop material on open innovation for an
undergraduate course centered the future of work that both teaches findings from
the work and gives students hands-on experience developing a project that
incorporates creative crowd input into the group's
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will collect a number of sources of data for
each challenge. From the crowd platform itself, they will collect all of the
online discussions from the inception of the challenge to the choice of winning
ideas, evaluation of those ideas by both the crowd and the firm, and the
subsequent technical work around developing the winning designs. They will also
conduct interviews with online community members, seeking to understand why
collaborations form and disband, why some designs are not ultimately submitted
to the competition, how community members perceive feedback, and how both
winners and non-winners engage with the winning designs. In parallel, they will
observe and interview activity at their partner firm, attending both specific
meetings related to the challenges being studied and general weekly meetings (to
give an overview of relevant discussions and decisions outside of the challenge
itself). Much of the analysis will involve applying social network and open
coding techniques to track interaction patterns and knowledge flows between
actors both inside and outside the firm, looking at how these evolve through the
course of the challenge. These, along with grounded theory-based analysis of
interviews and observational data, will highlight both key regular patterns
(such as the representation and manipulation of non-textual artifacts) and
important gaps (such as the need to provide an appropriate but not sensitive or
paralyzing level of context) that might benefit from better tool support.