* 1716820
* Combinatorial Engineering of Essentiality
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ryan Gill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2021
* USD 690,000.00

Mutations in genes affect their function in many different ways. There are
thousands of genes in the genome of any organism, so it is a major challenge to
decipher the role of each gene. The focus of this project is to build a new and
more efficient technology platform that will enable researchers to efficiently
understand how mutations in a gene affect the function encoded by that gene.
This platform which uses the tools of synthetic biology will allow researchers
to develop such understanding much more rapidly. Such efforts are central to a
broad range of applications in both applied and basic science. It may help with
the development of new strains for the production of pharmaceutical proteins,
enzymes, chemicals, or fuels. It will also help to develop forward engineering
paradigms central to the future of bioengineering. In the development of this
platform, the investigators will also train multiple graduate and undergraduate
students in cutting edge science, technology, engineering and mathematical
(STEM) approaches and technologies. These students will develop expertise in
experimental and computational methods, the design, execution, and reporting of
scientific research, and the generation of intellectual property.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental goal of synthetic biology is to develop new
paradigms for the forward engineering of biological systems. The prototypical
forward engineering process involves design, build, test, and learn (DBTL)
stages, which ideally are performed in a cyclical and highly parallel fashion
leading to the build up of knowledge bases, codified design rules, and optimized
designs. In biological endeavors, the "DBTL" strategy has historically been
realized through "sequence to activity relationship (SAR)" mutational mapping,
which has traditionally been limited in throughput to addressing only the
smallest of biological systems. Advances in DNA synthesis and sequencing
technologies however, have paved the way for new massively parallel approaches
to SAR that extend to the genome scale. Several technologies that have been
developed will be optimized in a generally accessible framework for use by the
larger synthetic biology community. Such a framework will enable new forward
DBTL-type engineering strategies at scales that are orders of magnitude more
advanced than methods currently available. The investigators in this project
have chosen to focus their efforts on the comprehensive mapping of gene
essentiality in the model bacterium Escherichia coli because this model system
is not only ideal for demonstrating their platform but also will allow them to
address foundational questions concerning essentiality, evolvability, epistasis
and fitness. This will have broad implications across genetics, synthetic
biology and biotechnology.