* 1716657
* RUI: Collaborative Research: The Effect of Filaments on the Gas in Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Rose Finn, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 12/31/2022
* USD 229,558.00

Astronomers seek to understand how galaxies form and evolve. A galaxy's growth
may be affected by processes within the galaxy itself and/or by its environment.
Such growth is measured by the rate of new star formation. Galaxies can be found
among vast aggregates of matter which are called filaments; alternatively, they
may be isolated from one another. Galaxies found in filaments typically grow
more slowly than isolated galaxies. Finn and collaborators seek to understand
why filaments quench star formation. This project will combine imaging of the
gas that fuels star formation in galaxies with observations that reveal the
resulting star formation. Investigators will compare galaxies in both types of
environment to determine the method of star formation quenching. Their results
will challenge theoretical models. The project will also continue a successful,
ongoing outreach to a local high school. Peer instruction will be added to
leverage impact without additional funds. Kansas, the state where one of the
investigators is located, is on the front-lines of the nationwide debate on the
role of science in the classroom. Therefore, this effort to broaden
participation in science is especially timely and
relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine a large imaging survey
in H-alpha and observations of neutral Hydrogen (HI) and molecular gas (CO). The
project has three specific aims. The first aim is to directly measure whether
the amount of neutral and/or molecular gas available to eventually form stars is
measurably lower in filament galaxies compared to those in the field, group, or
cluster environment. The second aim focuses on the spatial distribution of star
formation within each galaxy. This aim will determine whether ram pressure
stripping, starvation, and/or mergers are significant mechanisms for quenching
star formation. The third aim uses the results of the first two aims to confront
theoretical models of star formation quenching in the context of cosmological
structure growth. The Data Management Plan includes release of the main data
products: H-alpha + continuum maps of 200 galaxies and HI and CO measurements.
Ancillary and raw data will be released upon publication and archived.