* 1716686
* Lipoic acid biosynthesis: understanding sulfur attachment to aliphatic carbon centers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Squire Booker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

The mechanisms by which enzymes attach sulfur atoms to inert carbon centers are
poorly understood despite the importance of these reactions in cellular
metabolism and maintenance. One such sulfur-containing molecule of great
importance is lipoic acid, an eight-carbon straight-chain fatty acid (octanoic
acid) that has one sulfur atom appended to carbon 6 (C6) and one sulfur atom
appended to carbon 8 (C8). It is used as a cofactor in several large protein
complexes that are involved in energy production and storage, as well as in the
metabolism of several amino acids. Despite the relatively detailed understanding
of how lipoic acid functions in these complexes, it biosynthesis has been
puzzling due to the limited understanding of how sulfur atoms are appended onto
aliphatic carbon centers. This research seeks to assess the source of the
appended sulfur atoms in this important sulfur-containing molecule and the
mechanism of its biosynthesis. This project might provide a new paradigm for
this type of chemistry for a large spectrum of C-S bond formation processes in
metabolism. Outreach activities to encourage participation of underrepresented
minority students in the STEM disciplines will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses at the intersection of
iron-sulfur cluster and lipoic acid biosynthesis and aims at providing a
detailed molecular understanding of how aliphatic carbon centers are
functionalized with sulfur atoms. Experiments have shown that a protein called
NfuA, which itself is an iron-sulfur protein, can reinsert or repair the
degraded auxiliary cluster on lipoyl synthase (LipA) after each turnover. In
turn, NfuA obtains its cluster via a complex pathway by which iron-sulfur
clusters are biosynthesized and trafficked. The aims of this project focus on
elucidating the detailed mechanism that govern how the cluster on NfuA is
transferred to LipA. Mössbauer spectroscopy and mass spectrometry will be used
to follow iron and sulfur transfer, respectively. Protein crystallography will
be used to monitor selenium transfer from NfuA containing a [4Fe-4Se] cluster to
LipA, and efforts will be made to obtain structures of the NfuA/LipA complex.
Lastly, electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, as well as protein film
voltammetry, will be used to study the unique serine ligation to the auxiliary
cluster and to determine why it is critical for the reaction of LipA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry
of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry.