* 1716864
* Quantifying the contribution of a new type of H-bond to protein stability
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Floyd Romesberg, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 314,996.00

Proteins are linear chains of amino acids that fold into complex three-
dimensional structures by virtue of a variety of intramolecular interactions
involving both their main chain (i.e. backbone) atoms, as well as the different,
individual amino acid side chain atoms. One very well characterized interaction
in proteins that provides structural stability is the hydrogen bond (H-bond),
which is a type of electrostatic interaction formed between protein backbone
atoms that have opposite polarity and positioned in a structurally accessible
manner. This project investigates the role of an additional and previously
underappreciated type of stabilizing interaction in proteins, H-bonds between
backbone atoms of sequentially adjacent amino acids. This project will use an
experimental approach that relies on the use of carbon-deuterium (C-D) bonds to
visualize specific protein vibrations to investigate energetic contribution of
this type of H-bond in protein stability. The interactions that define a
protein's folding, structure, and stability are all important factors in
activity and function, thus research to identify and quantify novel types of
interactions have the potential to impact basic research into all aspects of
protein science. This project will provide education and training for graduate,
undergraduate and high school students by involving them in every aspect of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H-bonds formed between backbone N-H donor and CO
acceptors have long been appreciated as dominant forces underlying protein
structure and stability. However, many residues within proteins adopt
conformations with phi and psi values of approximately ±90° and 0°,
respectively, which are traditionally considered forbidden due to a steric clash
between the amide nitrogen (Ni) and that of the following amino acid (Ni+1).
This project will investigate the (Ni+1)-H---(Ni) interactions formed within
these conformations which constitute a previously underappreciated type of
H-bond. The objectives of this project is to focus specifically on determining
the stabilization mediated by the (Ni+1)-H---(Ni) H-bonds in R67 DHFR. This
project will compare the stability of the protein with its (Ni+)-H---(Ni)
H-bonds intact with that of an isosteric CH2 analog [wherein one or more of
th(Ni+1)-H---(Ni) H-bonds are disrupted]. In addition, model systems will be
used to generate a calibration curve that will enable an interpretation of the
shifts in IR spectra observed with the protein in terms of stabilization.
Successful completion of the objectives will provide a convincing demonstration
that (Ni+1-H)---(Ni) H-bonds are formed, and importantly, will provide a gauge
of their contribution to protein stability.