* 1716327
* Collaborative Research: Predicting the Observational Appearance of Accreting Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Charles Gammie, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2023
* USD 436,192.00

Since black holes are by definition invisible, the only way that astronomers can
detect them is by observing material accreting onto (or falling into) the black
hole. Given the strong gravity, intense radiation and powerful magnetic fields
near black holes, it is not surprising that such accretion is complex and can
only be understood by running sophisticated numerical models on supercomputers.
A research collaboration between the University of Illinois, Princeton
University and the University of California-Berkeley will model the behavior of
black-hole accretion in the realm intermediate between strong and weak
accretion, when interesting effects such as jets of outflowing material and
unusual oscillations in the accretion are known to take place. This work will
help to unravel mysteries related to black holes, such as how the jets form and
how the structure of the accretion flow changes over time. The team will
communicate the excitement of black-hole astrophysics to the public through
lectures and visualizations and to future generations of students through a
black hole summer school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of black-hole (BH)
accretion and outflows is central to many areas of modern astrophysics and
gravitational physics. The collaboration team has developed numerical techniques
that permit nearly ab initio modeling of black-hole accretion in both the high-
and low-accretion-rate limits. The team plans to develop new numerical
techniques and codes suitable for studying the difficult intermediate-accretion-
rate regime, which is associated with jets, quasi-periodic oscillations, and
state transitions around stellar-mass black holes. Additions to the models
include radiation forces, pair production and transport, nonthermal particle
production and transport, and collisionless plasma effects, all of which are
critical for making progress on long-standing problems in black-hole
astrophysics, such as the structure and observational appearance (spectrum, time
variability, polarization) of accretion at intermediate accretion rates, as well
as questions about the origin and maintenance of large-scale magnetic fields
believed to power relativistic jets from such systems. The group will make their
new codes available for others to use through public releases.