* 1716316
* Facilitated transport of actin monomer and cytoskeletal remodeling
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* James Galbraith, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 548,421.00

All cells move and change shape by continuously taking apart and rebuilding
their internal scaffolding, called a cytoskeleton. A great deal is known about
how cells remove and replace cytoskeletal pieces. However, a fundamental
challenge for the cell is how to recycle the disassembled pieces. A goal of this
project is to understand how cells move the newly disassembled parts to new
places where they need to be fast enough to change shape in response to external
signals. This work will reveal how cells are able to pull themselves apart, move
the disassembled pieces to the right place, and put themselves back together
every time they move. The work is important because it will reveal basic
principals of dynamic reorganization of the entire cell interior. Understanding
these principals is essential to learning how to coordinate cytoskeletal
remodeling, knowledge that is critical for a variety of applications. Broader
Impact activities will include outreach to a local science museum along with
helping to build a quantitative biology community in the
northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic control of the actin cytoskeleton is
fundamental to processes such as motility, division, and polarization. Although
decades of research have defined the mechanisms that control the addition of
monomers at the front of the cell and removal of monomers at the back, how the
cell transports monomer from the back of the network, where it is removed, to
the front of the network, where it is added is unknown. This transport process
is essential to cell homeostasis, and it is tacitly assumed to be diffusion
because it is fast and difficult to measure. The PIs have for the first time
directly measured forward monomer transport. From their measurements it is clear
that forward monomer transport is faster than diffusion and dependent upon
myosin II contraction. The objectives of this study are to identify the
mechanism that makes forward transport of actin faster than diffusion and to
define the role of myosin II contraction in driving and directing forward
transport to remodel the cytoskeleton. These objectives will be achieved by
combining biophysical assays, molecular biology, photonics, single molecule
imaging, and mathematical/mass transport analysis. This project is expected to
identify long-distance transport mechanisms where diffusion is too slow and
direct motor coupling is unlikely because of rapid spatial and temporal changes
of the intended transport destination.