* 1716091
* SHF:Small: Compact Modeling of Spintronic Magnetic Tunnel Junctions
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Eby Friedman, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,001.00

It is now well accepted that scaling of classical transistor technology is
coming to an end. Novel emerging device technologies will need to be developed
to continue the microelectronics evolution that has driven the world of
computing, communications, defense, automation, transportation, and health for
so many years. Many technologies are being considered for this next step beyond
the semiconductor evolution. One technology that has demanded a great deal of
attention is magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ). This technology exhibits
outstanding performance, density, and power characteristics, and is particularly
noteworthy due to the inherent nonvolatile nature of these devices. One
immediate application is as a low power replacement for solid-state memory, and
is called magnetic randomly accessible memory (MRAM). In addition to advancing
the state-of-the-art in computing, other outcomes of this project will enhance
the graduate and undergraduate educational experience while transferring
important new technology to US industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support the
use of this novel technology in designing new integrated circuits and inventing
novel applications, models will need to be developed that characterize the
speed, power, endurance, and reliability of these emerging devices. The focus of
this project is to develop both accurate and efficient models of magnetic tunnel
junctions. These models will accurately capture the electrical, thermal, and
magnetic behavior of two and three terminal MTJ, and will thereby support the
development of next generation, large scale, heterogeneous integrated circuits.