* 1716535
* Redox reactions in the biosynthesis of thio-cofactors in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Patricia Dos Santos, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 680,668.00

Vitamins and other small molecules defined as cofactors that contain sulfur in
their chemical structures are widely distributed in nature and essential for
life on Earth. All known living organisms use at least a subset of these
cofactors in various aspects of metabolism. While their importance in sustaining
basic biochemical reactions is widely recognized, the mechanisms of sulfur
activation, trafficking, and insertion into cofactors remain not fully
understood. It is widely recognized, however, that the free amino acid cysteine
is the source of sulfur for the biosynthesis of most sulfur-containing cofactors
in bacteria, eukaryotes, and some species of archaea. A family of enzymes named
cysteine desulfurases catalyze the first step in sulfur activation. This project
will determine the effect of physiological reducing agents -specifically,
thioredoxins and small molecules that contain sulfur (glutathione, bacillithiol,
and mycothiol)- in biosynthetic reactions and identify specific protein
interactions controlling the reactivity of cysteine desulfurases and their
sulfur acceptors. This project will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups by including undergraduate researchers from Salem
College and Guilford College, two smaller, local, primarily undergraduate
institutions. Graduate students serving as co-mentors will gain improved
communication skills in preparation as future independent teacher-
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reaction catalyzed by cysteine
desulfurases involves the formation and transfer of a persulfide intermediate to
acceptor molecules involved in the biosynthesis of Fe-S clusters,
thionucleosides in tRNA, rRNA and DNA, biotin, lipoic acid, molybdenum cofactor,
and thiamine. Studying sulfur-transfer reactions in the biosynthesis of thio-
cofactors is challenging. One of the major challenges is that sulfur-acceptor
proteins are often shared across multiple biosynthetic pathways. This project
will determine the involvement of physiological reductants in promoting redox
reactions in the biosynthesis of thio-cofactors in bacteria by investigating
different cysteine desulfurases that are involved in distinct pathways. The
outcome of this study will provide fundamental knowledge regarding the role of
redox agents in biochemical pathways involved in the transfer of sulfur and will
establish evolutionary determinants controlling reactivity of biosynthetic
enzymes. This project is supported jointly by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster
of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and Chemistry for Life Processes Cluster of Chemistry
Division in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.