* 1716987
* The Dynamic Genome: Studying the Interplay between Local Strand-Passage and Reconnection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mariel Vazquez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2021
* USD 290,000.00

Reconnection processes appear in a variety of settings at widely different
scales, from microscopic DNA recombination to large-scale reconnection of
vortices in fluid turbulence and magnetic reconnection of solar coronal loops.
Experimental data show striking similarities between the pathways of topology
simplification in newly replicated circular DNA plasmids by recombination and
those in interlinked fluid vortices thus pointing to a universal process of
unlinking by local reconnection. A drive toward topological simplification is
ubiquitous in nature and this work will develop a mathematical understanding of
the laws underlying it. Enzymes such as topoisomerases and recombinases are DNA-
binding proteins able simplify the topology of circular DNA. They act by local
crossing changes and local reconnection. The main objective of this project is
to characterize the topological mechanism of DNA topology simplification using
knot theory, low-dimensional topology and computer simulations. In pursuit of
this research objective, the central hypothesis is that under normal conditions
topoisomerases and recombinases follow optimal topological pathways of DNA
unknotting and unlinking. The principal investigator will test this hypothesis
through two specific aims. (1) Use techniques from low-dimensional topology, to
find possible topological pathways of DNA unknotting and unlinking by type II
topoisomerases and by recombinases. (2) Conduct computer simulations of DNA
topology simplification by signed crossing changes and by local reconnection and
explore connections to genome architecture. The PI and her group will be
involved in a variety of dissemination and outreach activities, and are
committed to increasing diversity in the Mathematical Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will produce rigorous mathematical models for
DNA unknotting and unlinking by local reconnection and signed crossing change,
which will contribute to our understanding of the unknotting and unlinking
mechanisms by topoisomerases and by recombinases. The enzymatic action can be
modeled as local crossing changes, and as coherent or non-coherent band surgery,
respectively. Assuming a chiral enzymatic action, this project will study signed
crossing changes and characterize knots that can be unknotted with a single type
of crossing change. Different minimal multi-step reconnection pathways will be
identified between given pairs of knots or links. The research will extend
results related to the nugatory crossing conjecture and analogous open questions
in knot theory, which concerns the characterization of crossing changes and non-
coherent band surgeries, which preserve the topological knot type. The proposed
project will develop a computer model (a multiple Markov chain Monte Carlo
algorithm) where DNA recombination at inversely repeated sites is modeled as
non-coherent band surgery. The principal investigator will compute minimal
recombination pathways and assess the efficiency of this form of topology
simplification under different geometric and topological filters. Via
simulations, the research will determine the transition probability networks for
each method and choice of parameters for the models developed for signed
crossing change and recombination of DNA. This will provide a ranking of the
nodes and identify topology types with high-connectivity. An important focus is
placed on the interplay of strand-passage and reconnection events.