* 1716046
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Rare genes and alleles in halophilic archaeal populations and communities
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Johann Peter Gogarten, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2023
* USD 920,628.00

The research will address the following questions: (1) How do microorganisms
(bacteria and archaea) diverge and become adapted to new environments? (2) What
is the role of rare genes in the adaptation process? Evolution and adaptation of
bacterial and archaeal populations, the spread of "selfish" or parasitic genes
in those populations, and especially the maintenance of within-lineage
variation, in which different microbial cells contain slightly different
complements of genes, impacts plant, animal and human life in many ways. This
interdisciplinary project combines theoretical explorations with the study of
environmental samples and laboratory experimentation on archaea that inhabit
saline environments. The project will train its participants in theoretical and
computational biology and genetic research that involves genome sequencing,
genetic engineering and laboratory tests. The research will involve high-school
students and teachers, undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows in an international collaboration to develop and test hypotheses on the
long-term survival of rare genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
execute the following tasks: (1) Through theory, modeling, and in silico
experiments determine which population dynamics can lead to persistence of
alleles in the non-core portion of the pan-genome. Find conditions that allow
for the emergence of a within population division of labor, and for the within
population survival of molecular parasites. In particular, explore the impact of
population bottlenecks, gene flow and recombination within and between
populations and species on the persistence of rare genes over time. (2)
Determine which community dynamics can lead to the coexistence of alleles and to
species diversification. Research will focus on the effect of low or uneven
rates of within population gene transfer, possibly due to incompatibility of
restriction modification (RM) or targeting by clustered regularly spaced short
palindromic repeats (CRISPR) systems and we will explore when a division of
labor that arose within a population is expected to lead to diversification. (3)
Identify genes having limited distribution in Haloferax spp. and Halorubrum spp.
populations and species from genome and meta-genome sequences, characterize
these genes through bioinformatics based approaches, and select suitable
candidates for genetic experimentation. (4) Perform experiments to determine the
effect of selfish genetic elements, RM and CRISPR-Cas systems on recombination
and gene frequencies in the off-spring. (5) Perform growth competition
experiment in Hfx. volcanii (plus versus minus a gene of interest) to measure
fitness cost of genes contributing to the production of a common shared good and
for selfish genetic elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel
project is supported by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and
the Office of International Science and Engineering at the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science Foundation.