* 1716688
* A new paradigm for regulation of de novo fatty acid synthesis in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Steven Van Doren, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2021
* USD 700,000.00

This project will enhance our understanding of fatty acid synthesis in plants as
an important step in developing new strategies for engineering designer oilseeds
of the future. Plant oils are a valuable renewable resource for food, fuels and
chemicals. The genes that encode the enzymes responsible for lipid synthesis
have been identified, but regulation of these genes is still poorly understood.
This project will take a multi-disciplinary approach to study the role of newly
discovered proteins in regulating a key early step in fatty acid synthesis,
which in turn controls total plant oil accumulation. The project will prepare
two undergraduate students, including underrepresented minorities, and two
graduate students for STEM careers. They will be trained in modern research
approaches of plant biotechnology, genetics, and protein science. The
undergraduates from University of Southern Mississippi (USM; an especially
diverse student population) will travel to University of Missouri (MU) to join
the MU undergraduates for a 9-week intensive summer research experience for
undergraduates in the Thelen and Van Doren laboratories. The graduate students
at MU and USM will acquire transferable skills from formal training in mentoring
and science communication and by mentoring the undergraduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages the expertise of a multi-
disciplinary team to test the hypothesis that the newly discovered biotin
attachment domain-containing (BADC) gene family and its counterpart biotin
carboxyl carrier protein (BCCP) collectively act as a molecular rheostat to
modulate acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACCase) activity and ultimately seed oil
accumulation. Quantitative biophysical analyses will distinguish between two
hypotheses for how BADC proteins intercalate into the holo-ACCase complex and
reduce enzymatic activity. The analyses will test the alternatives of the BADC
structure in solution versus its affinity for the BC subunit enabling BADC to
compete with its functional, catalytic sibling protein, BCCP, for access to
ACCase. The regulatory role of BADCs during seed development and induced
regulation of fatty acid synthesis (FAS) will be characterized by quantifying
gene expression and absolute protein levels of the BADC regulatory proteins
relative to the ACCase enzyme, under various states of FAS. The rheostat
hypothesis will be tested in planta by modulating BADC protein levels and
quantifying carbon flux through ACCase and FAS and the effect on total oil
accumulation. Additionally, the ability of BADC proteins to alleviate the FAS
feedback inhibition that is induced in plants engineered to produce novel oils
will be tested. This will clarify metabolic bottlenecks that limit oilseed
engineering.