* 1716388
* Approximate Message Passing Algorithms and Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Philip Schniter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 499,570.00

A problem of paramount importance in engineering, science, and medicine is that
of recovering information signals from high-dimensional measurements. This
problem manifests in many forms, e.g., reconstructing a high-quality image from
a few noisy Fourier projections, determining which features in patient data are
most likely associated with a given disease, or classifying which objects are
present within an image. Until recently, the dominant approach to signal
recovery was algorithmic. But nowadays, algorithms are increasingly being
replaced by deep neural networks (DNNs), which can learn optimal inference
strategies directly from the data. This project researches algorithmic as well
as deep-neural-network (DNN) approaches to high-dimensional signal recovery,
leveraging connections between them to make advances in
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the algorithmic front, this project investigates
the vector approximate message passing (VAMP) algorithm. Like the original AMP
algorithm of Donoho, Maleki, and Montanari, the VAMP algorithm enjoys low
complexity and a scalar state-evolution that rigorously and concisely
characterizes its behavior. However, VAMP is applicable to a much larger class
of problems than AMP. On the DNN front, this project investigates DNNs whose
architecture is inspired by the processing steps within VAMP. The resulting DNNs
are highly interpretable and, for some simple applications, statistical optimal.
This project aims to develop this VAMP-based DNN design framework to work with
more complex applications.