* 1716093
* Collaborative Research:  Hyper Suprime-Cam Wide Emission-Line Survey
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Esther Hu, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,646.00

The epoch of reionization, when the intergalactic gas went from being neutral
and opaque to being very highly ionized, and therefore transparent, is a key
period in the evolution of the Universe. Determining the redshift when this
occurred and the sources of the photons that ionized the intergalactic gas
represents one of the current frontiers in observational cosmology. The enormous
recent progress in identifying populations of high-redshift galaxies,
particularly the Lyman alpha emitting galaxies, has the potential to answer the
question of when this process occurred. This project will develop large,
homogeneous galaxy samples with which to determine the properties of the ultra-
luminous galaxies at high redshift. An important aspect of this project is to
provide research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students that will
engage their interest and encourage their participation in science, train them
in observational methods and instruments, direct them in computer processing and
reduction techniques for large imaging and spectroscopic data sets, and provide
mentoring, with a particular emphasis on encouraging women students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations suggesting a drop in the high-redshift Lyman
Alpha Emitter (LAE) fraction beyond a redshift of seven have been interpreted as
marking the onset of reionization at this redshift. However, the most luminous
LAEs do not appear to show such an evolution and may also exhibit more complex
line profiles than lower-luminosity LAEs, suggesting that the most luminous LAEs
are protecting themselves from the evolving neutrality of the IGM by generating
highly ionized surroundings. As a consequence, the galaxy can be seen directly
without scattering from the surrounding intergalactic medium. The aim of the
proposed survey is to observe a 120 square degree field to moderate depth using
Hyper Suprime-Cam on the Subaru telescope in order to develop a large uniformly-
selected sample of very luminous LAEs, as well as a very large sample of more
moderate-luminosity LAEs from which we can determine the properties of LAEs from
redshift 5 to redshift 7. From these samples, the researchers will be able to
determine how LAEs depend on environment and luminosity in this redshift range,
as well as estimate the ionizing photon production in the most luminous LAEs and
the growth of HII porosity. Determining properties of galaxies near the
reionization boundary, and particularly their ionizing photon production, will
provide strong constraints on theoretical models of the evolution of the
intergalactic gas, the evolution of galaxies, and structure formation at high
redshift.