* 1716134
* The Final Hour of a Massive Star:  Silicon Shell Burning and the Subsequent Supernova
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Eric Lentz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2021
* USD 232,430.00

The final stage of life for a massive star (larger than about nine times the
mass of the Sun) is the nuclear fusion ("burning") of silicon (SiSB) to create
iron in a shell around an inert iron core, increasing the mass of the iron core.
 This stage can last up to an hour until growth of the iron core triggers its
collapse to a compact and dense neutron star (NS) surrounded by accreting
material. Subatomic particles called neutrinos emitted by the new NS heat the
material and drive it out in a shock front through the surrounding star,
generating a supernova explosion that delivers newly made elements into the
interstellar medium of the galaxy. A research team at the University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, will follow multidimensional computer simulations of the
SiSB phase through the collapse/supernova phase in massive stars using state-of-
the-art computational simulation codes to better understand this critical
process for creating and dispersing atomic elements. The PI will present public
lectures on supernova science and nucleosynthesis, or element creation, and
train a graduate student in both stellar astrophysics and large-scale
computation.

The research team will simulate the developments in the last hour of convective
silicon shell burning in a massive star and continue the simulations into the
supernova explosion phase. The team will run a multi-dimensional code with
realistic microphysics, including nucleosynthesis, neutrino transport, and
turbulent convection. Since the code runs in three dimensions, they will be able
to introduce asymmetries, which are known to be important, particularly for the
supernova neutrino heating mechanism. The pre-collapse burning models will
explore the limits of dimensionality, spatial resolution, nuclear network
completeness, and duration required to adequately capture this dynamic stellar
phase. The explosion simulations will calculate the element production from the
supernova along with neutrino and gravitational wave signals. The proposed work
will use a simulation code called Chimera, which the PI describes as a
combination of three separate mature codes covering three aspects of the
problem.