* 1716202
* Precise Near-Infrared Motion Velocities of Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Peter Plavchan, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Still
* 01/31/2022
* USD 450,856.00

When planets are discovered around other stars, very precise telescopic
observations must be made so that astronomers can learn their size and motion.
These investigators have built instruments and designed techniques that can
measure the motions of these planets very precisely; these measurements describe
the planets that are orbiting their stars. This project will improve the
investigators' ability to make these precise measurements. A new, more precise
telescopic instrument, called iSHELL, replaced the first instrument that the
investigators designed and used to develop these observing methods. In this
project the investigators will develop computer programs and techniques to study
the new telescopic data from iSHELL more thoroughly and accurately. This
research serves the national interest as it promotes our progress in
understanding the characteristics of planets around other stars. The principal
investigator will include opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students,
including underrepresented minorities, to participate in this astronomical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the radial velocity
(RV) precision obtainable in the near-infrared (NIR) for the RV follow-up of
candidate exoplanets identified with the NASA Transiting Exoplanet Survey
Satellite mission and ground-based telescopic surveys. An NIR RV precision of 3
m/s will make it possible to detect 1-10 Earth-mass planets in the habitable
zones of M dwarf stars and to evaluate the wavelength dependence of stellar
jitter from the visible to the near-infrared for main sequence and young stars.
This project builds on the successful NIR precise RV instrumentation prototyped
from 2010- 2015 using the CSHELL instrument at the NASA Infra-Red Telescope
Facility. The collaboration surveyed a sample of young moving group M dwarfs and
a sample of nearby M dwarfs that have not been previously monitored, identifying
several candidate exoplanets. The iSHELL replaced CSHELL with first light at
IRTF in August 2016. Owing to the improvements in spectral grasp, resolution,
optics, and detector characteristics, the investigators will likely achieve a
long-term precision of &lt; 3 m/s with iSHELL. The investigators will adapt the
CSHELL data analysis pipeline for iSHELL data.