* 1716678
* Role of divergent IncRNAs in transcriptional priming and enhancer-mediated activation of nearby genes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Humaira Gowher, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2023
* USD 777,000.00

Dnmt3b is an essential methyltransferase, a protein that transfers methyl groups
to DNA. Expression of the gene that encodes Dnmt3b is tightly controlled by
unknown mechanisms during early mammalian development and later in somatic
cells. The controlled expression of Dnmt3b is critical for cellular
differentiation and for maintenance of cell identity. One mechanism by which
Dnmt3b expression is regulated potentially involves a non-coding RNA, named
Dnmt3bas, and its interaction with regulatory switches near the Dnmt3b gene. The
goal of this study is to characterize this mechanism in detail. This study will
make a significant contribution to current understanding of unconventional roles
of RNA thus advancing the field of study. The research plan will provide
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students, including women and
minorities, to undergo intensive training in biochemistry, molecular biology,
genomics, and bioinformatics. The appreciation of non-coding RNAs as functional
genomic elements that contradicts the traditional view of how the genetic
information in DNA is converted from RNA to protein will be introduced in the
form of interactive lessons to local middle or high school students as a part of
Purdue's GK-12 program. Given that the field of non-coding RNA is mature and is
now found in college textbooks, introducing these concepts at the middle/high
school level will prepare students for molecular biology and biochemistry
courses in college and increase student retention in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC)
differentiation as a developmental model system, our objective in this
application is to elucidate the mechanism by which the Dnmt3b enhancer and the
promoter-associated divergent lncRNA (Dnmt3bas) coordinate to regulate the
transcription of Dnmt3b gene. By using methods that include CRISPR/Cas9 mediated
manipulations of the Dnmt3bas, crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP), and
chromatin isolation by RNA purification (ChIRP-Seq) analysis, the investigators
will determine the role of Dnmt3bas in maintaining a transcriptionally competent
state of the inactive Dnmt3b promoter in naive pluripotent ESCs and in
stabilizing the interaction of the Dnmt3b promoter with the upstream enhancer
upon induction of differentiation. At the completion of this project, the
investigators expect to have identified a novel role for Dnmt3bas in maintaining
a state that facilitates rapid activation of the Dnmt3b promoter and enhanced
expression of Dnmt3b gene during the transition from the pluripotent to
differentiated state. By using 3C and ChIP assays, they will further determine
the role of chromatin conformation and of the repressive complex containing
Dnmt3a in establishing a stably repressed state at Dnmt3b regulatory regions in
differentiated cells.