* 1716585
* Strong Gravitational Lensing at High Spectral Resolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Charles Keeton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 306,354.00

Gravitational lensing occurs when light from a distant galaxy is bent by gravity
from another galaxy along the line of sight. The light is stretched over a
larger area on the sky, making the background galaxy appear brighter but
distorting its shape. A traditional way to study the background galaxies and
foreground lenses is to apply theoretical models to observations with high
angular resolution. The goal of this project is to apply new theoretical models
to observations with high resolution, like those made by radio telescopes. The
PI (a theorist) and Co-PI (an observer) will work with Rutgers graduate and
undergraduate students to achieve this goal. The project will support prior U.S.
investments in large arrays of radio telescopes and improve the understanding of
dark matter, black holes, and galaxy evolution. The project will also train
students in research, including rising sophomores from disadvantaged
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce a new way to model
data from NSF's Very Large Array, the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array, and similar facilities. The new method will be implemented in the PI's
public lensmodel software package. It will be applied to both compact and
extended lenses in two types of distant galaxies. With lensed quasar host
galaxies the project will examine the evolution of black hole scaling relations.
With lensed dusty star-forming galaxies the project will examine an extreme mode
of star formation. The resulting models will be used to characterize lens-plane
substructure and test the cold dark matter structure formation paradigm. In
addition to training graduate students, the PI and Co-PI will introduce
undergraduate students to research through a new seminar course for first-year
Educational Opportunity Fund students at Rutgers. This class will combine
professional development, biographical material on scientists and engineers from
diverse backgrounds, and hands-on research activities.