* 1716698
* CNH-L: Dynamics of Zoonotic Systems: Human-Bat-Pathogen Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Elizabeth Shanahan, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,650,000.00

Increases in the frequency of human-wildlife interaction have led to the
emergence of new zoonoses, which are infectious diseases that are transmitted
from animals to humans. Zoonoses are a major threat to biosecurity and public
health. Bats are home to some of the highest-profile emerging zoonoses,
including Ebola, Marburg, Nipah, and Hendra viruses, and severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS). Transmission from bats to humans often
occurs when bats abandon natural habitats to take advantage of resources
associated with human settlements. This project will investigate how habitat
loss causes bat migration into populated developed areas, which leads to
increased bat-human encounters and increased disease transmission. The research
will focus on Hendra virus, a bat borne pathogen in Australia, to study the
interactions among changing landscapes, loss of natural habitats, humans, bats,
and pathogens. A surge of bat movement into towns and cities in eastern
Australia has led to increased negative bat-human interactions, and increased
mortality of horses and humans from Hendra virus. An ultimate goal of the
research is to identify and mitigate the specific interacting factors
responsible for increased disease incidence and poor health outcomes. The
research team includes investigators at ten academic institutions and a non-
profit organization. The project will train U.S. students and postdoctoral
researchers, improve science communication and policies that protect wildlife
and human health, and will build greater research capacity among national and
international collaborators. Methods and results will be generalizable to
numerous countries in which similar zoonotic events occur, but that have limited
resources for biological surveillance, disease prevention, and responding to
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the hypotheses that
the root cause of negative bat-human interactions is the loss of habitat needed
to sustain bats' nomadic feeding ecology, and that some management decisions
(e.g., destruction of roost sites, not vaccinating horses) may exacerbate
conflict, spillover, and habitat loss. The research integrates theory and field
data spanning ecology, physiology, epidemiology, political science,
anthropology, veterinary medicine, behavioral ecology, and mathematical
modeling. Data will be collected on land-use change and the physiology,
energetics, and movement of bats; mechanistic models will be used to examine how
the relations among these variables influence bats' use of urban areas. The
researchers will conduct field and modeling studies on the dynamics of bat
viruses to help predict future instances of virus spillover. They will
additionally use narratives, collaboratively produced by researchers and local
communities, to conduct experiments on risk perceptions and decisions about bat
nuisance, virus spillover, and vaccination. Ultimately, the project will lead to
an evidence-based program for reversing the negative human-wildlife interactions
that lead to epidemics and loss of wildlife. It will also lead to a framework
for public education and engagement that is endorsed by local communities and is
embedded in ecological restoration initiatives.