* 1716396
* RPA-Directed Repair of DNA Damage in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kevin Culligan, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 641,864.00

When plant cells are challenged with DNA damage induced by environmental
radiation or by pathogen infection, Replication Protein A (RPA) is a first
responder in the cellular decision-making processes that promote cell survival
and help maintain the integrity of the genome. Plants contain multiple RPA
proteins, and these are thought to have specialized functions that allow the
plant to respond to different sources of DNA damage. To address this idea, this
project employs a multi-faceted approach, exploiting the genetic power of the
model plant Arabidopsis and leveraging biochemical and protein chemistry
methods. The results will illuminate a novel response in plants to the DNA
damage from various assaults, including pathogen infection. The long-term
outcome of the work could lead to development of plants with heightened disease
resistance. Educational goals include providing research training for
undergraduate and graduate students and involving at-risk high school students
in hands-on research. Students at all levels will engage in communicating
scientific information to lay audiences, simultaneously enhancing their own
learning and improving public appreciation of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project objectives are to discover cellular mechanisms for repairing DNA double-
strand breaks. DNA breaks can be induced by abiotic sources, such as UV or
ionizing radiation, or by biotic sources, such as pathogen infection. This
research will explore the role of the important DNA-repair factor, RPA, which is
hypothesized to be a key regulator of the cellular decisions involved in
properly repairing DNA breaks in response to both abiotic and biotic sources.
The main experimental objectives are to: 1) generate a model for RPA-dependent
repair by examining how RPA responds to DNA breaks induced by radiation sources;
2) determine if RPA is required for repair of pathogen-induced DNA double-strand
breaks, and 3) determine biochemical interactions and modifications of RPA in
response to DNA damage. These data will be integrated into a holistic model of
RPA functions to inform future functional analysis of cellular DNA repair in
this and other systems. The results have the potential to improve crop
production in response to abiotic and biotic threats.