* 1716837
* Unraveling core design principles to explore the world of nonconventional yeasts
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zengyi Shao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

There are several novel high-performing yeast species with desirable features
that well-studied species of yeast do not possess. Currently, genome information
about these novel species is easy to acquire. However, it is a major challenge
to develop platform technologies that can be applied effectively from one
species to another. This research aims at elucidating design principles to make
this task easier and more streamlined. The project will develop methods to
enable rapid genetic modifications of "challenging-to-study" species. It will
explore methods for large-scale characterization of the relationship between
certain genetic sequences and their functions. The successful implementation of
this project will open up a spectrum of new research directions and expand a
suite of high-performing microorganisms for various biotechnology applications.
The research will also have educational impact by strengthening the Industrial
Microbiology and Synthetic Biology infrastructure at Iowa State University.
Specific activities include: enhancing the current curriculum; helping graduate
and undergraduate students explore their career potentials; encouraging female,
under-represented minorities and students with disabilities to pursue careers in
STEM fields; and strengthening the next-generation workforce by closely
interacting with K-12 students. The proposed activities will promote public
awareness of the Industrial Microbiology and Synthetic Biology fields and
stimulate a long-lasting impact on the careers of a broad range of
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant technology hurdles limit
characterization of new non-conventional microorganisms and use of those
organisms for biotechnological applications. These hurdles can be overcome by
developing the kinds of tools that have made baker's yeast, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, such an effective model system. This project will develop and deploy
new methods for studying non-conventional yeast species. Specific goals will be
to (1) establish in silico principles to predict genetic elements vital for the
creation of stable plasmids; (2) build low-copy, high-copy, and integration
expression platforms for convenient gene and pathway manipulations; (3) develop
a high throughput pipeline for transcriptome engineering and reprogramming of
genome-scale regulatory networks to enhance desired cellular functions. This
comprehensive approach should enable the discovery of core principles and
technologies to serve as a foundation for studying diverse non-conventional
yeasts, thereby pushing the frontier in exploring new species readily available
in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
in the Biological Sciences Directorate and by the Cellular and Biochemical
Engineering Program, in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental
and Transport Systems in the Engineering Directorate.