* 1717602
* CIF:Small:High Performance Memories that Integrate Coding and Computer Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Daniel Sorin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 470,000.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers continue to develope new memory and
storage technologies for computer systems, including improvements to Flash
memory in solid-state drives, as well as novel technologies that have not yet
reached the market. These technologies offer new features---including greater
storage density, or the ability to retain their data even without power---yet
they also introduce new challenges, such as reduced lifetimes or the possibility
that writing data into one part of the memory could disrupt values in other
parts. Historically, imperfections in memory technologies have been overcome by
encoding the information such that disrupted or lost data can be recovered.
However, existing techniques do not suffice for the newly emerging memory
technologies that have different imperfections and divergent usage
models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between
researchers in information theory (who study how to encode information for
different purposes) and researchers in computer architecture (who study how to
design computer systems, including memory and storage). The architects will
identify exciting technologies and the problems they introduce, and the
information theorists will develop new ways of encoding information to overcome
these challenges. Whereas much research in coding is theoretical and lacks
connection to the reality of computer systems, the collaboration with computer
architects---who focus on implementation issues and costs---will ground the
coding work and enhance its impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To foster more
interdisciplinary work in this research area, the research team will present
half-day tutorials at conferences, including a coding tutorial at an
architecture conference, and an architecture tutorial at an information theory
conference. The investigators will continue to work with undergraduate research
assistants, including students from an established summer outreach program at
Duke?s Pratt School of Engineering. The investigators will also continue to
recruit female research assistants alongside research assistants from under-
represented populations; both investigators have extensive track records in this
area and are committed to cultivating diversity in the computing research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research program seeks to improve the lifetime and fault tolerance of existing
and emerging storage technologies---specifically Flash, 3D DRAM, and racetrack
memory---by developing practical coding techniques that can be implemented in
real-world systems. These storage technologies feature increased storage
density, yet suffer the particular challenge of limited lifetime, that might
otherwise limit their potential in
microarchitectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, improvements in memory
and storage have been due not only to advances in the memory technologies
themselves, but also to innovations by computer architects who design memory and
storage systems and by coding theorists who devise codes for data storage. The
proposed research program is a collaboration between a coding theory group led
by PI Calderbank and a computer architecture group led by co-PI Sorin. In their
preliminary work, architecture problems have driven development of new theory,
and advances in coding theory have driven development of new systems that can
take advantage of them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research thrusts can be
classified by the memory technology, and all include specific challenges as well
as more open-ended research directions: Specific objectives
include&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Development of new coding solutions for
racetrack memory that employ delimiter bits to identify single shift errors and
practically implementable codes to correct the error, once identified.
Introduction of coding across multiple racetracks (spatial diversity) to correct
multiple shift errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Development of virtual multilevel
Flash cells that connect computer architecture with coding theoretic
innovations, and evaluation of the tradeoff between host-visible capacity and
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Development of new coding solutions that
protect stacked DRAM designs from failures in bits, rows, banks, channels, dies
and through silicon vias. Development of fundamental limits on how redundancy
trades off against read/write latency, bandwidth requirements, and energy
consumption in stacked designs.