* 1717197
* NeTS:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Enhancing Crowdsourced Spectrum Sensing through Sybil-proof Incentives
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Guoliang Xue, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 251,999.00

Database-driven dynamic spectrum sharing has been advocated by the Federal
Communications Commission as one of the most promising methods to address the
spectrum shortage and improve the spectrum utilization. In such a system, a
spectrum service provider (SSP) accepts registrations from primary users and
determines spectrum availability based on their use of spectrum. Secondary users
interested in using the spectrum are required to contact the SSP to inquire
about spectrum availability in any band of interest. Leveraging the power of
crowd-sourcing, spectrum sensing becomes a key enabler for effectively improving
the spectrum-estimation accuracy. In crowd-sourced spectrum sensing, an SSP
outsources spectrum-sensing tasks to a large number of recruited mobile users.
However, many existing incentive mechanisms for crowd-sourcing are vulnerable to
Sybil attacks, where an attacker illegitimately forges multiple identities to
gain benefits but degrades the performance. The goal of this project is to
enhance crowd-sourced spectrum sensing by designing Sybil-proof incentive
mechanisms that overcome the shortcomings of current incentive mechanisms. This
project will raise awareness about the possible Sybil attacks in crowd-sourced
spectrum sensing systems. The anticipated results will also break new grounds in
designing incentive mechanisms for crowdsourcing-based applications. This
project will engage minority students and under-represented groups. The proposed
research activities will complement and enrich the growing curricula at Arizona
State University and Colorado School of Mines through course development and
special topic seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research consists of
two inter-related research thrusts. Thrust 1 concentrates on enhancing crowd-
sourced spectrum sensing through Sybil-proof incentive mechanism design under a
direct crowd-sourcing architecture, where mobile users communicate directly with
the SSP. Upon receiving the sensing task description, each mobile user proposes
a sensing plan together with a request for reward. The SSP selects the set of
winning users and decides the corresponding payment to each winning seller. The
winning users perform the sensing tasks and receive the corresponding rewards.
Thrust 2 concentrates on enhancing crowd-sourcing through Sybil-proof incentive
mechanism design under a hierarchical crowd-sourcing architecture, where mobile
users contribute in both spectrum sensing and solicitation. This model subsumes
the approach that won the DARPA networking challenge, but is vulnerable to Sybil
attacks. The PIs will design Sybil-proof incentive mechanisms. The proposed
research will be evaluated and validated via simulations and testbed
experiments.