* 1717082
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Investigating the Impact of Peer Mentoring on STEM Retention and Persistence among Minority Undergraduate Women
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Jillian Wendt, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 02/29/2020
* USD 286,128.00

The project is a partnership among the University of the District of Columbia,
Virginia State University, and the University of Memphis. It aims to pilot and
investigate the effectiveness of a blended (face-to-face and virtual) STEM
mentorship model that is designed to enhance career self-efficacy among minority
female undergraduates and increase their STEM persistence. Secondarily, the
project aims to enhance graduate students' mentoring skills and inspire their
pursuit of STEM careers. Participants will participate in STEM communities to
share ideas, receive encouragement, interact with STEM professionals, and
receive mentoring from female graduate students. The project will focus on
mitigating the underrepresentation of females in STEM by addressing the most
documented problems that they face, persistence and self-efficacy, especially
nontraditional female students. The researchers will produce evidence for a
technology facilitated mentoring and career development model to broaden
participation of underrepresented students in STEM graduate education and the
workforce. At the same time, they will document an effective intervention to
enhance the preparation of prospective STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to use a multiphase
mixed-methods approach to address three research objectives: 1) Develop and
examine the effectiveness of a STEM peer mentorship program on female
undergraduate students' STEM career self-efficacy. 2) Develop and examine the
effectiveness of a STEM peer mentoring program on graduate students' mentorship
skills that will be transferrable to the workplace. and 3) Develop and examine
the effectiveness of a STEM peer mentorship program on increasing undergraduate
students' propensity to matriculate to graduate school and the STEM workforce.
Data will be collected from interviews, surveys, and focus groups and analyzed
using descriptive statistics. Research participants will include undergraduate
and graduate students from each of the three partnering institutions. The
research results are expected to have implications for broadening the
participation of underrepresented minority females in STEM at other HBCUs and at
other institutions while, at the same time, strengthening mentorship skills of
graduate students planning to pursue STEM careers.