* 1717425
* CSR:Small:Supporting Position Independence and Reusability of Data on Byte-Addressable Non-Volatile Memory
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Xipeng Shen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,998.00

With the potential to eliminate the boundary between memory and storage, Non
Volatile Memory (NVM) calls for innovations across computing stacks. Existing
studies have been mostly focused on the how to ensure data consistency and
recoverability when a system crashes with minimum overhead. This proposal aims
to enable effective leverage of NVM persistency for computing efficiency. In
particular, the research focuses on a central challenge for data reuse: To
efficiently enable position independence for dynamic data structures such that
all the references in a data object keep their integrity (i.e., point to the
correct addresses) regardless of where in the memory space the data object is
mapped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NVM is expected to be influential for many
computational fields, from database to data analytics, scientific computing,
analysis of social networks, modeling of stock transactions and so on. The
success of this project may provide key support for effective data reuse on NVM,
helping improve computing efficiency and software development productivity on
future systems, and hence sustained advancement of science, health, and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have a version controlled repository in
place at NCSU that has and will be used for data storage and access control. For
metadata, documentation will be submitted alongside the data in order to make
the data reusable. The data will be archived for at least 10 years.