* 1717330
* CHS: Small: Assessing the Role of Platform Algorithms in Shaping News Attention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Nicholas Diakopoulos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,977.00

This research will conduct a series of algorithm audits of two major media
platforms that dominate human attention to news information: Google and
Facebook. Online platforms such as these are used by more than half of Americans
for receiving news information. But little is known about how the algorithmic
curation processes of these information intermediaries serve to drive public
exposure and salience of quality news information. The prevalence and magnitude
of the problem is unclear as are the attention patterns of real users around
such information. More generally: What types and sources of news are made
available and prioritized, and are there diverse perspectives represented in the
algorithmic curation of these major platforms? The overriding question this
project seeks to answer is: How do platform algorithms shape the availability,
magnitude, and quality of human attention to news media? Answering these
questions will provide key insights into the role of these platforms in
providing diverse and quality information. These contributions will advance the
fields of computational journalism and communication, and information science
both methodologically and in relation to social scientific questions of
information content dissemination, consumption, and mediation. This project will
provide knowledge that will impact the use, design, and perhaps even governance
of algorithmic curation systems in mediating and shaping attention of personal
and civic importance, thus helping to improve the public's access to diverse and
quality news information.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;News article URLs surfaced
specifically on the "Top stories" section of Google and the "Trends" section of
Facebook will be collected both automatically and using crowdsourcing methods so
that factors such as news source diversity, quality, and attention can be
measured as they relate to and vary with mediating considerations such as
personalization, locality, and temporality. A variety of metrics will be derived
in order to benchmark the information surfaced and to put it into a broader
context of media availability. Moreover, an innovative marriage of data from an
industry news metrics collaborator will enable a transformative understanding of
how algorithmic curation affects attention patterns at scale. Insights from
these studies may lead to the identification of design opportunities for
platforms or end-users to improve and fill gaps in the diversity or quality of
news information available around issues of personal or civic importance. The
main intellectual contributions of this project are (1) to develop repeatable
algorithm audit methods that can be deployed now and in the future, and (2) to
apply those methods to develop new knowledge of how algorithmically-driven
information intermediaries affect news information exposure and attention
patterns.