* 1717088
* SHF:Small:Software-Defined Radio: From High-level Language to Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Geoffrey Mainland, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2021
* USD 443,935.00

Software-defined radio (SDR) promises to bring the flexibility of software
development to radio protocol design. Unfortunately, SDR platforms that support
high-data rate protocols are difficult to program and require low-level, expert
knowledge that has little to do with radio protocol design. This project makes
high-data rate radio protocol design accessible to a wider community of
developers by developing a new high-level language for expressing SDR
applications, freeing protocol designers from worrying about the low-level
details of a particular SDR platform. The intellectual merits are a new
understanding of the language abstractions and runtime facilities needed to
translate high-level code to efficient low-level implementations. The project's
broader significance and importance are to drastically lower the barrier to
entry for high-speed software-defined radio platforms and to produce new tools
for the SDR community that facilitate both research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds on Ziria, a
language for writing radio physical layer (PHY) implementations. Ziria will be
extended in to support new radio protocol applications and to support new
hardware platforms, including FPGAs. A key project goal is portability:
protocols written in Ziria should be portable across SDR platforms without
significant loss of performance. Furthermore, users must be able to make use of
all parts of heterogeneous SDR platforms---from FPGAs to CPUs to DSPs---
seamlessly and without rewriting code. Finally, this project applies knowledge
gained in the SDR domain to new domains, such a video encoding and decoding,
where low-level hardware is also commonly targeted.