* 1717282
* Global patterns, predictors, and their dynamical consequences in zoonotic diseases of mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* John Drake, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,025,612.00

Around the world, outbreaks of novel infectious diseases are increasing in
frequency. The majority of infectious diseases emerging in humans originate from
animal hosts. There are now thousands of scientific studies investigating
animal-borne (zoonotic) disease threats, but to date there are few methods to
predict in advance where new infectious disease threats are most likely to
arise. In this project, researchers seek to understand why some animals harbor
many more human pathogens compared to others; what kinds of pathogens are most
likely to pose unforeseen disease threats to humans; and what kinds of
environments may see large disease outbreak events in the future. To do this,
researchers will analyze large databases on mammals, their pathogens, and
environmental conditions to describe what features best predict animal-borne
infectious diseases in humans. Researchers will also examine the theoretical
consequences of these predictions using mathematical models, to understand how
disease patterns are most likely to change over time. Instead of reacting to new
diseases after they have emerged, the predictions and methodological advances
developed in this project will immediately benefit society by informing us how
future disease threats may be preempted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining
machine learning and mathematical modeling with growing volumes of data on
infectious diseases in wildlife and humans, this project will: (1) Identify
intrinsic traits of hosts and pathogens and general environmental features that
best predict patterns of zoonotic infection; (2) Identify particular mammal
species and pathogenic agents likely to be undiscovered sources of future
zoonoses; (3) Investigate the host, pathogen, and environmental covariates that
distinguish infection from zoonotic disease in humans, and that combine to
predict outbreak size; (4) Fit mathematical models (theory) to empirically
observed patterns to derive potential underlying processes; (5) Investigate
paradigmatic eco-epidemiological mechanisms through which empirically observed
traits of hosts, pathogens, and changing environments influence transmission
processes and disease dynamics.