* 1717178
* CHS: Small: Physically-Based Simulation of Strand-Liquid Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Eitan Grinspun, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 353,995.00

This project develops algorithms that predict the dynamics of liquids
interacting with thin flexible strands. The interaction of strands with each
other, and with liquids, is a fundamental physical consideration in myriad
contexts. Therefore, the development of computer algorithms that can predict the
physics of liquid-strand interaction has the potential to spur advances in many
important scientific and engineering fields of investigation. New algorithms are
needed to improve realism in virtual reality, one of the grand challenges in
engineering as recognized by the National Academy of Engineering, and also to
advance important problems in biology, transoceanic communications, robotics,
graphical animation, and industrial product design. A fundamental challenge
addressed by this project is accounting for the many ways in which liquids and
strands interact. These interactions involve numerous physical ingredients at
distinct spatiotemporal scales. Efficient integration of these components in
numerical algorithms remains an important and challenging problem. Solving this
problem will involve development of algorithms that model complex, multi-scale,
multi-physics systems. The process of designing such algorithms will itself
produce new insights transferrable across scientific, engineering, and creative
disciplines. Students trained by this project will become highly skilled in
developing, extending, and harnessing numerical and graphical algorithms for
applications spanning the natural sciences and engineering. The investigators
will encourage participation from underrepresented groups at the doctoral,
masters, and undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies
numerical modeling of liquid-strand interactions involving the consideration of
multiple physical ingredients, including strand elasticity, liquid inertia,
capillary action, wetting-induced tribological changes, inter-strand contact and
friction, as external forces like gravity, and dimensionless groups, at multiple
spatiotemporal scales, and over transient periods. Unlike existing methods that
model certain specific processes in isolation, this project emphasizes broad-
purpose simulation of liquid-strand interaction. This focus requires thoughtful
selection of a computer model for each physical ingredient, as well as special
attention to compatibility between choices, so that reconciliation of all the
ingredients in different combinations becomes tractable. In particular, this
project will be carried out with two major thrusts, namely, the numerical
modeling of strands interacting with Newtonian and Non-Newtonian fluids. These
thrusts will also crosscut research on robust simulation of hair contacts and
performance acceleration for interactive simulation.