* 1717969
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Secure and Reliable Network Tomography in Wireline and Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zhuo Lu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Today's networks, such as the Internet, cellular networks, and the Internet of
Things, provide ubiquitous wired or wireless connections over large areas.
Secure and reliable operations are among the most important objectives in these
networks. Network tomography has become a promising framework for accurate
monitoring of network operation status, which is vital to ensure an efficient
and reliable network environment. However, this measurement process can be
exploited by malicious attackers to generate falsified, misleading measurement
or monitoring results, which significantly affects follow-on network operations
based on these results, and accordingly degrades the operational reliability and
health of today's networks. The goal of this project is to analyze security
vulnerabilities, understand potential security attack strategies and their
impact, and design effective defense mechanisms against such attacks. The
research in this project will extend the technical knowledge of security
vulnerabilities, attacks and defense during network measurement. The project
will also offer undergraduate students opportunities to gain research
experiences in network measurement and security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on investigating a new class of security attacks, called
measurement integrity attacks, during the measurement process in network
tomography. Unlike conventional data integrity problems that can be usually
protected by standard security methods (e.g., encryption and authentication), a
key challenge in measurement integrity attacks is that the network event data
(e.g., packet transmission/delivery timings and loss) during measurement is not
protected by standard security methods, but can be easily manipulated by an
inside attacker. This project aims at (i) creating the theoretical foundation to
analyze the feasibility and impact of measurement integrity attacks with
different attack strategies in wireline and wireless scenarios, (ii) designing
robust attack detection and localization methods, and analyzing the
effectiveness of such countermeasures, (iii) investigating efficient management
methods for network measurement to increase the attack resilience in a network,
and (iv) conducting comprehensive evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness
of attack countermeasures in both wireline and wireless networks.