* 1717607
* SHF: Small: Enabling Software Engineering Virtual Assistant Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Collin McMillan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 407,218.00

The objective of this research project is to address key barriers in adapting
natural language processing techniques to problems in creating virtual
assistants for software engineering. Virtual assistants such as Siri, Cortana,
and Alexa are claiming an increasing role in computing for everyday tasks, but
multiple barriers prevent existing virtual assistant technology from being
applied to software engineering tasks. The long-term goal of the project is that
virtual assistants will improve productivity for software engineers.

This proposal targets two of those barriers: 1) conversation analysis and
modeling, and 2) reference expression generation. The first of these problems,
in a nutshell, is that experiments in natural language modeling conversations
tend to cover topics with similar outcomes, while conversations about software
may have a much wider range of possible outcomes. The second problem is that
much research in natural language processing is focused on how humans refer to
physical objects that have attributes that are universally preferred while in
contrast, software artifacts tend not to have measurable attributes that people
use as descriptions. The chief broader impact is an application to assistive
technology for persons who are visually impaired. Virtual assistants have the
potential to alleviate barriers-to-entry into computing careers faced by
visually impaired persons by creating a voice interface for answering software
development questions.