* 1717899
* AF: Small: Duality-based tools for simple vs. optimal mechanism design and applications to cryptocurrency
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Seth Weinberg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 466,000.00

Traditionally, we think of algorithms as "processing an input" in order to
"produce an output." For example, imagine a firm trying to allocate various
resources among its employees: It might solicit from each employee how each
resource affects their productivity (the "input"), and allocate the resources in
a way to maximize the total production (the "output"). When each user has the
same goal (maximize the firm's productivity), the traditional algorithmic
paradigm perfectly captures the firm's objective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What if
instead we wish to model a cloud computing service allocating various resources
among its users? Now, the goals of the individual users (maximize their own
productivity) are misaligned with that of the service. Therefore, users may
manipulate whatever algorithm is deployed in order to improve their own
productivity, possibly at the cost of others'. Properly designing solutions for
such domains inevitably requires mechanism design, which makes use of both
algorithmic and game theoretic tools. As part of this project, the PI is
developing a new undergraduate course "Economics and Computation" in order to
provide the next generation of computer scientists with the ability to reason
rigorously about the incentives of users who interact with their
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much prior work prescribes wildly complex
mechanisms which are unusable in practice, motivating prior work of the PI and
others to investigate the theoretical properties of simple mechanisms. The main
research focus of this project is to greatly expand our understanding of how to
appropriately deploy simple mechanisms, via a rigorous theoretical foundation.
As part of this project, the PI will continue giving talks and tutorials about
the specific approach used to obtain these new results, referred to as a
"duality theory." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A secondary focus of this project is to
apply these theoretical foundations to resolve cryptocurrency incentive issues
arising within Bitcoin, an emerging cryptocurrency. While Bitcoin has remained
largely immune to traditional security breaches, numerous incentive issues have
been discovered which could undermine its future security if not properly
addressed. As part of this project, the PI will help broaden participation by
other mechanism designers in this direction via
tutorials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a little more detail, the main research
focus of this project aims to answer questions such as "what properties of a
setting make simple mechanisms appropriate or inappropriate?" or
"Quantitatively, how 'complex' does a mechanism need to be in order to be
'close' to optimal?" The main technical ingredient in this approach is a novel
duality framework recently developed by the PI and co-authors. The secondary
focus aims specifically to make progress towards an incentive compatible
cryptocurrency protocol: one where all users are incentivized to follow the
protocol in earnest, even when their refusal to do so goes undetected. While the
PI's focus will be on the theoretical foundations of such a protocol, any
findings will be followed up by experimental (simulations) or empirical (data)
research as well.