* 1717213
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Massively Scalable Secure Computation Infrastructure Using FPGAs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,999.00

The statistical analysis of behavioral data collected through clinical trials,
surveys, and experimentation, has a long history in academic disciplines like
medicine, sociology, and behavioral economics. The privacy risks inherent in
such studies are often at odds with the tremendous societal benefits resulting
from sharing data among researchers and practitioners. Mining behavioral data at
scale is also a ubiquitous practice among Internet companies, giving rise to
significant privacy concerns. As the potential benefits to society are enormous,
harnessing this data for the better good while protecting privacy is one of the
grand challenges faced by our society today. This project addresses this
challenge by bringing Secure Function Evaluation (SFE) of practical, real-life
data mining and machine learning algorithms into the realm of practicality,
through the development of a highly parallel, efficient, scalable computation
platform for secure computation operating at a massive scale. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a Massively Scalable Secure computation
Infrastructure using FPGAs (MaSSIF), accelerating secure computations over a
cluster of FPGAs and leveraging benefits of both hardware acceleration and
multi-device parallelism. MaSSIF significantly differs from previous
implementations of SFE in that it is the first to accelerate secure computation
primitives: specifically, Garbled Circuits (GC) with FPGAs on such a massively
parallel scale. The algorithms considered are (a) computationally intensive, (b)
non-trivial to parallelize under SFE, and (c) of considerable practical
importance. MaSSIF advances the state of the art both through novel SFE
algorithms, as well as in the design and optimization of accelerated, scalable
systems for SFE.