* 1717300
* SHF: Small: A Theory of Explanation Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Martin Erwig, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 507,897.00

Trust in a computing system depends on understanding its behavior. When users
are confronted with unexpected and unexplained results, they may not be willing
to rely on such a system anymore. With computing systems controlling ever-
increasing parts of our lives, it is important to ensure that they are
accountable and can justify their decisions and actions. For example, we want to
know how a decision support system arrived at its suggestion for a particular
health-care plan or why a self-driving car could not avoid an accident. Despite
this need for understanding computing systems, few systems today explain their
behavior to their users. This research explores the nature of explanations and
how they can be employed in the creation of computing systems that can explain
their behavior to programmers and users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Based on an
analysis of the nature of explanations and their properties, this research
explores operations for the composition and transformation of explanations and
the alignment with computations. Part of the research is the development of
criteria to judge the quality of explanations and develop guidelines for the
design and implementation of explanation languages. Altogether, this research
produces a theory of explanation languages. The development of example
explanation languages as suggested by the developed theory and their evaluation
according to the explanation quality criteria supports the assessment of the
research progress. The broader impact of this project includes support for
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students who will carry the ideas
developed in this project out into the world. Moreover, a theory of explanations
and a framework for systematically adding explanations to computing systems
empowers software developers to make their products more widely understandable
and trustworthy, which ultimately enhances the acceptance of new technologies in
society. This research leads to methods and tools that affect the design of
future software. Given the importance of software in all aspects of our lives
and the growing need for understanding its behaviors, the middle- and long-term
practical impact of this research can be enormous.