* 1717314
* CIF:Small:Collaborative Research:Codes for Storage with Queues for Access
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Emina Soljanin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 317,228.00

Large volumes of data, which are being collected for the purpose of knowledge
extraction, have to be reliably, efficiently, and securely stored. Retrieval of
large data files from storage has to be fast. Large-scale cloud data storage and
distributed file systems have become the backbone of many applications such as
web searching, e-commerce, and cluster computing. Cloud services are implemented
on top of a distributed storage layer that acts as a middleware to the
applications, and also provides the desired content to the users, whose
interests range from performing data analytics to watching movies. Users of
cloud systems demand that their content and services be readily available and
their data be reliably stored. Although there are apparent connections and
trade-offs between these two objectives, so far they have been addressed mostly
separately. The proposed research will characterize the interplay between
reliable data storage and fast data access, and develop methods to jointly
optimize these two main objectives of cloud storage. The project team will
develop the methodology for design, analysis, and performance evaluation of a
broad range of techniques for distributed storage that enable high reliability,
robustness, and fast data retrieval. The research team will also develop schemes
for storage and distributed computing which will optimize both reliability and
the latency of data access. The methodology developed in the course of this
project will allow the system operators to make their content and services
readily available to users and support delay-sensitive applications ranging from
individual video streaming to using online collaborative tools. This research
will minimize the energy requirements of data centers, which have increased
massively in recent years. The project will contribute to the broader areas of
coding theory, information theory, and queueing theory, and open new ways of
cross-pollination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on efficient data
access in distributed file systems that employ codes for reliable and efficient
storage. Users of cloud systems demand that their content and services be
readily available and their data be reliably stored. Although there are apparent
connections and trade-offs between these two objectives, thus far they have been
addressed mostly separately. This proposal follows findings that analyze how
some of today?s solutions for reliable data storage affect the speed of data
download under certain access models. This preliminary research has shown that,
in some scenarios, the coding schemes used for increasing storage reliability
can be further exploited for fast data access, while in others, the coding
schemes that seemingly increase data availability actually fail to provide
efficient access to popular content (so-called ?hot data?). The proposed
research aims to characterize the interplay between reliable data storage and
fast data access, and develop methods to jointly optimize these two main
objectives of cloud storage. The proposed research will first identify and
design schemes for coded-data access and derive (bounds on and estimates of) the
expected download time for these schemes. Regardless of which data access scheme
is used, the expected download time will depend on realistic service models as
well as the distributed system service capacity provisioning and allocation
schemes, which are then addressed. The work will also focus on the connections
between the proposed research and the areas of efficient distributed computing
and reduction in data center energy consumption. Preliminary results indicate
that these areas are closely connected and the techniques developed for one area
can benefit other areas.