* 1717801
* SaTC: TTP: Small: Easy Email Encryption
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jason Nieh, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,999.00

Encryption is not used as widely as it should be, especially for email. One
reason is that it's very hard to use; study after study has shown that email
users, especially senders, cannot use email encryption correctly. All too often,
email is sent unencrypted or encrypted to the wrong recipient, without the
sender even realizing it. The essential problem is the certificate: recipients
may not have one, or senders may not know how to find it. This project addresses
these problems in two ways. First, it makes certificate generation and selection
automatic and transparent; when a sender tries to transmit an email message, the
recipient's site automatically generates the certificate and returns it to the
sender's email client; that program in turn uses the certificate to encrypt the
email. Second, when email arrives unencrypted, the recipient's mail client
encrypts it with a locally generated key, thus obviating any need for the sender
to know or do anything.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The schemes rest on one fundamental
principle: a significant reason for the complexity of cryptography is that it
tries to defend against extremely powerful adversaries. This provides strong
protection, but at the expense of usability. The approach of this project is to
assume a somewhat less capable adversary; in turn, it achieves a significant
reduction in complexity. For automatic key distribution, the sender's email
client consults the recipient's site's Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
(LDAP) database. If a certificate already exists; it is returned and used for
encryption; if it does not, a key pair and certificate are generated. The
certificate is stored in the database and returned to the querier; the private
key is passed to the recipient. The system also implements receiver-controlled
email encryption: when email is received, a modified Internet Message Access
Protocol (IMAP) client downloads the message, encrypts it with a locally
generated key, and replaces the original email with an encrypted version. This
functionality can be incorporated into a standard email client or it can be done
via a standalone daemon. Either way, there is no key distribution problem nor
any need for sender action. The emails are not protected in transmission, except
by Transport Layer Security (TLS); however, they are protected for their likely
long lifetime in an IMAP store. If the email had been encrypted by the sender,
it is decrypted and then re-encrypted; the same can be done with messages
protected by a locally generated key. This allows for key and algorithm refresh,
again protecting email in storage.