* 1717373
* SHF:Small:Cooperative Garbage Collection for Big Data and Server Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Samuel Guyer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2021
* USD 447,031.00

Increasingly, critical parts of our computing infrastructure need to process
huge quantities of data, and do so quickly and efficiently. These so-called "big
data" applications range from familiar Internet search engines to industrial
installations, such as factory and farm monitoring. Detailed environmental
sensing for agriculture, for example, can generate many gigabytes of data per
day for a single farm. The demands of these new applications differ
substantially from the conventional programs that have shaped our existing
computing systems. As a result, system support does not always serve these
applications well, resulting in poor performance or increased resource
requirements. The goal of this project is to study big data applications in
detail and develop new system-level software to better support them. The
project's broader significance and importance are that more data will be able to
be processed more quickly and with less computing hardware, reducing costs and
improving responsiveness for a wide array of applications.

The technical focus of this project is on improving support for big data
applications in the Java virtual machine, specifically, in the garbage
collector. The intellectual merits are derived from a three-part approach to the
problem. The first involves using the project's GC tracing tool to study the
memory patterns of big data and server applications in order to quantify and
characterize them. The second part involves designing a set of configurable GC
mechanisms, which allow applications to tailor memory management support to
their specific needs. The third part is an industrial-strength implementation
that is used to evaluate real workloads, and that is available to other
researchers and to practitioners.

The project is releasing the developed tools as open source and is building a
user community around the tools by ensuring that interested researchers are able
to contribute to the codebase. This aspect is of special interest to the
software cluster in NSF's Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, which provides
co-funding for this award.