* 1717065
* SHF:CSR:Small: Perpetuum Mobile: Orchestrating the Provisioning of Pervasive Resources for Emerging Mobile Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Eli Tilevich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 532,000.00

This project develops Perpetuum Mobile, a unified framework that unburdens
mobile developers from using dissimilar, low-level programming interfaces to
access external resources required for the efficient execution of emerging
mobile applications. The ever increasing computational power of mobile devices
is being surpassed by the even faster growing resource demands of mobile
applications. These demands can be effectively fulfilled by using distributed
resources, provided by cloud servers, desktop computers, or other mobile
devices. However, existing approaches for accessing the external resources fail
to provide a unified and uniform avenue for integrating heterogeneous and
pervasive resources with emerging mobile applications. Mobile developers have no
choice but to use dissimilar programming interfaces and protocols through
software abstractions that cannot effectively meet the requirements of mobile
users and developers as well as device owners and administrators. To address
this problem, Perpetuum Mobile selects devices that best satisfy the
requirements, deploys the external resources on any selected network-connected
device on-demand, and provides a uniform access to the
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate technical objective of this project
is to make it as straightforward, efficient, reliable, and secure for mobile
applications to access the resources hosted by any network-connected device as
it is currently to access standard web services. To meet the execution
requirements of mobile applications, Perpetuum Mobile evolves the microservices
pattern: it carefully curates microservices and deploys them at runtime by using
a new software infrastructure component that combines features of mobile
application markets and service repositories. It further identifies the most
suitable service-providing device efficiently by applying a lattice model for
expressing requirements, and a weighted distance based selection heuristic.
Finally, this project identifies and seeks solutions for the security and
privacy problems that threaten the safety of the developed execution model. By
providing seemingly unlimited resources, the technologies created under the
auspices of this project will form the foundation for the next generation of
mobile, IoT, and wearable applications. The project will recruit a diverse group
of participants, while making the created technologies publicly available for
adoption, training, and experimentation.