* 1717132
* CSR:NeTS:Small:GigaPaxos: System Support for Group-Scalable, Reconfigurable Replica Coordination
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Arun Venkataramani, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

This project is developing a cloud computing technology called GigaPaxos that
enables Internet services to be dynamically moved close to their users. For
example, imagine you and your friend jointly editing a shared document or
playing your favorite online game at a WiFi-enabled cafe. Wouldn't it be
convenient if the document or game server magically moved to a "nano-data
center" located right at the WiFi access point ensuring local-area-network-like
fast performance and resilience to outages in Internet connectivity or data
centers? GigaPaxos promises to realize this vision to bring these low-latency
and fault-tolerance benefits to any mobile cloud service with minimal
programming effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key intellectual merit of this
project lies in dramatically increasing "group scalability" or the ability to
maintain a very large number of independent consensus instances, one each for
each lightweight fault-tolerant principal as small as a distributed counter, a
user's calendar, a single record in a key-value store, etc. GigaPaxos allows
each consensus instance to consume no more than a few hundred bytes; enables
developers to programmatically sprinkle and reconfigure lightweight replicas of
services in accordance with resource management, performance, or availability
objectives; enables flexible consistency semantics; enables byzantine fault-
tolerance support to accommodate untrusted machines; and facilitates a number of
realistic end-to-end application case studies to validate ease-of-use and user-
perceived quality of experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this project include new course curriculum on distributed systems targeting
senior undergraduates and Masters students; a computer science diversity and
enrollment effort targeting University of Massachusetts Amherst undergraduates
as well as high school students; an aggressive dissemination plan involving
fostering a vibrant open-source community to help sustain GigaPaxos beyond the
project's duration; and quantitative user- and developer-centric usability case
studies that will help improve GigaPaxos and potentially simplify distributed
systems development in the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
researchers will host the open-source code repository at
https://github.com/MobilityFirst/gigapaxos and documentation and research
publications at https://gigapaxos.io for the duration of the project and
indefinitely beyond that contingent on community interest.