* 1717473
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Understanding and Improving Implicit Coordination in Peer Production Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Nickerson, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2021
* USD 363,783.00

This research will apply knowledge about coordination mechanisms that was gained
in biology to better understand and to improve coordination in peer production
using information and communication technologies. Peer production has emerged as
an important economic force. It produces knowledge infrastructure that underlies
many aspects of educational and research institutions. Thus, ways of furthering
peer production may have broad impacts on the infrastructure that supports
invention, and in turn on the economy. More generally, collaborative editing is
used in most industries that manage knowledge, and so progress on this front may
have impacts in corporations, partnerships, non-profits, and government
institutions. The research will not only seek an increased understanding of peer
production but also will build tools and interfaces that seek to improve the
collective creativity of online communities. Models, data sets, and accompanying
simulations will be built for two purposes: as explicit forms of knowledge for
reuse by other researchers, and as materials for education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will proceed through a set of observational studies
and experiments, to explore how coordination mechanisms that have been
discovered through studies in the field of biology may provide useful insights
into human behavior. Recent studies have indicated that coordination in open
source and peer production networks can be explained at least in part by
stigmergy, a process discovered by biologists in which the traces of work become
conditions or signals that generate more work. Peer production is described as
being stigmergic because coordination often happens not through explicit
planning conversations, but through interactions triggered by previous
interactions, all centered on the primary technical artifact, some form of text
or source code. The work will proceed in three phases: (1) performing studies
that examine how interaction rates affect productivity in peer production
networks such as Wikipedia; (2) applying dynamic models from mathematical
biology to peer production, first through an observational study and then
through an experiment, and (3) testing alternative interfaces for peer
production and applying the findings to other collaborative editing
environments.