* 1717834
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Dispersed Real-time Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Abhishek Chandra, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 08/31/2022
* USD 258,000.00

Recent years have seen an explosion of data produced by a wide variety of mobile
applications, sensors, and Internet of Things (IoT) devices spread across
multiple geographic locations. This data must be aggregated and analyzed to gain
real-time insights across several domains. There has also been a dramatic
increase in the heterogeneity of the computing platform: compute and storage
resources are available at end-user devices and data centers at the edge of the
Internet, as well as at centralized clouds. This project proposes algorithms and
architectures for leveraging such a dispersed computing platform to perform
real-time processing of large volumes of data. Gaining real-time insights from
large volumes of data is at the crux of the digital economy, as information from
users and sensors must be processed quickly to gain immediate actionable
insights. This project aims to make such insights feasible leading to greater
productivity and user satisfaction. Data science and analytics is a key area of
workforce demand in the US. The proposed educational and outreach activities
include new course material and Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
programs targeted to provide greater exposure in this area. This project also
includes strong outreach initiatives to attract both women and under-represented
minorities to data analytics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes a two-level architecture for a dispersed real-time analytics system
across a large number of autonomous resource providers (ARPs): a global
subsystem that allocates resources end-to-end across multiple resource
providers, and a local subsystem that schedules resources within each ARP. The
global resource allocation process introduces the notion of an aggregation tree
that is used for discovering, allocating, and coordinating resources across
multiple ARPs. The local resource allocation process orchestrates the movement
of computation and data within an ARP. Across both levels, techniques for
dealing with dynamic variability in resources and resilience to failure are
investigated. All software developed as a result of this project will be clearly
documented and open-sourced. For any datasets collected from public sources,
sufficient meta-data will be published to enable others to reuse the data for
their own purposes. The technical reports and papers produced by the project
will be published and shared with the general public. The information generated
by the project will be maintained, preserved, and made available for the
duration required by NSF. A comprehensive website will provide access to this
information. The website URL is: http://geo-anal.cs.umn.edu.