* 1717973
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Easily Adapting Apps to Diverse Wearable Form Factors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Aruna Balasubramanian, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2020
* USD 284,497.00

With the advent of many small, inter-connected devices - from appliances to
wearable computers - the vision of ubiquitous computing appears increasingly
tractable. The key obstacle is software development effort. Currently, a
programmer must write a substantial amount of code for each different device
form factor, such as smart phones, smart watches, and smart glasses. The
research objective of this proposal is to demonstrate that a combination of
techniques from Operating Systems, Human Computer Interaction, and Programming
Languages can significantly reduce the programmer effort in adapting
applications to different form factors. The developer writes an application for
one form factor, and then specifies a simple metaprogram to extend the
application to additional form factors. The UIWear system proposed in this
project compiles the metaprogram to effectively and efficiently extend the smart
phone application to different form factors. UIWear has the potential to
transform the wearable application market by: (a) reducing the barrier for
development and (b) intelligently offloading computation between the smart phone
and the wearable device. Ubiquitous computing has the potential to dramatically
improve many aspects of life, including healthcare, commerce, and education.
Unfortunately, the widening range of different devices also introduces an
equally large range of different and complex programming models' creating an
obstacle between good ideas and end users. This proposal, if successful, will
significantly simplify development of ubiquitous apps, making these platforms
available to a wide range of developers. The work on augmenting accessibility
services is independently useful to design new applications for the visually
impaired. The software designed as part of this project will be released on a
public site: https://github.com/sbunetsys. Electronic data will be archived
internally. All data will be kept for at least 5 years after publication; likely
longer, depending on its size and outside interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will advance the state-of-the-art in three key areas. First, it will
explore new models for abstracting and refactoring graphical user interfaces
(GUIs) for a wide range of form factors. The research approach is to identify an
intermediate, lowest-common-denominator-style representation of the GUI that has
enough details to allow the GUI to be repositioned, transformed, and scaled, but
is simple enough that it can be rendered natively on any device display. Second,
the UIWear framework will design new constraint optimization strategies to find
the optimal UI that satisfies the limitations of the new form factor while
leveraging the unique capabilities of the form factor. Third, the UIWear
framework will use new language-level analysis techniques to guide programmers
in placing computation across multiple devices.&lt;br/&gt;