* 1717064
* CSR:Small: Enabling Sensor-Rich Vehicular Applications with Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Brian Noble, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,387.00

This project is developing methodologies and systems that support sensor-rich
vehicular applications by offloading computation to edge compute resources
located at roadside and embedded within cellular networks. The modern vehicle
has cameras, microphones, location and positioning sensors that all supplement
detailed monitoring of vehicle motion and operation. These sensors can supply
data for advanced applications, such as personal driving assistants, automated
road hazard detection, and augmented display of driving data (e.g., highlighting
turn-by-turn directions or available parking on the vehicle windshield).
However, sensor-rich applications also require substantial computing power that
is unavailable in the vehicle. These applications cannot leverage cloud
resources because the latency of communicating with remote data centers is too
high and the bandwidth available over wide-area networks is too limited.
Instead, this project is supporting sensor-rich applications by offloading their
computation to nearby servers located at the network edge. This work has the
potential to enable applications with great societal benefit. Sensor-rich
vehicular applications promise to improve driving efficiency; for example, by
reducing congestion and idling time by guiding drivers directly to available
parking spots. These applications can also substantially improve road safety;
for example, by providing automated, crowd-sourced road hazard detection. The
project is prototyping these applications and developing the infrastructure
required for their deployment. The research results, traces of vehicular
applications and environments, and open-source software artifacts developed by
this project are available at: http://pervasive.eecs.umich.edu/vehicular-
edge.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since vehicles will remain near edge resources
for only limited periods of time, the project is creating methods for fast
handover of state and computation from one edge resource to another. Vehicle
mobility introduces considerable variability in network and service performance,
so the project is investigating how the principled use of redundancy can improve
average and worst-case response time. Finally, to support applications with
extremely tight time bounds, the project is using speculative execution to
hypothesize multiple possible futures that depend on vehicle speed and
direction, calculate results based on those futures, and then select the
appropriate response based upon actual vehicle motion during the time when
calculations were made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;