* 1717186
* CHS: Small: Designing Next Generation Digital Employment and Recruitment Intervention Tools: Identifying Technical Features to Support Underserved Job Seekers in the U.S.
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Tawanna Dillahunt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2022
* USD 531,729.00

The goal of this research is to understand the requirements for and to begin
building next-generation information technology tools and applications that
address the distinct needs of underserved U.S. job seekers, who live in low-
socioeconomic regions, have limited education, or have low income. Many of
today's technologies facilitate the needs of relatively affluent populations
with very limited consideration of the needs of underserved populations. This
leads to offline inequality of opportunity transferring to online means of job
application. As a result, underserved job seekers may lack the confidence,
skills, and economic means necessary to make use of mainstream technologies used
to support the employment process. They face obstacles such as articulating job
skills and using these skills to develop resumes, developing educational
pathways to gain needed job skills, and giving a successful interview. As non-
technical employers and companies increase their use of mainstream online
recruitment and interviewing tools, the digital recruitment divide may widen and
exacerbate the employment plight of underserved populations, unless research
like this project finds ways to mitigate the problems and adapt information
technology to serve the needs of this significant part of the workforce. This
study will fill a gap in the research on the challenges of using digital
recruitment and employment tools among underserved populations and will
ultimately lead to better digital employment and recruitment
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply the Theory of Planned
Behavior as a perspective and guide for evaluating digital employment
applications. The research results will expand the theory to include digital
barriers and constraints faced by underserved job seekers and stakeholders such
as managers and staff at job centers who support them. Well-known human-computer
interaction methods will be used to iteratively build and enhance three
alternative digital employment and recruitment applications to evaluate their
impact on job search attitudes, subjective norms (or social support) and
perceived behavioral control (or self-efficacy) - all factors that could lead to
job attainment. These applications are: (1) SkillsExtractor, a proof-of-concept
prototype that uses an open dataset provided by the Open Skills Project to
extract and identify job skills from past job title searches; (2) Interview4, an
existing non-mainstream tool that enables job seekers to conduct mock interviews
and send these interviews to friends for feedback; and (3) Review-Me, a pilot
application that the research team built, deployed, and evaluated to enlist
social support by connecting job seekers to volunteers for resume review. This
project will conclude with an effort to evaluate the tools as well as to
identify and report challenges that would benefit from policy intervention. This
research will provide important theoretical insights about what technical
features are effective and ineffective in underserved populations, and why.