* 1717028
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Securing Web-to-Mobile Interface Through Characterization and Detection of Malicious Deep Links
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Danfeng Yao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

With the wide adoption of mobile devices, mobile websites and applications
(apps) have become the primary interfaces to access online content. Mobile deep-
linking, a key mechanism to index mobile content, has been widely used to enable
users to navigate across websites, search engines and mobile apps and become
instrumental to improving users' online experience. Unfortunately, mobile
deeplinks are designed without security in mind, which allows malicious apps or
websites to launch stealthy attacks to hijack user clicks, steal sensitive
information and perform phishing attacks. With more apps and websites deep-
linked every day, this becomes an emerging security threat to a broad Internet
population. This project is developing methodologies and usable tools to
measure, analyze and secure mobile deeplinks in today's mobile-web
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To first understand the emerging security
threat, the researchers are developing novel measurement frameworks to map out
the empirical connections between mobile apps and the web by automatically
extracting mobile deeplinks from the market-scale apps. In addition, the
researchers are investigating automated techniques to detect deeplink-based
abuse without relying on large-scale ground-truth data. One target approach is
to construct deeplink graphs for apps and websites and explore detection
techniques using semi-supervised learning and trust prorogation schemes.
Finally, the researchers are developing analytics tools to extract context
information from mobile deeplinks to enable intelligent alert systems to
safeguard the deeplink usage. The researchers are investigating the tradeoffs
between security and usability to design safer ways of using deeplinks without
sacrificing the usability.