* 1717871
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Data-driven Approaches for Large-scale Security Analysis of Mobile Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Doina Caragea, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This project investigates how to apply big-data analysis techniques to analyze
mobile apps for the Android platform, for the purpose of accurately identifying
security problems therein. A major challenge is the scale of the problem, with
thousands of new apps entering the online app markets on a daily basis. Current
technologies cannot keep up with the pace of the threats, and malware are
regularly found in both large-scale marketplaces such as the official Google
Play market and in third-party markets. The project adopts a number of advanced
machine learning and data mining techniques to tackle those challenges. The
large number of apps in the markets allows an automated machine learning
algorithm to better capture security-related patterns and trends in the data, so
that it can predict with good accuracy which apps may have security problems.
Those apps are worth the more in-depth and expensive analysis that usually
requires significant human effort. This creates an effective triage to deal with
the scale challenge, and can be used by industry to scale the security vetting
process of mobile apps. Artifacts produced from the research are released in
open source and benefit practitioners. New courses on mobile apps and their
security are developed. Undergraduate students are involved in this research.
Underrepresented groups, including female students, also participate in the
research. The materials developed from the research are used to further enrich
cybersecurity education opportunities in the PIs' multiple outreach platforms in
their institutions, to enable a large student body to benefit from the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project designs solutions to tackle
the unique challenges in applying machine learning for mobile app security
analysis, most of which are due to the big data nature of the problem. A key
scientific challenge faced in mobile app security analysis is the difficulty in
obtaining high-quality ground truth. Many times one has to rely upon imperfect
data in training and evaluation. The research experiments with a number of
approaches to deal with the noise due to the imperfect labels, including semi-
supervised learning algorithms, which can learn from small amounts of labeled
data, or even from positive data only, together with unlabeled data. The project
also explores a novel approach that uses social media information to acquire
additional information to improve the ground truth and/or the prediction
accuracy.