* 1717963
* SHF:Small: Rooting Out Data- and Control-Flow Anomalies in Event-Based Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Nenad Medvidovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Distributed event-based (DEB) software systems are widespread, spanning diverse
domains such as user interfaces, financial markets, logistics, and mobile
applications. Unlike traditional software systems, in DEB systems software
components do not directly interact but rely on brokers to transfer data and
notifications of different events. Consequently, components in DEB systems are
highly decoupled, which yields scalable, easy-to-evolve applications. However,
this flexibility and scalability comes at a price: It is difficult to have an
accurate insight into the structure and functionality of a DEB system, which
makes it difficult to ensure a DEB system's desired behavior and absence of
security vulnerabilities. Many techniques have been developed for dealing with
analogous issues in traditional software systems. However, those techniques
provide inadequate and/or misleading information when applied to DEB systems.
This project is providing a suite of tools for ensuring software correctness,
reliability, and security that are specifically targeted at DEB
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project does so by developing novel program
analysis, runtime monitoring, and visualization techniques that account for the
implicit invocation, concurrency, and ambiguous interfaces inherent in DEB
systems. The project's specific focus is on (1) data-flow anomalies that cause
correctness and reliability issues and (2) data- and control-flow anomalies that
cause security problems. The broader impact of this research is direct: It
provides to engineers in a wide range of important software development domains
analysis and visualization techniques that are comparable to techniques
available in traditional domains. On one hand, the flexibility of DEB systems
bodes well for their continued adoption and expansion. On the other hand, that
adoption is impeded by obstacles in understanding, analyzing, debugging,
evolving, and securing DEB systems. This research presents a significant step in
the direction of providing the necessary remedies and helping to realize the
full potential of DEB systems.