* 1717488
* III: Small: Information Fostering - Being Proactive in Information Seeking
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Chirag Shah, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/29/2020
* USD 515,656.00

People often have difficulty in expressing their information needs. Many times
this results from a lack of clarity regarding the task at hand, or the way an
information or search system works. In addition, people may not know what they
do not know. The former is addressed by search systems by providing
recommendations, whereas there are no good solutions for the latter problem.
Even when a search system makes recommendations, they are limited to suggesting
objects such as queries and documents only. They do not consider providing
suggestions for strategies, people, or processes. This project will address such
problems by investigating the nature of the work a person is doing, predicting
the potential problems they may encounter, and providing help to overcome those
problems. Such a help could be an object such as a document or a query, a
strategy, or a person. This whole process is referred to as Information
Fostering. Beyond creating a general-purpose recommender system, Information
Fostering is an idea for providing proactive suggestions and help to information
seekers. This could allow them to avoid potential problems and capture promising
opportunities in search before it is too late. In order to meet these goals, the
project will carry out three lab studies. Through these studies, a new system
will be created. This system will be integrated in a user's Web browser to
provide real-time assessment of the information seeking process, as well as
recommendations for queries, documents, strategies, and people. The outcomes of
this project will make it possible and easier for a user with even low
information literacy to be able to leverage the power of information. Such users
may use information for multiple life contexts, including healthcare (e.g.
caring for a sick family member), financial well-being (e.g., deciding on an
investment portfolio), work (e.g., reviewing a business proposition), and
education (e.g., compiling a report).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current systems face
challenges in understanding the problems that information seekers face due to
their inability to express their information needs, recognizing a potential
problem during a search episode, and identifying support needed that goes beyond
what a typical search system could provide. Most recommender systems try to
mitigate these problems by suggesting information objects (queries, documents),
disregarding a deeper understanding of the task at hand or the possibility of
recommendations that involve process/strategy, people, and other forms. The
project will advance our understanding of these information-seeking problems at
the task level, and of when and how help could be offered to information
seekers. The offered help would go beyond recommending alternative queries and
documents and would include recommending search strategies. This will be done in
three phases with different user studies: (1) extracting the nature of task,
problems, and help to build Task Model and Problem-Help Model; (2) testing the
validity of Task Model and Problem-Help Model in being able to detect tasks,
problems, and help; and (3) creating an Information Fostering system and
evaluating its effectiveness in various search tasks. There will be three major
intellectual outcomes: (1) Task Model that detects the nature of a search task
using implicit signals such as browsing behaviors; (2) Problem-Help Model that
uses behavioral data and other contextual factors, including the nature of the
task, to explicate possible problems and potential solutions without explicitly
asking from the searchers; and (3) a general-purpose recommender system
framework, called Information Fostering, that proactively creates
recommendations in real time for enhancing one's information seeking process and
helping one avoid potential problems or grab an opportunity before it is too
late. The results from this project will be disseminated through the project
website, which will include technical reports, publications, and links to
datasets and open-source software developed in this project.