* 1717320
* AF:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Computational Representations for Design and Fabrication of Developable Surfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Keenan Crane, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 258,000.00

This project develops mathematical representations and computer algorithms for
three-dimensional forms that can be assembled from a collection of flat pieces
without incurring material stress, known as piecewise developable geometry.
These will drive new developments in the emerging industry of advanced 3D
manufacturing: Not only can developable geometry can easily be cut from a rich
array of thin flat materials like plywood or sheet metal, but it can also
provide a novel geometric approach to tool path planning that improves the
efficiency and accuracy of shapes fabricated via computer-controlled flank
milling. Such processes offer a competitive advantage for manufacturing in the
US by reducing cost, increasing complexity of fabricated forms, and automating
tasks previously only achievable by hand (e.g., robotic folding of developable
forms). A fundamental issue addressed by the research is automatic approximation
of an arbitrary curved surface by a small number of developable pieces---at
present this process must be carried out laboriously by expert engineers and
designers, severely limiting the scope and impact of developable manufacturing
processes. More broadly, algorithmic models of developable geometry enrich basic
understanding in the area of discrete differential geometry, which seeks to
reformulate classical geometric knowledge from a discrete, algorithmic point of
view. This area provides a crucial link between modern geometric theory and
industrial/applied applications that need to incorporate data and computation,
and students trained in this project will be well-equipped to contribute in 3d
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on foundations from
smooth and discrete differential geometry: rather than view discrete meshes as
mere numerical approximations, the unifying goal is to develop data structures
that directly encode the most salient features of piecewise developable
geometry. Two key observations are that (i) flattenability alone is not a
sufficient characterization for discrete developability, often leading to nasty
"crumpling" behavior and (ii) the curvature of a piecewise developable surface
is encoded entirely by the shape of its patch boundaries, a fact often exploited
in garment design. These observations lead to two primary thrusts, namely (i)
representations for discrete developability that naturally avoid crumpling by
guaranteeing the existence of discrete "ruling lines," and (ii) efficient
algorithms for developable surface design based on sparse descriptions of
curvature along critical feature curves. A cross-cutting theme is physical
considerations for fabrication, e.g., translation between simple geometric
models and material/constitutive properties relevant to the production of
physical artifacts.