* 1717108
* NeTS: Small: Principles and Protocols for Traffic-Insensitive Performance  in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Bin Li, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 317,367.00

The rapid growth of smart phones as well as other intelligent wireless devices
generates significant amount of diversified traffic ranging from sending warning
messages to watching online videos over wireless networks such as cellular
networks, Internet of Things, and cyber-physical systems. Such wide range of
traffic calls for the development of wireless algorithms with traffic-
insensitive performance in the sense that the network performance (such as
throughput and latency) does not depend on the distribution of network traffic
except the mean traffic load. This is tremendously valuable in the presence of
highly heterogeneous wireless applications. The goal of this project is to
enable the wireless algorithm design to be robust to the diversified service
demands and meet the stringent performance needs of future wireless systems.
This research project will also be closely integrated with PI's undergraduate
and graduate courses, and will provide hand-on experiences for undergraduate and
high school students in wireless networking
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to establish efficient,
adaptable and scalable algorithms that are robust to the diverse wireless
traffic penetrating almost every wireless system. This calls for new dynamic
algorithms and analytical framework for both delay and short-term fairness
insensitivity, which are extremely important for real-time applications. Towards
this end, the project will answer the following eight questions that address key
elements and challenges of popular wireless systems: (1) For a realistic model
of flow arrivals and departures, is there an algorithm that achieves good
throughput, delay and short-term fairness insensitivity? (2) How can such an
algorithm be implemented in a multi-channel base station? (3) How can such an
algorithm be implemented in the uplink with limited coordination by the base
station? (4) Is it possible to implement such an algorithm in a purely
distributed way? (5) What are good mathematical models to study the delay
insensitivity of such algorithms to flow-size distributions? (6) Does the
algorithm have good short-term fairness performance? (7) What are good models
for arrivals and departures of flows and how do they affect the performance of
the algorithm? (8) How does one validate the algorithms using laboratory
experiments? The novelty in the proposed research lies in the development of
efficient, robust and easily implementable scheduling algorithms in various
wireless systems as well as the methodology for analyzing both delay and short-
term fairness insensitivity.