* 1717033
* CIF:Small:Network Tomography and Resource Allocation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Yariv Ephraim, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,998.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;Communication networks, including the Internet and cellular
networks, provide an infrastructure for information and data exchange that is
critical to modern society. As networks have increased in size and complexity to
meet the growing demands of users and new multimedia applications, they have
also become more difficult to manage. Consequently, evaluating the performance
of a network and allocating resources to improve performance are extremely
challenging tasks. This project will develop an approach to evaluate the
performance of a network through endpoint traffic measurements and by sending
probe packets through the network. This approach is referred to as network
tomography, since the concept is similar to medical tomography, whereby an image
of an organ is reconstructed through virtual sectioning using some form of
penetrating wave, e.g., X-rays or ultrasound. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
methods for network tomography do not scale well with the size of the network
and cannot provide estimates of network performance in real-time. The project
will investigate new methods that will be capable of evaluating the performance
of large networks in real-time through endpoint measurements and statistical
analysis. This information will in turn be used to allocate resources within the
network in order to enhance network performance. The ultimate goal of the
project is to develop a framework, based on new methodologies for network
tomography, to alleviate congestion and service degradation in communication
networks such as the Internet, data storage networks, future cellular networks,
as well as transportation networks. The project will advance the field of
networking via the development of real-time and scalable methods for network
tomography and resource allocation, which will impact society through
significant improvements in the performance, efficiency, and reliability of
communication and transportation networks. The project will also involve the
development of an educational software tool to simulate and graphically depict
the operation of a network, with knobs to allow the user to control the
allocation of network resources and visualize the effect of such allocations on
network performance. Students, including some from underrepresented groups, will
gain valuable experience from implementing algorithms, running computer
simulations, and conducting empirical validation with real data from the
Internet and cellular networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2:&lt;br/&gt;Performance evaluation and resource allocation of communication
networks are extremely challenging tasks due to the tremendous scale and
complexity of modern networks. Traditional approaches to network performance
evaluation include queueing theory and computer simulation. In this project, a
framework for network tomography of both traffic rate and delay on network links
from endpoint traffic measurements, will be developed and investigated, with
application to network resource allocation. Gallager's model for minimum delay
routing in a network will be used to formulate the joint problem of traffic rate
and delay estimation, and derive information that can be applied directly to
resource allocation. A new approach to traffic rate tomography, which has the
potential to improve upon the accuracy, computational efficiency, and generality
of earlier methodologies will be explored. A recent approach to delay network
tomography based on parameter estimation of a partially observable bivariate
Markov chain model will be further developed in the context of the proposed
framework. A major focus of the project will be on developing efficient online
algorithms for network tomography and resource allocation that can be applied to
improve network performance in near real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
investigations are grounded in the theory and estimation of multivariate Markov
processes, and explore the interplay between the existing theories of queueing
networks and statistical inference. The research will involve the development of
new models for network tomography, recursive estimation algorithms, and
empirical validation. The proposed research will be applicable to the
performance evaluation of a wide range of networks, including computer networks,
cellular networks, and transportation networks. The research will contribute to
new mechanisms to improve the quality-of-service and quality-of experience for
users of the Internet and next generation wireless infrastructure. The proposed
approach to network tomography will also help optimize the planning of
transportation systems.