* 1717415
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Discerning and Recommending Context-Specific Best Practices in DevOps-Oriented Software Development
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Bogdan Vasilescu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 335,351.00

This project is a scientific study of modern software development practices,
which has become known as DevOps. The DevOps culture seeks to bring changes into
software production as quickly as possible without compromising software
quality, primarily by automating the processes of building, testing, and
deploying software. In practice, DevOps engineers can choose between a multitude
of tools, including configuration management, cloud-based continuous
integration, and automated deployment. Often individual tools are used without
much guidance on how they fit in the big picture, and questions about best
practices abound in online forums. However, existing answers are typically
generic rules of thumb or dated advice, mostly based on third-party experiences,
often non-applicable to the specific context. In fact, current empirical
evidence on the effectiveness of DevOps practices is much fragmented and
incomplete. State-of-the-art decision-making support, based on hard data and
informed advice, can help DevOps engineers discern the best choices and
practices for their tasks.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
grounded in contingency theory, where the emphasis is on task context when
reasoning about the effectiveness of practices. The goal of this project is to
learn and convey structured, context-dependent analytics on best practices in
DevOps environments, by mining and analyzing data from the collaborative coding
platform GitHub. Using established and novel qualitative and quantitative
techniques, this research will: (1) identify clusters of software projects that
share similar context variables; and (2) within a context of interest, discern
the conditions under which DevOps practices such as continuous integration are
most (and least) effective. This will result in actionable knowledge and tool
support for DevOps teams, to customize efficient project practices to their
environment, as well as advance the theory and practice of software engineering,
especially as it relates to distributed, fast paced, automation-heavy
environments.