* 1717578
* CIF:Small:Coded Aperture Spectral X-Ray Tomography
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Gonzalo Arce, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 462,000.00

Spectral tomography has emerged as a key imaging modality for medical imaging
and homeland security. It offers material discrimination providing useful cues
for identifying atomic composition, chemical targets, and explosives. It relies
on the principle that the X-ray absorption of different chemical materials has
characteristics that depend on the energy of the X-rays used. Thus, detectors
that can differentiate between X-ray energies make it possible to discriminate
different materials having similar X-ray attenuation properties. Unfortunately,
energy resolving X-ray detectors are prohibitively costly for many applications.
Other detector technologies often trade cost for acquisition speed and, in many
cases, practical limitations require limited angle or subsampled projection
geometries that lead to severe artifacts in image reconstruction. This research
explores coded X-ray illumination projections which can be captured with
standard integrating detectors yet provide information for energy-resolved image
reconstructions. The coded measurements have lower radiation dose. They can also
be multiplexed for robustness in limited angle
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores colored X-ray coded
projections to circumvent current detector limitations. Rather than measuring
objects by the attenuated X-rays, the X-rays are first coded in amplitude and
spectra that modulate the X-ray field in a known pattern, effectively creating
lower-dose structured X-ray bundles that interrogate specific voxels of the
object. Careful design of the coded apertures, their placement, and the
development of fast computational inverse algorithms that exploit the structured
illumination can provide advantages in the application of spectral tomography.
Various computerized tomography (CT) geometries are being considered including
tomosynthesis, fan-beam, and cone-beam. A test-bed for validating the underlying
theoretical concepts is a central part of the project.