* 1717420
* SHF:Small:GOALI:Formal Equivalence Checking for Quasi-Delay-Insensitive Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Scott Smith, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,999.00

Digital integrated circuits (ICs) are designed based on a periodic signal called
the clock, which synchronizes the operation of the components of an Integrated
Circuit (IC) referred to as synchronous circuits. However, the rigidity of
clock-based synchronous design causes the resulting ICs to malfunction in
extreme environments (e.g., very hot/cold, large temperature swings, high
radiation). An alternate approach to IC design is the asynchronous paradigm,
where correct operation is achieved through the use of locally distributed
handshaking protocols instead of a global synchronizing clock. Quasi-Delay-
Insensitive (QDI) asynchronous circuits have been shown to function in extreme
environments and also consume lower power compared to synchronous circuits.
However, designing QDI circuits correctly is more difficult, because their
behavior is much more complex and unconstrained. The goal of this project is to
develop verification methodologies for QDI circuits, which will have a broad
impact, enabling reliable design and therefore more widespread usage of QDI
circuits in extreme environment and low-power Internet of Things (IoT)
applications, such as space exploration, power industry, automobile industry,
wireless sensor networks, etc. The project will have close collaboration with
industry via transfer technology, and plans to prepare students for a career in
the technical fields covered by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
technical approach aims to develop a systematic proof technique that can be used
to establish the functional equivalence of a QDI circuit with its synchronous
counterpart. It is based on formal verification, where mathematical proofs are
used to establish correctness of the design, or find anomalies if the design is
not correct. The proposed approach exploits the fact that synchronous circuits
are much easier to design and verify. Therefore, to verify a QDI circuit, the
previously verified synchronous counterpart will be used as the reference.