* 1717313
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Hybrid Capability-Enforcement for Endpoint-Driven Traffic Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yih-Chun Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The Internet has become a societally transformative technology. Because the
design of the Internet allows any Internet-connected device to send any amount
of traffic to any other Internet-connected device, attackers can send large
volumes of traffic to a victim, overwhelming the ability of the network to carry
legitimate traffic to the victim. When many different devices send such attack
traffic in a coordinated manner, the attack is called a Distributed Denial-of-
Service (DDoS) attack, and is difficult to filter in the current Internet
architecture. This research investigates a new architecture for filtering DDoS
attacks that is efficient, economical, and readily deployable. The proposed
architecture aims to alleviate the burden of maintaining an Internet service in
the presence of DDoS attacks, and to improve the availability of Internet
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed architecture combines a filtering
functionality deployed in the cloud with a network state estimation algorithm
performed with the cooperation of the cloud and the victim server. Traffic is
redirected to the cloud server using DNS; the cloud server then polices each
sender's traffic according to a receiver-selected fair sharing policy. The fair
sharing algorithm uses the bandwidth estimate derived from the network state
estimator. The network state estimator uses capability feedback from the
receiver to estimate the available bandwidth for fair-sharing. This research
expands the proposed architecture to make it more secure, more effective at
catching obvious Denial-of-Service attacks, and more robust against powerful
adversaries. The research will also provide a more through evaluation of the
proposed architecture. The work will advance the understanding of how
incrementally-deployable approaches, deployed based on economic incentives
rather than relying on altruistic deployments, can also provide strong
properties. Specifically, it aims to develop and evaluate a collection of
methods that when fully deployed would provide the same strengths as an approach
like SIBRA, yet be incrementally deployable, providing benefits as each Internet
entity deploys each individual mechanism.