* 1717754
* SHF: Small: Accelerating Graph Processing with Vertically Integrated Programming Model, Runtime and Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Xuehai Qian, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Recently, graph processing received intensive interests due to the increasing
need to understand relationships. For example, in cyber security, the graph
analytics are needed to identify probes on the network. In social media, the
graph analytics are employed to figure out the relationships and influences
between people. In infrastructure monitoring (e.g. smart building), the graph
analytics are crucial in spotting failures based on system dependencies before
they become critical and cause cascading failures. On the other hand, in-memory
graph processing is becoming more appealing due to recent technology advances
(e.g. NDP with 3D integration) that improved the scalability of memory system
with lower cost. Therefore, this research program timely considers graph
processing(which has broad applications) with the emerging trends in the memory
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a vertically
integrated approach involving programming model, runtime system and architecture
to holistically accelerate in-memory graph processing. It contains three
research innovations and cross-stack integration: (1) Reducing data movements
with novel programming model. It will study a new graph processing programming
model,?Two-phase Vertex Program?, designed for PIM that supports a novel
"source-cut" data partition. (2) Batched regular inter-cube communication and
intra-cube locality enhancement. It will examine how to re-organize the
computation to make the inter-cube communications happen in a controlled manner.
This allows batched communication and the overlapping of computation and
communication. To this end, it will study how to partition the cores in the same
cube into two groups (Process and Apply unit) to improve intra-cube memory
access locality. (3) Co-designed locality-aware scheduler and prefetcher. This
project will develop a novel architectural interface so that the software and
architecture could interact. On one side, it provides scheduler the capability
to query the locality information of scheduling candidates to make better
decisions. On the other side, the scheduler could convey the scheduling
decisions to architecture so that even a simple prefetcher can precisely fetch
the data related to the active vertices that will be scheduled soon. The
proposed research will also contribute to society through engaging high-school
and undergraduate students from minority-serving institutions into research,
attracting women and under-represented groups into graduate education, expanding
the computer engineering curriculum with graph processing architectures and
runtime systems, disseminating research infrastructure for education and
training, and collaborating with the industry.