* 1717731
* SHF: Small: A Versatile, Adaptive Network Architecture for Combating Traffic Heterogeneity in Data Centers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Driven by technology advances, massive data centers consisting of tens or even
hundreds of thousands servers have been built as infrastructures by large online
service providers, in which the performance of data center networks plays a
critical role. Traffic in data center networks (DCNs) generally exhibits
tremendous heterogeneous characteristics, at different locations in the network,
among various applications, between distinct companyís implementations, and from
time to time. On the other hand, today's data center networks still lack
sufficient flexibility to handle such huge heterogeneity of traffic in an
efficient way. Meanwhile, as virtualization techniques undergo a profound
development, cloud applications do not directly run on physical hardware or
operating systems. Instead, they are assigned on a simulated operating system
layer which is virtualized from a substrate network. Thus, a single
infrastructure provider can support numerous virtual machines/networks for
different users while keeping each user with a vision that the entire
infrastructure is uniquely occupied by the user. To meet the challenges, this
research designs a versatile network architecture oriented to the ever-
increasing performance demands and heterogeneous traffic characteristics of
today's data centers. The architecture provides an adaptive full-stack paradigm
which includes interconnect topologies, addressing and routing schemes, and
virtualization algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the research
focuses on several closely coupled issues: (1) design a novel, cost-efficient
DCN architecture that can dynamically and systematically handle traffic
heterogeneity in data centers; (2) design the corresponding routing algorithms
for the architecture under unicast and multicast traffic models; (3) develop
efficient network virtualization algorithms in the architecture, including
virtual network embedding, virtual network function placement and virtualization
over geographically distributed DCNs; (4) conduct a comprehensive performance
evaluation through extensive simulations and implementation of the schemes in a
realistic network prototype. The research combines theoretical analysis,
algorithm design, network optimization, simulation and prototyping techniques to
provide a comprehensive working solution that enables high performance next
generation DCNs. This research is expected have a profound impact on fundamental
design principles of future DCNs. The outcome of this research will not only
greatly boost the performance of DCN flexibility and energy efficiency while
keeping low cost, but also facilitate numerous cloud computing applications
currently hosted in data centers. As cloud computing is penetrating into all
aspects of the society, this research will have a broader impact on the society
and help change the world.