* 1717982
* CSR: Small: Algorithms and Abstractions for Efficient Virtual-Memory Streaming and Big-Data Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Dmitri Loguinov, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 487,008.00

As the field stands today, operating systems provide a poor interface for data-
intensive computing, requiring programmers to engage in tedious, non-
reconfigurable, and error-prone code development. These software-engineering
practices often lead to easily exploitable vulnerabilities and devastating
security breaches. This project builds various algorithms and implementations
for a virtual-stream interface that enables our society to develop big-data
software that is more easily managed, simpler to understand, inherently faster,
and less buggy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Operating systems have used virtual memory
and paging for decades; however, user-level applications are still required to
process input/output in blocks of fixed size. This project takes a different
approach by creating a zero-copy streaming abstraction that offers sequential
access to bulk data with unprecedented simplicity, flexibility, and speed. The
outcomes of this research not only improve the internal functionality of
operating systems and hardware, but also permit reuse of existing libraries in
external-memory operation, lead to significantly faster in-place sorting and
inter-thread communication, and pave the way to more scalable database
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project delivers novel system-level
concepts and prototypes that simplify algorithm design, enable faster processing
of large-scale data streams, reduce software cost, and help produce better
technology for the 21st century. The project also engages students at Texas
A&amp;M University in research-intensive education in cross-disciplinary fields,
broadens integration of fundamental research into classroom teaching, mentors
students, and permits related research in the industry and institutions around
the world through publicly shared outcomes of our
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project data will be maintained online for as long as
it is feasible. The shared products include publications, data, software, and
various research artifacts. The project URL is
http://irl.cs.tamu.edu/projects/streams/