* 1717942
* CIF: Small: Blind information measures for waves: a deterministic approach
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Massimo Franceschetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project focuses on the study of signal representation and reconstruction in
the context of sensing and communication. Non-redundant representation of
signals is a key issue to perform sensing efficiently and to achieve optimal
communication rates. In many practical scenarios, one would want to perform
sensing with a small number of measurements, often with partial or incomplete
knowledge of the structure of the signal. Specifically, for signals occupying
disjoint sub-intervals of the spectral band, knowledge of the number and
locations of the sub-bands is typically assumed. This project investigates ways
to relax these assumptions at the cost of performing a slightly larger number of
measurements. There are several potential benefits arising from this research.
Results will lead to insights on optimal sensing and communication
architectures, as well as provide fundamental limits of these architectures. The
project also introduces new mathematical methods and, in laying the foundations
for the wave theory of information, it draws connections between information
theory, functional approximation, and compressed sensing. On the education
front, it involves students in the research, as well as recruitment efforts for
under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan considers a
least-redundant informational description of signals using a deterministic
approach and without assuming any prior spectral knowledge. It provides a new
notion of degrees of freedom that suits both band-limited and multi-band
signals. It also extends this notion to higher dimensions to obtain information-
theoretic bounds for space-time propagating signals. The roots of the project
are in the classical theory of functional approximation and in the determination
of the significant propagation modes of signals. The theory is connected to
recent advancements in compressed sensing, and provides a unifying view of
discrete and continuous signals as well as deterministic and probabilistic
results. The foundational results of the project are relevant to both
communication and remote sensing systems. The information-theoretic approach
provides a baseline for what can be achieved in real systems.