* 1717498
* Predicting the evolution of vector-borne disease dynamics in a changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Robert Fleischer, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2019
* USD 2,498,876.00

This project will advance our understanding of how disease transmission will be
affected by and evolve in response to environmental change. Diseases transmitted
among hosts by small invertebrates such as mosquitoes or ticks (vectors) are on
the rise across the world but our ability to measure and predict risk is
lagging. Predicting vector-borne disease risk requires both an understanding of
how all the species involved are likely to be affected by environmental change
and how those interactions may evolve. The transmission of avian malaria in
native and introduced Hawaiian birds is an ideal system to gain this
understanding. The project will focus on the Hawaiian honeycreepers, a diverse
group that includes many species that are threatened with extinction. Through
the use of historical specimens of both the birds and the malaria parasite, the
project will be able to document and model the evolution of disease tolerance
and resistance over the past 80 years. The model methodology will then be
available for broad application into any disease system in which evolution is
expected to occur in response to shifting environmental conditions. The results
will also be used for management of the bird species in Hawaii. The project will
support undergraduate and graduate student training, and participation of local
high school students.

The agent of avian malaria in Hawaii is a non-native Haemosporidian parasite,
Plasmodium relictum, vectored by mixes of two non-native strains of the mosquito
Culex quinquefasciatus. Avian malaria in Hawaii occurs as a series of replicated
natural experiments in which vector and parasite prevalence vary along
elevational gradients on several islands, and a parallel gradient in tolerance
among some bird hosts has been reported. Although P. relictum was previously
highly virulent to all of the >50 species of Hawaiian honeycreepers, evolution
of tolerance (or resistance) has been observed in at least three species
including the amakihi (Chlorodrepanis sp.). Additionally, there is geographic
variation within and across islands in host species composition, host tolerance,
climate (temperature and precipitation), vector abundance, vector competence,
and pathogen fitness. This project will 1) characterize the genomic signatures
of parasites, hosts and vectors at different elevations replicated across
islands and through time, the latter by using museum specimens; 2) perform
common-garden experiments and experimental infections to assess differences in
competence or virulence among strains of vectors and parasites, respectively; 3)
integrate Aims 1 and 2 in predictive models of the impact of co-evolutionary
changes on vector-borne disease transmission under current and future climate
scenarios. We will use comparative genomics and transcriptomics at multiple
spatial, temporal and experimental scales, and combine Susceptible-Infected-
Resistant (SIR) models with evolutionary game theory to capture the reciprocal
influence of changing populations.