* 1717119
* Rapid deployment of seismic instruments around Wellington, NZ, following the November 13, 2016, magnitude 7.8 Kaikoura earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 11/30/2018
* USD 49,581.00

The purpose of this project is to deploy ten temporary seismic stations in the
Wellington region on New Zealand's North Island. The recorded seismicity will
help constraint the rupture area of the Kaikoura Mw= 7.8 earthquake that
occurred in the northern part of New Zealand?s South Island on November 13,
2016. The main motivation for deploying instruments in this region is the
potential for earthquakes migrating northwards onto or being triggered on the
subduction megathrust located beneath the Wellington area and/or on crustal
faults that cut through the region surrounding the capital of New
Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress change calculations show that the area near
Wellington has been subjected to an increase in earthquake-causing stress. The
plan is to deploy the temporary seismic instruments at sites previously used in
the 2009-2011 SAHKE project, concentrating on redeploying in the southwestern
part of the former array. This will yield an average station spacing of about 12
km. We will work directly with our collaborators in Victoria University of
Wellington on the siting plan, and we will take advantage of their landowner
connections for facilitating permitting. We expect to run the stations for about
6 months. Once the instruments are removed and shipped back to the U.S., the
data will be converted to a standard archive format and provided to the IRIS
Data Management Center, along with the metadata, within one month.