* 1717556
* AF:  Small:   Collaborative Research:  Scalable, high-order mesh-free algorithms applied to bulk-surface biomechanical problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Grady Wright, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 07/31/2022
* USD 244,417.00

Modeling material processes, like interaction of a drug molecule docking with a
receptor site, must capture interactions, often by systems of partial
differential equations (PDEs), both in the bulk and on the surface. These PDEs
must be calculated numerically, since they often have non-linear couplings
between bulk and surface whose geometries often evolve in time.  This project
develops and implements scalable, high-order, meshfree algorithms -- based on
radial basis functions (RBFs) -- for complex multi-scale bulk-surface
biomechanical modeling in three-dimensional evolving geometries.  The algorithms
and software developed under this grant will directly enable researchers to
explore scientific questions in lipid membrane morphology and physiology of
platelets in the clotting process.  The algorithms will have broad applicability
to other coupled bulk-surface processes -- in biology, material science, and
many industrial problems. The grant will help bolster the research portfolio of
the new Computational Science and Engineering (CSE) PhD program at Boise State
University, and will support one of the first graduate students in this
program.  The PIs will continue to build upon their successful track record of
recruiting graduate students in computational mathematics from underrepresented
groups as part of this project by working with the LSAMP program at Boise State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A specific focus of this proposal is on
developing RBF algorithms for two biomechanical and physiological problems that
are at the forefront of what current numerical techniques can handle and that
have features common to general bulk-surface problems:  morphology of the lipid
bilayer and platelet aggregation and coagulation.  These problems will drive the
development of the following advances in numerical discretizations and
algorithms for RBFs: 1) Scale-free kernels for high-order solutions of surface
PDEs; 2) Stable, scalable meshfree schemes for advection in geometrically
complex domains without any tuning parameters; 3) High-order meshfree geometric
modeling techniques with optimal computational complexity; 4) SIMD-friendly
algorithms for automatic scattered node generation with variable spatial; 5)
Algorithms for low-cost automatic stencil selection for upwinding and adaptive
node refinement; 6) Preconditioning strategies for implicit discretizations of
bulk-surface; 7) Consistent, accuracy preserving meshfree techniques for
visualizing solutions from RBF-based high-order methods.  The developments will
be made publicly available through an open-source software package.