* 1717199
* NeTS: Small: Cognitive Management and Control of Agile Dynamic Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Vincent Chan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 498,975.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;The optical network of the future will have orders of
magnitude increase in data rates, due at least partially to the increase in big-
data transactions. These create the need for fast scheduling of network
resources and agile network adaptation to most efficiently move the data across
the network. This project proposes to investigate a cognitive network management
and control system, which 'senses' current network conditions and uses this
information to satisfy overall performance goals. This project will be the first
comprehensive research on cognitive optical network management and control. The
goal is for agile automated adaptation to replace current slow, manually-driven
management and control practices. The fruits of this research will have
implications for next generation wireless networks and power grid systems and
for fast detection of extreme events that can significantly disrupt networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2.&lt;br/&gt;Current optical networks are operated
with predominantly static connections, with lightpaths changed quasi-statically
and often remaining unchanged for months. Present methods of setting up a
wavelength path result in slow changes to the network (~20 min setup times), as
each of the network elements along the path is gradually tuned to avoid
instabilities and transient impairments arising from rapidly introducing another
optical channel into the network. Large flow and other traffic dynamics will
require bandwidth adaptations of the order of ~100mS-1S. In today's optical
networks, the link quality of all adjacent wavelengths is monitored as the
lightpath is turned on in several steps. The number of network parameters and
their short coherence time in dynamic future networks render acquiring the
complete state information of the network impractical. The idea of this project
is to sense and control a small subset of the parameters with the 'largest'
information content and use their relationship to tune the network. Cognitive
techniques that need to be incorporated in such a strategy include sampling of
network and link parameters, applying data analytics to learn behavior and
cognitive techniques to operate networks, and inferring network state and
optimizing performance without placing an undue network control and management
communications burden on the network. This research will consider both dynamic
per-session scheduling, rerouting/load-balancing and topology reconfiguration to
optimize network performance.