* 1717588
* NeTS: Small: Demystifying the Role of Prediction Models: Bridging Prediction Algorithms and Resource Provisioning
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Anshul Gandhi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 449,816.00

Software deployments must be carefully provisioned to meet their performance
requirements without wasting resources. Most resource provisioning solutions
today employ predictions to estimate future demand and provision accordingly.
However, naively employing predictions can negate its benefits. For instance,
provisioning resources based only on the predicted average can result in severe
performance violations due to uncertainties in the predictor. On the other hand,
while additionally resource provisioning can eliminate performance violations,
it can substantially increase resource wastage. The goal of this project is to
develop and leverage error models to fully realize the potential of
predictors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The key intellectual contribution of this
project is to bridge the gap between predictors and resource provisioning
solutions by investigating the prediction error model. This will be accomplished
via three main thrusts: (i) constructing models that capture the structure of
prediction errors, including correlations and quality over time; (ii) developing
an algorithmic framework to incorporate the prediction error models and account
for switching costs and penalty functions; and (iii) designing systems to
exploit the new prediction error-aware algorithms, including multi-resource
provisioning and resource placement solutions. The solutions will be
experimentally evaluated using available application traces.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research will allow businesses to reduce resource wastage despite
significant prediction errors. The research results will be disseminated through
technology transfer opportunities with industrial partners. Given the nature of
the work, the project will advance interdisciplinary education and research
opportunities. In particular, the project will directly contribute to
interdisciplinary courses taught at the Computer Science and Applied
Mathematics, and Statistics departments, which also will allow for joint
advising of students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;All data produced as a result of
this project, including traces, software, publications, and courseware, will be
made publicly available on the project repository:
http://www.pace.cs.stonybrook.edu/prediction-models.html. The data will be made
available for at least 10 years, and even longer if needed. Data will be
maintained by local web servers and will also be replicated on external public
Internet servers, such as those provided by github, which offer long-term
durability and reliability.