* 1717062
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Scalable and Meaningful Threat Intelligence Generation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Damon McCoy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 492,064.00

Threat intelligence is used by organizations to protect systems and end-users by
detecting and blocking communications with known attackers' systems. Quality
threat intelligence can also provide methods of detecting attackers' tools,
which are often less ephemeral than their attack infrastructure. Unfortunately,
producing quality threat intelligence is often a highly manual and inefficient
process. This has resulted in limited amounts of useful threat intelligence
which is available only to those companies that can afford it. This research
develops new data-analytics methods to identify an attacker's infrastructure and
attack tools. Our methods leverage the ability to efficiently collect large
amounts of raw attacker data, process it, and build artificial intelligence
techniques to discover attack patterns. This project improves the efficiency of
generating high quality threat intelligence data, and makes it more affordable
to a large range of companies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Achieving this goal of
improving the efficiency of generating useful threat intelligence requires
progress on several key challenges. The project (i) investigates supervised
machine learning based methods for efficiently collected large-scale amounts of
data from attackers, (ii) improves methods for storing this data and other
freely available raw threat intelligence data such that it can be easily joined,
(iii) identifies robust features that can be extracted from this raw
data which can be used for training supervised machine learning detection
techniques, and (iv) enables high performance and efficient generation of large-
scale useful threat intelligence data. Consequently, this research has the
potential to transform the way in which threat intelligence data is produced and
improve the security of organizations by making threat intelligence more
accessible. This work also creates many educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students to gain experience using data-analytics
techniques to efficiently detect emerging threats and improve the security of
organizations.