* 1717763
* CSR: Small: IRON: Reducing Workload Interference on Massively Parallel Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Zhiling Lan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 08/31/2022
* USD 497,213.00

Interconnection networks based on dragonfly and fat tree designs are becoming
increasingly dominant in high-performance computing facilities and data centers.
A key challenge of managing such networks is workload interference. In a multi-
user computing environment, interference among applications for shared network
resources can cause a vicious cycle of events (workload interference, low
productivity, selfish user behavior, and poor scheduling) aggravating each
other. This project seeks to tackle the vicious circle of workload
interference.&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a software framework to
systematically analyze and mitigate workload interference on dragonfly and fat
tree systems. Completion of the project will create novel interference-aware
scheduling policies and scalable software tools for interference analysis and
reduction on dragonfly and fat tree networks. The resulting data and tools
collected from simulations and experiments will be made available to the broad
community under an open source license. An integrated education and outreach
plan will enhance the Computer Science curriculum, broaden the participation by
underrepresented groups, and outreach to the surrounding communities that are
predominantly African-American and Latino.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research focuses on three inter-related research thrusts: (1) high-
fidelity network simulation to gain insights into network interference among
applications, (2) interference aware scheduling to avoid or mitigate network
contention among applications, and (3) real-world experiments to quantitatively
measure workload interference of representative applications on production
systems and assess interference aware scheduling. The resulting IRON will
provide an integrated interference analysis and reduction framework for
advancing the research of workload interference on massively parallel platforms.
The project website (http://www.cs.iit.edu/~lan/iron.html) provides all the
information about the project (publications, software tools, data, etc.). This
project repository will be maintained for at least five years after the project
completion.