* 1717916
* III: Small: Topics in Temporal Marked Point Processes: Granger Causality, Imperfect Observations and Intervention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Hongyuan Zha, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Event sequences are ubiquitous in many important applications. For example, a
major earthquake may trigger many after-shocks and a specific disease in early
life leads to many symptoms and diseases later on. A fundamental question is how
different types of events relate to each other and how one type of event causes
the occurrence of another type of event. The objective of this project is to
address this question by leveraging the probabilistic and statistical
methodology of temporal marked point processes, which models the instantaneous
likelihood of an event occurrence using history dependent intensity functions.
The project will specifically investigate the notion of causality that provides
a general framework for tackling the problem of how to control a temporal marked
point process. To make the methods practical, the project will also investigate
statistical learning problems when point process data are noisy and incomplete.
This research targets health informatics and e-commerce. For healthcare, the
research has the potential to uncover clinically meaningful comorbidity in
disease progression as well as to optimize treatment regimes for the purpose of
improving healthcare outcomes. For e-commerce, the research has the potential to
improve companies' operational efficiency and enhance user
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on machine learning
and data mining methodology and algorithms for modeling, learning and control of
temporal marked point processes. The goal is in understanding and modeling of
how the occurrences of a specific type of events at present and future depend on
the occurrences of events of the same and other types happened in the past, and
how this dynamic dependency exhibits heterogeneity across a population and
across time. Ultimately, it will leverage knowledge of the dynamic properties of
temporal marked point processes to design intervention policies to change their
time evolution so as to achieve more desirable outcomes. The technical core of
the project is to develop intensity based causal dynamic models of temporal
marked point processes with the goal to extend Granger causality to the context
of temporal point processes, to make algorithms for temporal marked point
processes more practical by systematically investigating inference algorithms
under a variety of imperfect observations and to develop methods for the
manipulation and control of the time evolution of temporal marked point
processes in order to achieve more desirable outcomes.