* 1717142
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Measurement and Modeling of the Pathways of Potential Fugitive Methane Emissions During Hydrofracking
* ENG,CBET
* 11/14/2016,07/31/2019
* Jaclyn Matthes, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 59,228.00

1508994(Bohrer) &amp; 1509297(Matthes)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of
natural gas from deep subsurface shale formations in the US has increased
considerably in the last decade due to the advancement in drilling and hydraulic
fracturing technology. In 2010, shale gas accounted for 23% of annual dry
natural gas supply in the US, with projections that this capacity will increase
to 48% by 2035. There are large economic advantages of shale gas development,
including reliance on domestic production due to the abundance of natural gas in
the US and the improved air quality when using natural gas compared with the
combustion of gas and coal. This project will examine fugitive emissions, those
not controlled in the production well, in a life cycle analyses of the
greenhouse gas footprint that include the hydrofracking extraction and
production processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of shale gas
resources in the United States is predicted to grow steadily over the next
twenty years, however there is large uncertainty surrounding the quantity and
mechanisms of fugitive methane emissions released to the atmosphere from these
activities. The large range among methane measurements from different
hydrofracking sites suggests that fugitive emissions may be largely preventable
and are dependent on the practices of the drill and well operators. This project
will provide a much needed and timely set of baseline and fugitive methane
emission measurements before and during hydrofracking operations that will
quantify and identify the sources of methane emissions released during different
components of the drilling and gas extraction operations process. This will fill
a critical knowledge gap that will inform the development of effective
management strategies and operations practices to minimize methane emissions and
improve the overall greenhouse gas benefits of natural gas. This project will:
(1) Quantify baseline and fugitive methane emissions during hydrofracking by
collecting continuous landscape-scale methane flux measurements; (2) Identify
biological and geological sources of methane emissions by measuring continuous
atmospheric fluxes of 13C isotopes in methane; (3) Attribute measured methane
fluxes to different components of the hydrofracking process by using a footprint
model and advanced large eddy simulations to isolate flux sources in space and
time. This project will leverage ongoing collaboration with the Ohio State
University Shale Energy and Environment Field Laboratory (SEEL), which will
provide the site access to drilling operations and information about the
management practices and operations timeline will be provided through the SEEL
partnership with the drill and well operators. The PIs will partner with the
Ohio State University (OSU) Extension Office to develop online and print
resources and forums for the general public describing the effects of shale gas
development on local and regional air and water quality. They will also work
with OSU Extension to transfer results from this project to hydrofracking
practitioners who could use information regarding drill pad management practices
to effectively reduce fugitive methane emissions. The PIs will share the
developed products with West Virginia University and Extension, with whom they
extensively collaborate on shale gas development issues. Furthermore, they will
leverage existing outreach relationships with the Ohio Water Resources Center to
present the work related to this project at a water luncheon organized with the
Water Management Association of Ohio, and at a separate seminar to state agency
representatives. A graduate student will be trained in observation and modeling
methods for methane fluxes during this project. This project will also train
undergraduate students from the Dartmouth Women in Science Program in fieldwork
and data analyses to develop honors theses from this research.