* 1717947
* CCF-BSF: AF: Small: New Randomized Approaches in Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mohit Singh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

In the modern world, many industries make every day crucial decisions by solving
large scale discrete optimization problems including routing of delivery trucks,
designing schedule of airplanes, and deciding on the logistics of inventory
supplies. Unfortunately, many of these problems are computationally hard to
solve exactly. The area of approximation algorithms has grown as a general
theory to develop and analyze solutions that can be efficiently computed as well
as give near-optimal solutions. One of the most successful approaches in this
area has been to: (1) formulate the problem at hand using an easily solvable
continuous mathematical characterization; and (2) applying a rounding method
that converts the solution to the continuous characterization into a discrete
feasible solution to the original problem. This project aims to develop a new
generic and broadly applicable rounding method based on probabilistic tools. The
success of the project will help obtain new and improved solution methods to
many fundamental discrete optimization problems. The PIs of this collaborative
NSF-BSF project compose a harmonious team as both PIs have complementary
proficiencies in algorithmic research. This will contribute to achieving one of
the primary goals of this project, which is to extend and maintain the US-
Israeli scientific collaboration between the PIs. Another paramount goal of this
research project is to include students, both undergraduate and graduate, as
full active participants. A special emphasis will be given to students coming
from under-represented groups. The PIs plan to assist the dissemination of
knowledge by integrating results from this research into inter-disciplinary
curriculum activities at all levels, spanning computer science, applied
mathematics and operations research. The project aims to enrich the algorithmic
toolkit in the area of approximation algorithms and show that a new approach
based on discretized Brownian motion is applicable to a wide range of NP-hard
problems. A special emphasis is given on optimization problems that are
considered fundamental including traveling salesman problem, maximum cut and
maximum satisfiability. Any new insight into the solution of fundamental
problems, such as the ones mentioned above, is likely to have much wider
implications as these problems form basic building blocks for numerous discrete
optimization problems occurring in both theory and practice. Thus, this project
also aims to study the applicability of the newly developed technique to such
problems.