* 1717084
* III: Small: Learning Latent Representations of Heterogeneous Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Zhen Lei, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,635.00

Feature engineering is an important pre-processing step in applying machine
learning algorithms for knowledge discovery in all fields of scientific research
and business applications. In these applications it is crucial to obtain
appropriate features that best describe the observed phenomena. Traditionally,
researchers often manually decide features of interest based on the knowledge
and experiences of domain experts, which is costly and labor-intensive.
Recently, a new line of research, called representation learning, has used
neural networks to automatically learn features that may be used in various
scientific research projects and business applications. The PI plans new
representation learning methods to capture rich, meaningful and discriminative
features in heterogeneous information networks (HINs), which have been used to
model heterogeneous types of network entities and their relationships in support
of network data analysis and mining. The work planned in this project includes
information about model design, scalability, sample data extraction, network
variety and data heterogeneity issues in the implementation of the learning
frameworks. This research will be integrated into graduate and undergraduate
courses of data mining and machine learning, enabling students to develop
analytics and big data skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research
objectives of this project are three-fold: 1) The PI aims to leverage
information in HINs to learn representations of latent features for nodes and
relationships specified by meta-paths in the network. Novel techniques will be
developed to address the scalability issues in learning. 2) The PI seeks to
address model design and learning issues arising in HINs growing with time,
e.g., citation networks. New neural network architectures and new sample data
extraction schemes will be devised. 3) The PI plans to integrate both content
and network structures in representation learning of HINs. New neural network
architectures will be devised. To evaluate research prototypes, the PI will
develop a testbed consisting of new neural network frameworks for representation
learning on HINs. Techniques and software will be made available as research
resources to the communities of data mining and representation learning.