* 1717432
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Advanced Algorithmic Tools for Discovery in Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alexander Russell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The prevalence of embedded computing and wireless technology has given rise to
remarkable new opportunities for technology to provide and improve safety and
services. Such applications include on-the-fly traffic management to improve
safety and reduce congestion, establishing ad-hoc networks for disaster
recovery, and maintaining sensor networks for military or scientific purposes.
In all these cases, wireless devices must discover each other's existence,
configure their wireless radios to maximize efficiency, and conserve battery
power. This project will develop new methods to address these fundamental
problems of discovery and efficiency. Additionally, the project will develop and
new techniques and tools for evaluating the efficacy of proposed solutions. The
project also incorporates development of undergraduate- and graduate-level
courses, outreach via educational opportunities for high-school teachers and
students, expanding participation of undergraduates and underrepresented groups
in research, and support for female students in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and analyze
advanced algorithmic tools for spatio-temporal peer discovery, a fundamental
primitive for ad-hoc networks. The proposal focuses on cognitive radio networks
characterized by high mobility, congested spectrum, motion-induced channel
outages and energy-constrained commodity devices. The development of efficient
discovery schemes with both provable guarantees and strong practical performance
will be critical for the build out of such networks for large scale applications
such as road safety and emergency response for driver-less fleets. The project
has four principal thrusts: (1) Multi-channel discovery, where nodes equipped
with spectrally agile radios channel hop to achieve rendezvous using
deterministic and probabilistic techniques for achieving multi-channel
discovery, drawing inspiration from constructive Ramsey theory, cyclic algebraic
geometry codes, number theoretic sieves, and a novel pseudo-random construction:
the synchronizing sampler; (2) Energy-constrained single channel discovery
algorithms where mobile nodes duty cycle to save battery, via connections with
additive combinatorics, algebraic geometry, and expander graphs; (3) Spatial
discovery through signal strength by applying techniques from computational and
convex geometry for estimations of trajectories within vehicular environments;
and (4) Validation via a simulation environment using the ns-3 simulator with
appropriate extensions for multi-channel vehicular networks. While focusing on
vehicular networks, these techniques can be applied in a wide variety of
different networks, such as medical and telemetry networks as well.