* 1717324
* RI: Small: General Intelligence through Algorithm Invention and Selection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrew Nealen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 427,000.00

Creating better artificial intelligence has plenty of applications in different
areas of society, from self-driving cars and aircraft to production planning,
control of machines and music composition. Most current artificial intelligence
research focuses on creating algorithms that can only do a single thing, or
solve a single problem. To achieve artificial general intelligence we must learn
how to create algorithms that can solve many different problems, without a human
having to adjust the algorithm for every problem. The research in this project
aims to understand how such artificial general intelligence can be created. The
basic idea is to build algorithms that can create their own more specific
algorithms, and learn to automatically select the right algorithm for the right
problem. In order to develop these algorithms, we need a large set of good
problems to test them on. Games are widely used to test AI algorithms, because
they model real-world problems but are fast and easy to execute. The general
algorithms developed in this project will be tested on a set of classic games,
and a real-time strategy game.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims
to investigate how we can create more general artificial intelligence through
online stochastic search for algorithms, combined with and informed by online
selection among discovered algorithms. In other words, the project will
investigate the combination of genetic programming in the space of tree search
algorithms with algorithm selection, also called hyper-heuristics, for creating
more general problem-solving abilities. These capabilities will be evaluated
through a sequence of experiments on two different test beds. Successful
completion of the research will clarify the potential of search in algorithm
space as a method for creating more general artificial intelligence, and produce
a number of algorithms. This includes both the algorithms that will be designed
for searching for algorithms and searching among algorithms, as well as the new
algorithms that will be discovered by the search in algorithm space. The methods
produced are expected to ultimately be generally applicable to a large number of
problems.