* 1717188
* Collaborative Research: The evolutionary mechanics of hybridization across a primate radiation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Christina Bergey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 15,460.00

This is an investigation of whether hybridization between closely-related
species has been a significant force in the evolution of primates. Recent
research has uncovered that up to 5% of the DNA of many modern humans originated
from ancient interbreeding with Neanderthal populations, raising the broader
question of whether a species' genetic makeup includes genes brought together
through occasional episodes of hybridization. In the present study, the genomes
of a group of monkey species will be compared to determine whether segments of
DNA have been transferred between species over evolutionary time. The project
will broaden participation of groups under-represented in science through a
partnership with the McNair Scholars Program (a federal program that identifies
promising undergraduates who are first-generation, low-income and/or under-
represented in PhD programs) and by working with other organizations that focus
on similar groups of high school students, such as the Harlem Children's
Society, BridgeUp:STEM, and ARISE in New York City. The project will also
enhance infrastructure for research by making all custom-written software freely
available on the internet and by presenting such software in workshops at the
annual conference of H3ABioNet, a pan-African bioinformatics group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybridization has been reported among numerous species
with the Cercopithecins. Thus, if historical interbreeding indeed leaves its
mark on a species' genome, such evidence should be readily identified in these
animals and serve as a model system for investigating hybridization in primates.
Two central questions will be addressed. First, are genes more likely to be
exchanged between closely related species (e.g., within a genus), or species
with deep evolutionary separation (e.g., different genera)? The former scenario
allows for a higher frequency of hybridization due to greater overall biological
similarity, while the latter scenario allows for more variant, and possibly more
advantageous, forms of genes to evolve and transfer between species. Second,
will genes exchanged through hybridization be unique, or will patterns of genes
with similar functions be found to repeatedly cross between species? If the
latter, such patterns will reveal a more general pattern by identifying genes
that are likely the essential drivers of the evolutionary process in primates.
"Consensus" evolutionary relationships among these monkey species will be
derived from an analysis of the total non-coding DNA sequence; this amounts to
the majority of the genome and reflects the "true" set of evolutionary
relationships. Coding sequences will then be analyzed individually and compared
across all possible pairs of species; some sequences will follow the consensus
pattern, but those that do not will likely reflect genes exchanged through
hybridization. A series of statistical calculations will measure the probability
of such genes being correctly identified as transfers via hybridization.