* 1717355
* RI: Small: Low Cost Technologies to Improve the Quality of 3D Scanning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Gabriel Taubin, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,994.00

This project develops a new mathematical framework, algorithms, and optical
designs to increase the resolution and precision of line and area 3D scanners,
and to minimize the hardware cost. Combining simple optical design techniques
and novel mathematical formulations, this project builds the next generation of
low cost high resolution 3D scanner systems based on active illumination and 3D
triangulation. The project designs, fabricates, and demonstrates prototype 3D
scanners based on the new technologies. The project integrates research with
education. Courses taught by the principal investigator on a regular basis
provide the necessary mathematics, software, and practical details to design and
build 3D scanners using off-the-shelf low cost semiconductor lasers, small LED
projectors, and web-cams, as well as digital geometry processing software.
Undergraduate and graduate students learn in these courses to design and build
low cost 3D scanners based on the technologies being developed in this project.
By significantly lowering the cost of high resolution 3D scanning systems, the
technology, software and methods being developed in this project have
significant impact in the multiple applications in computer vision, computer
graphics, and robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies a new
mathematical formulation for 3D optical triangulation based on interval
arithmetic, where 3D points are only determined within certain bounds along the
camera rays, and multiple measurements are used to tighten these bounds. The
project introduces the "Line Segment Cloud" as an alternative surface
representation, and as a tool to visualize the measurement errors within the
proposed framework. The project develops new variational surface reconstruction
methods with line segment constraints tailored to line segment clouds. Enabled
by the new formulation, the project is constructing: 1) novel laser line and
structured light super-resolution 3D scanners, where the projectors are mounted
on small displacement motion platforms; 2) structured light area 3D scanners
where the different 3D patterns are projected by fixed non-coaxial LED slide
projectors, and neither DLP or LCD projector engines are used; and 3) super-
resolution 3D scanners based on volume carving, optimized for existing line and
area based 3D scanners, where camera and projector are rigidly mounted with
respect to each other. The project is also developing techniques to design laser
line projectors optimized for optical triangulation using inexpensive optical
components, where the thickness of the projected line is significantly reduced
and the depth of field is increased. The project develops new calibration
methods and performance metrics to evaluate these technologies.