* 1717550
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Smart and Secure Non Volatile Memory
* CSE,CNS
* 07/31/2017,07/30/2021
* Huiyang Zhou, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/30/2021
* USD 480,379.00

Non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies and the 3D-integration technology reshape
memory systems. Although providing many desirable features such as low leakage
power and fast system restart, the non-volatility of NVM introduces the
vulnerability to data remanence attacks. This project leverages the processing-
in-memory (PIM), enabled by vertically stacked 3D integration of integrated
circuits, to overcome the security challenge associated with
NVM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we use an attack model, in which an
attacker can physically obtain the NVM chip and scan the data stored in NVM, can
also snoop on the memory bus to retrieve data and addresses; and can tamper with
the memory content as well as commands. Our trust base includes both the
processor and the memory chip, meaning that the hardware logic and state
registers inside the chips are well hidden from the attacker. To protect against
data scanning and memory bus snooping, we utilize counter-mode encryption to
encrypt data and obfuscate addresses. The data stored in NVM are always
encrypted while the addresses are encrypted at the processor side and decrypted
at the memory side. The decryption logic becomes a part of the PIM logic on NVM
chips. To protect against data tampering, we develop efficient integrity checks
by re-purposing error correction codes (ECC) for integrity checking such that
the existing error correction logic can be used for both error
detection/correction and integrity verification. Overall, we leverage PIM to
protect data and access patterns and ensure the data integrity. The end result
of the project is smart and secure NVM architecture designs.&lt;br/&gt;