* 1717290
* RI: Small: Modern Machine Learning Algorithms for Ranking from Pairwise and Higher-Order Comparisons
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Shivani Agarwal, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 445,473.00

The problem of ranking a large number of items from comparisons among a few
items at a time plays a crucial role in many areas, including recommender
systems, crowdsourcing, marketing, and econometrics. In modern settings, as the
numbers of items to be ranked increase and corresponding datasets grow in size
and complexity, it is critical to re-visit the classical algorithms currently
used for these problems and to design new algorithms that can better scale to
modern needs under fewer assumptions. This project will design modern machine
learning algorithms for such problems, while training PhD students and
postdoctoral scientists in the interdisciplinary skills needed to design novel
machine learning algorithms for problems involving modern datasets. Other
broader impacts of the project will also include organization of workshops
and/or tutorials to disseminate the results of the research conducted here,
survey articles aimed at conveying the ideas to a broad scientific audience, and
activities designed to increase participation of under-represented groups in
STEM education opportunities and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of
ranking from pairwise comparisons has been studied in several fields, including
statistics, operations research, social choice, and computer science, and
several algorithms have been developed; however, very little has been understood
in terms of how these different algorithms relate to each other, under what
conditions they succeed (or fail), and how insights from one can be used to
improve another. Algorithms for ranking from higher-order comparisons are even
less well understood. The project will develop a strong understanding of the
conditions under which various pairwise ranking algorithms succeed (or fail),
and use insights from this understanding to develop modern machine learning
algorithms with strong performance guarantees for ranking from pairwise as well
as higher-order comparisons. Specifically, the project will investigate the
following three directions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Understanding conditions
on pairwise models under which current algorithms succeed or fail.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Design of new machine learning algorithms for ranking from pairwise
comparisons.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Ranking from higher-order
comparisons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring a unified perspective
to the study of ranking from pairwise comparisons, which hitherto has been
scattered across different disciplines; develop new machine learning algorithms
that improve the state of the art for a variety of ranking objectives; and
initiate a systematic study of ranking from higher-order comparisons, a nascent
area at the intersection of machine learning, statistics and econometrics.