* 1717712
* SHF:Small:Data Structures and Transactions for Emerging Nonvolatile Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2021
* USD 449,937.00

Data that need to be persistent, either for the sake of long-term access or for
recovery from system crashes, have traditionally been kept on disk and flash
drives, which are very slow. Within the next few years, much faster persistent
memory is expected to be widely available at reasonable cost, raising the
possibility that file systems might be replaced, at least in part, by memory
that is simply "always available." The intellectual merits of the project lie in
addressing two key challenges to such "always available memory": first, ensuring
that the values in memory in the wake of a system crash are always mutually
consistent, despite the possibility that traditional caches often pass data to
the memory out of order; second, safeguarding the structural integrity of
persistent data despite the possibility that buggy programs may erroneously
modify arbitrary memory locations. The project's broader significance and
importance lie in the promise of significant improvements in programmability,
reliability, and system performance, and in the ability to survive power outages
and hardware failures at much lower cost than has previously been possible. This
latter benefit may be of particular importance for ubiquitous sensors in the
Internet of Things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on prior work by the
principal investigator and colleagues, which has developed formal correctness
criteria for persistent data, together with automatic methods to guarantee this
correctness. The current project is pursuing three major research thrusts.
First, it is developing a library of reusable, high-performance persistent data
structures, with particular emphasis on exploiting high-level semantics to
minimize instrumentation overhead, maintaining sufficient information to
complete or undo partial operations in the wake of a program or system crash,
and formalizing and proving correctness. Second, the project is developing
techniques to compose persistent operations into larger atomic transactions.
This work builds on past experience with hardware and software transactional
memory, and encompasses both nonblocking and lock-based approaches. Particular
emphasis is being placed on "boosting" the operations of persistent data
structures so that they can serve as reversible high-level operations of a
transactional system. Third, the project is developing mechanisms (including
user-level daemons, compiler-based sandboxing, fine-grain memory protection, and
the use of virtualization hardware) to ensure that persistent data is modified
only by trusted library code, thereby safeguarding its structural integrity in
the presence of buggy applications.