* 1717299
* CIF:Small: Toward an Algebraic and Probabilistic Foundation for Network Information Theory based on Quasi Structured Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sandeep Sadanandarao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 369,903.00

Modern infrastructure, including transportation systems, power systems, climate
and environment monitoring systems, and education systems, are increasingly
interconnected through information networks. A recent forecast predicts no end
in sight for humanity's hunger for information consumption and the concomitant
information interconnection. Network information theory aims to address this
challenge by developing a comprehensive theory of information storage,
transmission, and processing in networks. This project develops new ideas and
techniques in efficient distributed encoding and decoding of information in
networks from a communication/information/signal-processing theory perspective.
The project will be tightly integrated with a significant education and outreach
program consisting of two focus areas: training students in interdisciplinary
research, and broadly disseminating research outcomes in the forms of new
curricular development and student involvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project considers two key concepts: (i) structured codes versus unstructured
codes; and (ii) common information. A new fundamental connection between them is
uncovered, which motivates the development of a new unified coding framework for
the communication problems that form the building blocks of networks. This
project is pillared on three key innovations developed in the recent past: (i)
Quasi-structured codes that span the spectrum from completely structured codes
to completely unstructured codes and whose performance can be characterized
using single-letter information quantities; (ii) Conferencing common information
among three or more random variables (or terminals) that characterizes new
structures in the joint probability distributions that are the key to developing
new information coding strategies in networks; and (iii) Practical code
constructions for networks that approach the information-theoretic rate region
using computationally efficient encoding and decoding algorithms. This project
strives for a fundamental understanding of the algebraic code structure in
network communication problems, as a precursor to developing computationally
efficient encoding and decoding algorithms adapted to challenging multi-user
information theory problems.