* 1717100
* AF: Small: Symbolic Computation with Certificates, Sparsity and Error Correction
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Erich Kaltofen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2022
* USD 496,373.00

This project continues the PI's productive work in certifying the results of
symbolic computations and in polynomial computations. It aims for results in
three areas: &lt;br/&gt;1. Low-cost certification of the output of large-scale
symbolic computations performed on high power servers, possibly in the computing
cloud. The focus is on problems in high-dimensional linear algebra and non-
linear optimization. Quickly checkable proofs can also expose bugs/faults in
time- and space-consuming server computations. &lt;br/&gt;2. Medical image
processing needs robust interpolation from values sampled at points; The project
will reconstruct functions as sparse sums of a few exponentials or orthogonal
polynomials, using algorithms that account for noise and outliers (that is,
catastrophic errors) while minimizing the number of sample points. &lt;br/&gt;3.
In fundamental problems in algebraic computational complexity, it takes a fresh
look at polynomial multiplication and greatest common
divisors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI continues to train undergraduate and
Master students, and supervise Ph.D. students and a postdoctoral scholar, so
that they develop advanced skills in designing algorithms and computer programs
for doing mathematics. The students and postdoc will be encouraged to adopt
advanced research communication skills by presenting posters and talks at
international meetings, especially when their background is from under-
represented groups in the discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method to achieve
the goal of low-cost certification is to develop certificates for the Frobenius
form of sparse matrices and for the solvability of polynomial equations over the
real numbers that are independent of the algorithms that produce the output. The
approach is based on interactive proof protocols and crytographic hardness
assumptions, but the project aims to reduce the use of cryptography in its
protocols, so that the verifier can increase probability of correctness
arbitrarily, even after the computation. The PI has used algebraic error
correcting decoding to locate evaluation errors in sparse interpolation and
dense rational vector recovery, the latter with early termination. The current
focus is on sparseness in a Chebyshev basis, where list-decoders are missing,
and on multivariate sparse interpolation using a generalization of Prony's
Algorithm combined with Sakata's generalization of the Berlekamp/Massey
Algorithm. Finally, the project studies the algebraic complexity of multiplying
polynomials without the use of constants, computing the Sylvester resultant
without divisions, and representing polynomials as the characteristic polynomial
of matrices.