* 1717634
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: An Integrated Approach for Enterprise Intrusion-Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alina Oprea, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2021
* USD 257,832.00

The recent prevalence of advanced cyber attacks has caused enterprise breaches
with severe consequences in critical sectors, such as national defense,
manufacturing and the financial industry. Current defense practices rely on
attack prevention and detection technologies, but our understanding of the
capabilities of these security tools against truly advanced threats, which
rapidly grow in sophistication, is severely lacking. This project seeks to
harden enterprise security against advanced threats by systematically designing
a new multi-layer intrusion-resilient framework that addresses individual
enterprise defenses, as well as global, community-based protections. Overall,
with a focus on educational activities, outreach to under-represented minority
groups and technology transfer to industry, this project aims at contributing a
new holistic defense approach to the security community that increases the
security stance of our national infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a new framework for enterprise intrusion resilience that: (1)
protects both individual assets and enterprises as a whole; (2) adapts to
attacker's strategies by devising security tools that are themselves resilient
to breaches; and (3) promotes new coordinated protections across enterprises and
industry sectors while protecting the privacy of shared data. These solutions
leverage cryptography, game-theoretical modeling, and community-based defenses
to provide strong intrusion resilience against advanced threats. The
investigators plan to engage actively with the security industry to evaluate
their techniques in practical settings and provide concrete recommendations on
local and coordinated defensive strategies for protecting our national
infrastructures. By educating students and cyber professionals, as well as
conducting a range of outreach activities to the community, this project seeks
to increase awareness of emerging attack techniques and best proactive defenses
for successfully mitigating the cyber attacks of the future.