* 1717950
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Multi-Party High-dimensional Machine Learning with Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Evans, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 498,624.00

Individuals and organizations can frequently benefit from combining their data
to learn collective models. However, combining data to enable multi-party
learning is often not possible. It may not be permitted due to privacy policies,
or may be considered too risky for a business to expose its own data to others.
In addition, high-dimensional data are prevalent in modern data-driven
applications. Learning from high-dimensional data owned by differential
organizations is even more challenging, due to the bias introduced by the high-
dimensional machine learning methods. The overarching goal of this project is to
address these challenges by developing methods that enable a group of mutually
distrusting parties to securely collaborate to apply high dimensional machine
learning methods to produce a joint model without exposing their own data. This
project enables owners of sensitive data to jointly learn models across their
datasets without exposing that data and providing meaningful privacy guarantees.
It produces open source software tools and has many important societal
applications, including its use in analyzing electronic health records across
multiple hospitals to identify medical correlations what could not be found by
any individual hospital. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key of multi-party
high-dimensional machine learning is to find an efficient way to produce an
accurate aggregate model that reflects all of the data, by combining local
models that are developed independently based on individual data sets. The
strategy of this project is to combine two emerging research directions:
distributed machine learning, which seeks to distribute machine learning
algorithms across hosts and produce an aggregate model by combining multiple
local models; and secure multi-party computation, which enables a group of
mutually distrusting parties to jointly compute a function without leaking
information about their private inputs or any intermediate results. It also
incorporates differential privacy-based mechanisms into multi-party high
dimensional learning, which further protects the individual data points in each
party. The results of this research have the potential to impact both the
machine learning and security research communities. The education plan of this
project includes developing open course materials that integrate privacy and
machine learning, and provide research-based training opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students in computer science, systems engineering,
and medical informatics. It actively gets underrepresented groups involved in
research projects, and trains a new generation of interdisciplinary researchers.