* 1717486
* CNS: SHF: Small: Architectural Support for Efficient and Programmable Non-Volatile Main Memory
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* James Tuck, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 515,800.00

Computer systems typically include memory and storage as separate and distinct
components. Memory is fast and volatile, meaning that it loses its contents
during power loss or program failure. Storage, on the other hand, is slower and
non-volatile, or persistent, and keeps documents, photos, applications, and
other data for long periods of time, even throughout a power loss. Historically,
these components have been distinct, however, emerging memory technologies are
poised to upset the status quo, combining the faster speed of memory with the
persistence of storage into a single device known as non-volatile memory, or
persistent memory. While this will simplify computer systems, it will also
create new problems and challenges in how they function and how they are
programmed. In the past, processors only interacted with memory, but they will
now interact directly with storage also. Persistent memories will require new
hardware support from processors, but the mechanisms that have been proposed so
far incur high overheads and require programmers to reason about complex
hardware-level events to use persistent memory correctly and efficiently. Some
of the overheads are a direct result of waiting for data to be written to
persistent memory so that the programmer can be certain that data is saved to
storage. Other overheads are the result of performing this operation in a way
that is failure-safe, in other words, that even if a failure occurs while
updating storage the integrity of the data already in storage is preserved. In
both cases, the design of the processor significantly impacts the overheads and
complexity associated with using persistent memory. This project will
investigate new hardware designs that make it easier for programmers to write
high-performing and efficient code for future systems that use persistent main
memory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train Ph.D. students,
undergraduate students, and Professional Masters students in the design of
future computer systems with emerging persistent memory technologies. The
culmination this work will be research manuscripts that report findings,
infrastructure for experimentally validating the findings, and other supporting
documentation and data. The manuscripts produced by this project will be
submitted to high impact journals and conferences so that computer systems
researchers and engineers can become aware of the findings and incorporate this
knowledge into the design of future systems. This project will also support
undergraduate curriculum development efforts based on the Analog Discovery 2.
The research manuscripts, experimental infrastructure, and curriculum materials
will be available at http://go.ncsu.edu/persistent-memory as they are produced.