* 1717207
* AF:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Distributed Quasi-Newton Methods for Nonsmooth Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Nasir Memon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2020
* USD 163,160.00

Optimization, which finds the inputs to a mathematical function that produce the
minimum output, is a workhorse algorithm behind many of the advances in smart
devices or applications in the cloud. As data gets larger and more distributed,
new ideas are needed to maintain the speed and accuracy of optimization.
Operator splitting, which expresses the function to minimize as the sum of two
convex functions, one of which is smooth and the other non-differentiable, is an
idea that has produced to new first-order optimization methods. This project
explores operator splitting with second-order optimization methods, which have
faster convergence to the minimum. The focus is on large, distributed, and
streaming data sets, so that the resulting general-purpose numerical solvers and
embedded systems implementations can support optimization in cyberphysical
systems and the Internet-of-Things. The project has as priority the active
engagement and training of students and researchers, with specific emphasis on
the inclusion of women and under-represented minority groups. This project not
only involves collaboration across three top-tier American universities, but
also with European research institute, KU Leuven.

In specific, this research project seeks to interpret existing methods for
structured convex optimization (such as the celebrated ADMM algorithm) as
gradient methods applied to specific functions arising from the original problem
formulation, and interpret of operator-splitting techniques as fixed point
iterations for appropriately selected operators. A key theoretical foundation is
the introduction of new envelope functions (smooth upper approximations
possessing the same sets of solutions) that can be used as merit functions for
variable-metric backtracking line-search. To conclude, a principal focus of the
project is to design distributed asynchronous methods applicable to large-scale
multi-agent cyberphysical systems that involve big data and impose stringent
real-time constraints for decision-making. In this purview, the goal is to
deliver methods that will outperform current state-of-the-art in terms of (a)
speed of computations, (b) scalability with big data sizes, (c) robustness to
various types of uncertainty, and, most topically, (d) distributed asynchronous
implementation over networks in real-time. The merits will be illustrated in the
context of applications in signal processing, control, machine learning and
robotics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.