* 1717075
* CCF-BSF: AF:Small: Time-Message Tradeoffs in Distributed Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Gopal Pandurangan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2023
* USD 462,598.00

Real-world distributed communication networks such as the Internet, peer-to-peer
networks, ad hoc wireless and sensor networks as well as data center networks
used for large-scale data processing are an integral part of today's digital
society. Distributed/decentralized algorithms underlie the efficient operation
of these networks, e.g., distributed shortest paths algorithms are used for
routing in the Internet, and distributed graph algorithms are used for finding
communities in social networks. Hence, designing and analyzing efficient
distributed algorithms is an important research task which will lead to faster
and more resource-efficient performance in real-world networks. To address the
more realistic situations, this project will aim to design distributed
algorithms which simultaneously optimize the (1) running time and (2) number of
messages. This research will help in the design of efficient and scalable
distributed algorithms with provable performance guarantees. It can impact
algorithm design in peer-to-peer and ad hoc wireless sensor networks, and
distributed processing of large-scale data. The PI plans to develop a new course
and a textbook on distributed network algorithms that is closely related to the
research proposed above. University of Houston is a designated Hispanic serving
public Tier 1 research institution and the PI will make efforts to involve
minority and underrepresented students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
fundamental performance measures of a distributed algorithm that determine its
efficiency are the running time and the number of messages used by the
algorithm. Research in the last three decades has focused to a large extent on
optimizing either one of the two measures separately, typically at the cost of
the other. However, in many real-world applications, it is important to design
distributed algorithms that simultaneously optimize both the measures. This
project will investigate how distributed algorithms can be designed that work
well under both measures. Furthermore, it will study the precise relationship
between the two measures, in particular, how one can trade off one measure with
respect to the other measure. This project will study time-message tradeoffs in
distributed algorithms for various fundamental problems, including leader
election, minimum spanning tree, shortest paths, and random walks. Specific
goals of the project are: (1) Given a bound on one measure, design distributed
algorithms that are optimal with respect to the other measure; (2) Obtain lower
bounds on the complexity of one measure while fixing the other measure; (3)
Obtain tradeoff relationships that characterize the dependence of one measure on
the other. (4) Obtain efficient distributed algorithms that operate on large-
scale graphs.