* 1717606
* AF: Small: The Complexity of Random CSPs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ryan O'Donnell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

This project is concerned with understanding the computational difficulty of
solving very large, randomly generated tasks called "constraint satisfaction
problems." One major motivation for this study is cryptography. Cryptographic
protocols used to transmit and compute on securely encrypted data rely on our
ability to easily generate random, hard-to-solve computational tasks. As an
example, many cryptographic protocols rely on the assumption that if you
multiply together two random prime numbers of many digits, it is computationally
difficult to factor the resulting product. Recent research in cryptography has
sought new sources of easy-to-generate hard problems, both for added flexibility
and for facilitating different types of cryptographic tasks. However, although
we have a fairly good understanding of what kinds of computational tasks can be
hard to solve in the worst case, we do not know nearly as much about what kinds
of computational tasks are expected to be hard when they are chosen at random.
The class of "constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs)" seems to be a good and
potentially useful candidate for a class of problems that is hard when chosen at
random. This project will involve furthering our understanding of the
computational feasibility of random CSPs, studying how the various parameters
involved (such as the ratio of constraints to variables, the kinds of
constraints, etc.) affects their easiness/difficulty. An additional aspect of
the project will be scientific and educational training for computer science
undergraduate and graduate students at Carnegie Mellon University, as well as
wide dissemination of the research produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more
technical level, the project has several lines of inquiry related both to the
computational complexity of random CSPs, as well as algorithms for their
solution. The PI will consider the tradeoffs between constraint density,
constraint type, quality of approximation/refutation algorithms, and running
time. Particularly, the PI will investigate the power and limitations of the
powerful "Sum-of-Squares (SOS) semidefinite programming hierarchy" in the
context of random CSPs. The PI will also investigate potential new hardness
results for non-CSPs and learning theory problems, based on the assumed
intractability of random CSPs.