* 1717312
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Toward Usable and Ubiquitous Trust Initialization and Secure Networking in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Shucheng Yu, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Anita  Nikolich
* 12/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

With billions of smart wireless devices being ubiquitously deployed,
safeguarding their networking from cyber attacks has become a challenge. Not
only can the devices deployed in a network can be heterogeneous in terms of
available computing resources and interfaces, but ordinary users typically have
limited technical expertise to perform complicated security configurations.
What's more, trust among the devices is often lacking because of the different
vendors or distribution channels they have traversed. This project addresses
these challenges and proposes a suite of lightweight protocols for initial trust
establishment and secure networking of wireless devices. Intrinsic properties of
wireless channels, which are available to most wireless devices, are utilized to
minimize the dependence on user engagement, prior secrets or any hardware not
commonly seen in most smart devices.

Three research thrusts are proposed to achieve the project's objectives, which
take into consideration devices with limited cryptographic capabilities and
those with no cryptography at all. The first task aims at minimizing user
involvement in the trust initialization process without assuming any extra
resources, which is achieved with an obfuscated in-band message authentication
protocol. The second task puts forward a mobility-aided authenticated secret key
extraction technique without any explicit user involvement. The third task
explores key-free wireless security utilizing friendly jamming; a geometry-based
computational model is proposed for optimizing the network deployment. The
results of this project will lay the foundation for designing extremely
lightweight and highly usable secure trust initialization and networking
protocols that are compatible with most commercial off-the-shelf smart wireless
devices.