* 1717206
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: High-Dimensional Machine Learning Methods for Personalized Cancer Genomics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Quanquan Gu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The key to success in personalized and precision cancer genomics lies in: (1)
discovering and understanding the molecular-level mechanisms of how genetic
alterations influence various cellular processes relevant to cancer, and (2)
utilizing molecular signatures to tailor more personalized treatment strategies
for patients. In order to achieve these goals, various high-throughput
experimental methods have been developed in recent years to obtain information
about a patient's cancer genome sequence, mRNA expression, protein expression,
epigenetic readout, and other detailed information about a patient's tumor.
However, algorithms that fully harness such a massive amount of high dimensional
data to yield biomedical insights are often lacking. This project will advance
the field of data-driven complex modeling of cancer genomic data for
personalized cancer treatment by developing novel algorithms that use emerging
and new techniques in high-dimensional machine learning. The results of this
research have the potential to impact both the machine learning field and the
computational genomics field. The educational components integrated with the
research program will develop new curriculum materials, involve undergraduate
students and underrepresented groups in research, and train a new generation of
interdisciplinary graduate researchers.

This project consists of two synergistic research thrusts to develop novel high-
dimensional machine learning algorithms for analyzing high-throughput cancer
genomic data. First, the project will develop high-dimensional graphical models
for multi-view data modeling to integrate data from heterogeneous genome-wide
data sources. Second, it will devise novel high-dimensional collaborative
learning methods for personalized drug recommendation. The high-dimensional
graphical models will be used to estimate networks for different cancer
subtypes. These networks will then be integrated into the recommendation
algorithms, which in turn will help improve the multi-view graphical model
estimation. This project will enhance the ability to interpret large-scale
cancer genomics data by pinpointing the roles of complex molecular interactions
in cancer onset and progression, which will enable novel ways to more
effectively discover personalized molecular signatures and more targeted
potential treatments of cancer. Such technical innovation and conceptual
advancement have the potential to reshape the way that one approaches graphical
model estimation and its role in biological contexts. The project will
potentially open up new possibilities for both theoreticians and practitioners
in machine learning and computational biology as well as other disciplines.