* 1717262
* CSR: Small: Cost Function Based Management of Computational and Energy Resources in Embedded Controllers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* C Krishna, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,001.00

In recent years, many embedded applications have emerged where the speed of the
computer's response to external demands is as important as the correctness of
its output. These are real-time systems, where tasks must meet specified
deadlines. Such task deadlines are based on the specific needs of the
application, from moment to moment. Typically, applications are served by a
cluster of processors, collaborating together on deadline-bound tasks. To do
this effectively requires efficient management of the processor and energy
resources available to the system. Obtaining application-sensitive resource
management techniques is the focus of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit lies in the integrated way in which the individual elements
associated with embedded systems are managed. Cost functions are defined that
provide an interface between the computer and control domains of the embedded
system, conveying the urgency of computational tasks with respect to the control
domain. Such cost functions, once defined, can be used by the computational
domain to effectively manage computational and energy resources; obtaining them
is the first thrust of the project. Using such cost functions to dynamically
manage the resources pertinent to the computer domain (so as to optimize
control-domain performance over a specified mission) is the second
thrust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project arises from the
economic and social importance of embedded systems in today's world. Such
systems range from small implantable medical devices to country-wide networked
systems; their efficient functioning is of great importance. This project
occupies an interdisciplinary area involving both computer and control domains.
The results of this work, along with associated background material, will be
migrated in the form of accessible modules to both the graduate and
undergraduate curriculum; these will contribute to the training of a diverse
workforce that can work with confidence in the interacting worlds of
computation, control and networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A project repository
will be maintained containing code, course modules, technical/research
documents, and other relevant technical material associated with this project.
Its purpose is to make possible a wide and free dissemination of project-
generated materials. The University of Massachusetts library system runs a
repository (scholarworks@UMassAmherst; URL: http://scholarworks.umass.edu/ece/)
that will be used for this purpose. The material will be maintained until, in
the judgement of the Principal Investigator, it becomes obsolete. Care will be
taken to ensure that there are no privacy or intellectual property violations in
making this material widely available.