* 1717581
* SaTC:  CORE:  Small:  Collaborative:  A New Approach to Federated Network Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* John Foster, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 131,691.00

Modern networks are often federated in nature---i.e., they are an interoperation
between independent networks spanning multiple administrative domains. For
example, in many enterprises, different business units control various logical
segments of the network, but share common resources, such as routers, firewalls,
and load-balancers. In such federated systems, the correct enforcement of
network security policies relies on interactions that span multiple
administrative domains. This project is developing techniques for enforcing
security policies in federated networks using a new form of Proof Carrying Code
(PCC), specialized to the networking domain. This enforcement mechanism will
ensure that only authorized actors can reconfigure devices in federated
networks, and will guarantee that configuration software preserves "behavioral"
policies such as access control, slice isolation, etc.

The technical contributions of this research will include (i) developing PCC
techniques for NetKAT, a language for SDN programming that comes equipped with a
sound and complete equational reasoning system, and (ii) integrating NetKAT PCC
into the Nexus Authorization Language (NAL), a framework that provides methods
for specifying and enforcing distributed authorization policies. Key challenges
will include how to generate, represent, and transform NetKAT proofs, and how to
deal with dynamic behaviors such as network configuration changes and evolving
trust models. The broader impacts of this project include (i) developing open-
source software that will be tested on a GENI rack hosted by the BTV Ignite
program with broader impacts in the local Burlington, VT community, and (ii)
presenting education opportunities for underrepresented groups via an outreach
program for high school students developed in partnership with the New York
State 4-H and Science Leadership Academy.