* 1717937
* CHS: Small: Investigating the Behavioral Effects of Longitudinal Exposure to Immersive Consumer Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Andrew Robb, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2021
* USD 466,842.00

As systems for consumer virtual reality (VR) become more available, people will
start to spend more and more time in VR environments for education, work,
entertainment, and communication. This project will look at how people change as
they use VR systems over time, as well as at how more experienced VR users
compare to novice users and how well existing studies of novice behavior will
predict experienced user behavior. The team will first analyze data from online
forums where people talk about their experiences in VR to develop an
understanding of how people have already begun to use VR systems. They will then
compare how people explore and become skilled in simulated environments using VR
versus using traditional interfaces, using the Minecraft environment as a
testbed and collecting data about people's behavior in the environment,
physiological markers, and self-reports about their experiences. Finally, they
will conduct a longitudinal study of people performing common VR tasks both
before and after spending a considerable amount of time using VR. The goal is to
use these multiple data sources to study how long-term exposure to VR affects
both people's behavior and their engagement with VR, and to use that to advance
both psychological understandings of how people interact with virtual
environments and the design of such systems. In doing the work, the team will
develop tools to collect behavioral data from Minecraft and release both those
tools and the datasets collected for the benefit of other researchers and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized in three main phases.
The first phase will use thematic coding of the first six months of posts from
forums devoted to each of the main consumer VR technologies, along with
interviews of contributors to those forums guided by those themes, to identify
how people react as they experiment with VR technologies and incorporate them
into their lives, as well as key differences between available implementations
that affect those reactions. The second study will ask participants to use both
VR and standard desktop interfaces for six hours exploring Minecraft, which
supports a wide variety of possible behaviors and provides a good API for
collecting data about both those behaviors and the environment. These data,
along with video and biometric recordings, will be analyzed around five core
elements of VR experiences: navigation through, interaction with, and perception
of the environment itself; and feelings of both individual presence in the
environment and social presence of other people and characters. In the third
study, the team will ask VR novices to complete a series of VR tasks that
correspond to the five core areas, then to use a VR version of Minecraft for at
least 30 hours over the course of several months, then to complete the tasks
again. This will allow them to compare novice and experienced users' ability to
navigate and interact in VR environments, as well as effects of VR expertise on
key values claimed for VR such as presence and key barriers such as simulator
sickness.