* 1717705
* CHS:Small: A Kinder, Gentler Technology: Enhancing Human-Machine Symbiosis Using Adaptive, Personalized Affect-Aware Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Sean McCrea, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 07/31/2020
* USD 447,889.00

A longstanding goal in artificial intelligence is to develop smart systems that
interact well with humans. Advances in sensing and machine learning are
increasingly allowing computers to infer mental states, raising questions about
how agents might use those inferences to adapt to human partners. This project
will systematically address how to design and evaluate "affect-aware" systems
that adapt their behavior based on estimates of their users' emotional
experiences. The team will first look at the effectiveness of current strategies
that vary the difficulty of educational tasks and games based on inferred
affect. They will then develop new strategies that take into account both
individual personality and dynamic characteristics of the physical environment.
Finally, they will evaluate these strategies, paying particular attention to
what happens when systems act on incorrect inferences about affect. These
studies will help pave the way toward self-driving cars, conversational
assistants, and virtual reality characters that consider affect when interacting
with people, ideally leading to better experiences and outcomes. The team will
also develop new interdisciplinary courses in human factors and human-computer
interaction, connecting with industrial partners to help train students in both
the practice and research of these kinds of adaptive systems. Further, they will
do public outreach about these systems and use them to provide summer research
experiences for K-12 and community college students, focusing on those from
groups traditionally underrepresented in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be structured as a series of lab studies, using spatial cognition
games and robot-assisted motor rehabilitation tasks as testbeds that allow the
team to directly manipulate task difficulty and measure enjoyment/engagement and
performance/learning outcomes. The team will first collect training data with
people using the testbeds at randomly selected difficulty levels and reporting
the perceived level of difficulty as too easy (bored), too hard (frustrated), or
about right, while capturing heart rate signals, skin conductance and
temperature, electroencephalogram (EEG) data, and environmental factors
including light, time of day, and room temperature. These will be used to train
affect recognizers using a variety of machine learning methods: linear
discriminant analysis (including a Kalman adaptive version), support vector
machines, neural and Bayesian networks, and random forests. Using a common
adaptation strategy that adjusts difficulty up or down one step, the team will
measure the enjoyment and performance outcomes that affect-aware recognizers
achieve both with and without considering environmental factors, comparing those
to a baseline strategy that adapts difficulty based only on task performance.
During these experiments, the team will also collect data about users'
personality characteristics and use those to develop individualized recognition
models and adaptation strategies for different personality types. These
individualized models and strategies will be evaluated by comparing them to the
baseline data from the first experiment. Finally, they will compare the outcomes
of these systems with those from a "best-case" system controlled by humans and a
"worst-case" error-prone system that chooses adaptation strategies randomly,
looking at those induced error rates along with the natural error rates captured
during the other experiments to determine the effect of recognition and
adaptation error on satisfaction and task outcomes.