* 1717883
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Automated Numerical Solver EnviRonment (ANSER)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Boyana Norris, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,999.00

The computational science community is tackling ever larger and more complex
applications. The solution of the underlying mathematics problems requires using
high-end parallel computing resources effectively, and delivering performance
without degrading productivity is critical for the success of scientific
computing. Converting mathematics from algorithms to high-quality
implementations, however, is a difficult process, whether an application is
developed from scratch or by leveraging existing software libraries. Modern
numerical packages provide numerous solutions with widely varying performance.
Selecting among these possibilities requires expertise in numerical computation,
mathematical software, compilers, and computer architecture, but even such broad
knowledge does not guarantee the selection of the best-performing method for a
particular problem. In response to these challenges, ANSER (Automated Numerical
Solver EnviRonment) automates the selection and configuration of algorithms such
as sparse linear solvers, eigensolvers, and graph methods in the context of
large-scale scientific and engineering applications. The overall approach is
generalizable to any situation involving multiple solutions whose performance
varies with input problem properties. ANSER increases developer productivity and
promotes effective use of modern parallel architectures to solve large-scale
scientific and engineering problems. This work also impacts the training of the
next-generation scientific workforce by involving graduate and undergraduate
students in this model-guided development of high-performance software.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;ANSER, the Automated Numerical Solver EnviRonment, is an
open-source web-based platform that supports the development of both scientific
applications and high-performance libraries. It selects, configures and, in some
cases, generates implementations of high-performance numerical algorithms. ANSER
defines a methodology for automating the process of identifying problem
features, creating performance models (based on combining analytical and machine
learning approaches), and employing them in creating and configuring numerical
software. ANSER initially targets widely used numerical packages for nonlinear
partial differential equations and solution of eigenvalue problems, but it is
designed to be extensible to other types of numerical methods, such as graph
computations and n-body simulations. In addition to traditional dissemination
methods (open-source software releases and publications), ANSER integrates
semantic analysis of scientific computing literature to discover numerical
methods similar to those provided by the target libraries and to identify and
connect with our users. ANSER provides multiple interfaces to support different
types of users, including students, computational scientists, and numerical
library developers.