* 1717532
* SHF: Small: Enabling and Analyzing Accuracy-aware Reliable GPU Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Adwait Jog, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,999.00

Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are becoming the default choice for general-
purpose hardware acceleration because of their ability to enable orders of
magnitude faster and energy-efficient execution for large-scale high-performance
computing applications. Since the majority of such applications executing on
large-scale HPC systems are long-running, it is very important that they cope
with a variety of hardware- and software-based faults. Many prior works have
shown that real HPC systems are vulnerable to soft errors. An absence of
essential protection and checkpointing mechanisms can lead to lower scientific
productivity, operational efficiency, and even monetary loss. However, these
protection mechanisms (e.g., error correction codes) are themselves not free --
they incur very high performance, energy, and area
costs.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a holistic approach to explore
the avenues to reduce these protection overheads by taking advantage of the fact
that all errors do not lead to an unacceptable loss in the accuracy of
application output. Prior results show that GPGPU applications are amenable to
such accuracy-aware optimizations. In order to enable these optimizations, this
project will address three major research questions: a) What hardware/software
support and tools are necessary to determine which instructions are not
vulnerable to soft errors, b) Based on this analysis, which hardware
component(s) need not be protected and for how long, while not sacrificing
application quality beyond the user's quality requirements, and c) What
optimizations in terms of resource management and scheduling are necessary to
make low-overhead but reliable computation more effective and efficient. These
questions will be explored via a variety of GPGPU applications emerging from the
areas of high-performance computing (HPC), big-data analytics, machine learning,
and graphics. If successful, this project will generate several novel research
insights that will play an important role in enabling low-cost reliable GPU
computing. The results of this project will be integrated into the existing and
new undergraduate and graduate courses on computer architecture and reliability,
which will facilitate in training students, including women and students from
diverse backgrounds and minority groups.