* 1717589
* CSR: Small: Software Transactional Memory for Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,999.00

When someone driving a car presses the brake pedal, they expect the anti-lock
brakes to react in time to avoid a problem. A car actually contains many
computers that run programs that control braking, steering, engine power, etc.
These programs must perform their control operations by specific deadlines,
often measured in tiny fractions of a second, to ensure safe operation. Systems
like those in a car belong to a category of hardware and software designs called
"safety-critical real-time systems" because they must complete their work by
real deadline times that matter for safety. Systems in this category require
some form of certification that provides the necessary level of assurance that
catastrophic consequences, such as loss of life, are avoided. Most car buyers
would likely never give certification a passing thought, but it is a critical
part of the automotive design process. This project is directed at developing
infrastructure that can aid in the creation and certification of safety-critical
real-time systems. This infrastructure will be provided in the form of a concept
called real-time software transactional memory (STM). The purpose of real-time
STM is to allow tricky program-certification issues, which arise in complex
software systems in which programs share data, to be handled automatically with
little programmer effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed real-time STM
framework will ease overall certification efforts and costs in the development
of complex safety-critical real-time systems, which are increasingly becoming
part of our society and daily lives. In developing this framework, multicore
processors will be a primary emphasis. The advent of multicore technology has
created serious certification issues in the avionics and automotive industries.
The real-time STM to be developed will be specifically disseminated to research
collaborators in these industries to evaluate in their systems. The software and
data produced will also be made available for public download by other
interested parties. Instructions for doing so will be provided at
http://jamesanderson.web.unc.edu/research/. The results obtained in this project
will be disseminated to the public through lectures at universities and
international summer schools, presentations at conferences and workshops, and
public demonstration events. Computer science as a field is suffering from a
serious shortage of women at all levels and in particular at the graduate level
and above. Several female graduate students will be directly involved in this
project