* 1717884
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Error Correction with Natural Redundancy
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jehoshua Bruck, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 166,666.00

Part 1: Nontechnical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project studies the fundamental problem of removing errors from data by using
internal structures of data. It shows that the vast amount of data stored in
current data-storage systems possess very rich structures; therefore, by fully
exploiting them for error correction, the reliability of data-storage systems
can be improved significantly. The project studies several fundamental aspects
of this technology, including how to discover and characterize the highly
complex structures of various types of data, how to use them to correct errors
in data efficiently to improve the reliability of data-storage systems, how to
combine the technology with existing error-correction techniques that are based
on adding external redundancy to data, and how to implement the technology in
practical data-storage systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a
critical issue of the modern society: how to ensure that data can be stored
reliably at large scale and over a long time. The new technology has the
potential to substantially improve the dependability of information
infrastructure, which accesses vast amounts of data frequently for scientific
and industrial computing. The project is interdisciplinary in nature: it
combines multiple scientific fields including information theory, machine
learning, big data analysis and algorithm design, and aims to educate students
and contribute to workforce development for next-generation storage systems. The
project conjugates rigorous theoretical analysis and significant practical
applications, to foster collaboration between academia and industry, and create
new scientific advances with combined efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:
Technical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies
how to use the inherent redundancy in big data for error correction. Examples of
big data include languages, images, databases, and others. The inherent
redundancy is integrated with error-correcting codes (ECC) for effective error
correction. The objective is to elevate data reliability in storage systems to
the next level. To achieve this goal, new techniques will be developed to
discover various types of inherent redundancy in both compressed and
uncompressed data. New approaches will be explored to combine inherent-
redundancy decoders and ECC decoders for effective error correction. Fundamental
limits of both capacity and computational complexity will be studied for error
correction using inherent redundancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines
error correction with machine learning and is interdisciplinary in nature. It
will expand the current knowledge on error correction in multiple ways. First,
it uses techniques in natural language processing and deep learning to discover
new types of redundancy in big data that are suitable for error correction, and
which extend beyond current knowledge in joint source-channel coding. This
includes redundancy discovery techniques for data already compressed by various
compression algorithms. Second, it explores decoding algorithms for ECCs with
not only regular ECC-imposed redundancy, but also irregular inherent redundancy.
It extends existing error correction schemes to cast the fundamental limits of
inherent redundancy for error correction, in terms of both capacity and
computational complexity. Third, by integrating a theoretical study with
practical systems, a foundation can be laid for next-generation systems that
store and transmit big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern society relies
increasingly heavily on digital data. With the explosive amount of data
generated each day, it is essential to make advances in error correction that
can catch the speed of data explosion. This project aims at improving data
reliability significantly to the next level, and improvements in this direction
can be highly beneficial to the daily work and life of the modern society. This
project, being interdisciplinary between coding theory and machine learning, can
foster collaboration between the information theory and computer science
communities. The project combines rigorous theoretical analysis with significant
practical applications, to foster collaboration between academia and industry,
and create new scientific advances with combined efforts. The proposed research
will be integrated with engineering education by developing new courses for
graduate and undergraduate students, and involving under-represented, domestic
and international students in advanced research. The results will be actively
publicized in national/international conferences and journals.