* 1717362
* PFI:BIC - Development, Deployment and Evaluation of an Intelligent Service System for Personalized Early Literacy Learning Using Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Robin Morris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2021
* USD 999,817.00

Early learning is a key time to intervene for subsequent educational and
economic achievement. Research shows that reading levels in early primary years
can predict high school graduation rates. Effective Pre-K educational
intervention programs are recognized as an effective return on investment (ROI)
for society via improved employment opportunities, lower incarceration rates,
and decreased need for social services. The scalability and ease-of-deployment
of smart devices and other digital learning technologies has transformative
potential to increase Kindergarten readiness outcomes that is widely accessible
and affordable. Especially for children who cannot access quality pre-K
education. However, modern digital early educational tools do not possess AI and
machine learning algorithms for continuous assessment and modeling of children?s
literacy and and oral language skills, nor are they capable of personalization
to meet the diverse needs of individual children. The goal of this proposed
research is to bridge this gap between the need for personalized interventions
for early childhood learning with the ubiquity and affordability of mobile
devices. The research team proposes to develop, deploy, and evaluate a system
capable of automatic and continuous assessment, personalized content adaptation,
and AI-powered educational mentorship to deliver high quality, scalable, and
affordable early literacy interventions to young children.

The proposed research will develop a smart system for personalized early
learning on mobile devices, by developing three innovative technology
components: 1. Embedded student assessment algorithms, that can estimate reading
skill from diverse, multimodal data sources including audio, facial expression,
and real-time gameplay/usage data. 2. Personalized mentoring algorithms that
adapt educational content to individual patterns of behavior of app usage to
optimize for individual learning outcomes. 3. Affect-aware content adaptation
and personalization algorithms to optimize engagement and learning. These
technologies shall be embedded within two novel interactive educational apps.
The first is for storytelling and vocabulary development. The second is for
reading.  Both use general assessment data, real-time audio, and facial
expression recognition to estimate performance and to optimize motivation,
engagement, and learning. These technologies will be embedded within industry
partner Curious Learning's mobile software platform, which currently delivers
early learning software for children to promote early literacy readiness of US
kindergarten children. The project will evaluate the ability of these
technologies to assess reading skill, foster vocabulary and oral language, and
to improve engagement and learning by personalizing the Curious Learning
system's educational content to children.