* 1717842
* CIF: Small: Fundamental limits and coding for massive wireless random-access
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Yury Polyanskiy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The key expected innovation of the next generation of radio-access networks
(such as cellular) is their ability to service vast numbers of active devices as
envisioned in the so-called "Internet-of-Things". Unfortunately, current
networks were designed with the human-type communication in mind, and this led
to a focus on the operating regime of a (relatively) few simultaneously active
users. More specifically, present systems employ centralized resource
allocation, thus orthogonalizing the access from different users. This solution
is not acceptable for machine-type communication, as it relies on a significant
control-layer overhead thereby incurring a significant penalty in latency and
energy efficiency. Consequently, there is a strong economical demand for a new
solution in both the unlicensed spectrum (so called, low-power wide-area
networks) and the licensed spectrum (5G).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
work is to provide theoretical guidance for the design of the multiple-access
layer in the next generation of wireless networks. Classical work on the topic
lacks several specific details, making it inadequate: ignoring the control-layer
overhead in network analytic literature, and ignoring delay in information
theory. Consequently, this work aims to provide necessary contemporary
modifications: (a) a gigantic number of idle (inactive) users; (b) a still large
number of active users; (c) short packets; (d) high energy-efficiency (low
energy-per-bit). This project introduces a new paradigm of random-access coding
that separates data communication from user identification, for which
fundamental limits are going to be derived and the low-complexity practical
solutions studied. Performance of the currently available solutions will be
contrasted with the non-asymptotic fundamental limits and new solutions
developed. In addition to information-theoretic and communication-theoretic
parts, the work involves a combinatorial-theoretic component in the form of
constructing Sidon sets, B2-sequences and superimposed codes.