* 1717858
* NeTS: Small: Strategic Management of Advance Reservations in Cloud and Network Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 507,158.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;Advance reservation (AR) services form a pillar of the
economy. For instance, they are widely deployed in the industries of
transportation, lodging, and health care. They are also increasingly being
adopted for the management of resources in communication networks and in cloud
computing. For users they offer assurance that resources will be available when
needed, while for providers they offer a new stream of revenue and the ability
to forecast demand. Yet, the behavior of systems supporting AR is complex, since
the decision of a customer about making a reservation affects the performance of
other customers. Furthermore, pricing schemes employed by service providers have
a significant impact on customer behavior. The main goals of this project are to
develop mathematical models for characterizing the strategic behavior of users
and providers in cloud and networking systems that support AR. The project also
entails the design of efficient resource allocation and pricing mechanisms to
incentivize widespread adoption of AR services in a way that benefits both
customers and the service provider. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The
main goals of this project are: i) to develop models for characterizing the
strategic behavior of all participants in advance reservation schemes employed
in cloud computing and network systems; ii) to analyze the equilibrium outcomes
of these models using game theory; iii) to design efficient resource allocation
and pricing mechanisms that incentivize the deployment of AR services to the
benefit of all participants; and iv) to transition theory into practice. This
project incorporates key features of advance reservation in cloud and network
services along several dimensions, including the randomness of the demand, the
heterogeneity of the workload, the dynamic nature of the network traffic and
topology, and the ability for users to learn and adapt their strategies based on
historical data. The investigations entail characterizing the equilibria
outcomes and their efficiency, using both established and newer concepts, such
as the Price of Anarchy and the Price of Conservatism in non-cooperative
contexts, and the Core and Bargaining Schemes in cooperative contexts. The
project further includes measurements on an open cloud marketplace
(Massachusetts Open Cloud) to inform the analysis and guide both service
providers and customers in their strategic decisions.