* 1717636
* SHF: Small: Formal Methods for Modern System Configuration Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Brian Levine, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2021
* USD 448,904.00

Computer systems play an essential role in all aspects of business, education,
and the military. However, modern computer systems are incredibly complicated
and thus prone to failure and susceptible to being hacked. System
administrators, whose job it is to ensure that computer systems run smoothly,
have a very difficult time managing and defending computing infrastructure. This
research project is developing tools and techniques to make the job of system
administrators dramatically easier. The project is focused on techniques that
work well with existing, industry-standard tools and practices, which will make
its research contributions easier to apply. The intellectual merits are that the
project is (1) developing new tools for maintaining computer systems, (2)
designing models of computer systems that are amenable to analysis and
verification, and (3) advancing the state of the art in formal methods for
system administration tools. The project's broader significance and importance
are that (1) it directly addresses a current and urgent problem that affects the
nation's computing infrastructure, (2) it is developing tools that system
administrators will be able to use, and (3) it will spur further research and
development in this important area by publishing and releasing its products as
open source software.

This project leverages recent advances in program verification and program
synthesis to make system administration dramatically easier. Instead of
proposing completely new abstractions that would be unfamiliar to system
administrators, the project is developing techniques that are applicable to
mainstream system configuration languages, such as Puppet, Chef, and Ansible.
The project is developing tools to verify both universal properties of
configurations and configuration-specific properties that govern how components
of complex systems interact. Moreover, since real system configurations often
invoke external commands, the project is also investigating a model-learning
approach to accommodate them. Finally, even verified configurations need to be
updated, and updates introduce new errors. To address this problem, the project
is developing new abstractions to make configuration updates dramatically
easier.