* 1717997
* III: Small: Improving Technical Paper Database Search through Math-Aware Search Engines
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Richard Zanibbi, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2022
* USD 498,928.00

Today's search engines make use of sophisticated techniques for searching based
upon words, but are not able to make nuanced use of mathematical notation. This
project aims to allow scientists, engineers, mathematicians, and students to
locate technical information using words, mathematical notation, or some of
each. For example, a mathematician studying graph theory could use these new
capabilities to find related applications in physics, ecology, and social
network analysis, despite any differences in the notation and terminology used
in those disciplines. Given a large collection of technical documents, we will
apply machine learning techniques to construct associations between the formulae
and words used to explain mathematical ideas, and determine how to translate
automatically between those two forms of expression. These associations and
translations can then be used by students who write what they are looking for
using words, with the search engine finding documents that express those same
ideas, even if only in mathematical notation. These new math-aware search
engines will accelerate innovation by allowing searchers to discover information
both across technical disciplines and, by using mathematical notation as a
pivot, even across human languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these
goals, the project will develop novel scalable techniques for indexing and
retrieval of mathematical content in technical documents. These methods will
accommodate a broad range of notational conventions, formats, and encodings. New
context-based methods for inferring associations between formulae and related
text will be used to build rich and flexible models of content equivalence.
These equivalence models will be used in new ranking algorithms that integrate
results found using words or using mathematical notation into a single ranked
list. Open-source reference implementations will be shared publicly, and new
test collections created to evaluate these implementations will be shared with
other researchers. To gain experience with the use of these new capabilities,
the project will add math-aware search to the CiteSeerX digital library of
scientific literature. CiteSeerX is an open Web service that can be used to
compare alternative retrieval methods in actual use. For further information see
the project Web page: https://www.cs.rit.edu/~dprl/math-aware-search.html.