* 1717060
* CSR: NeTS: Small: Theoretical Foundations for Cache Networks: Performance Models,  Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ness Shroff, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,135.00

Caching systems are a core component of Internet data infrastructures. They
enable low-cost access to a fast, but limited cache space that stores a
selective subset of popular data items drawn from a large collection of data
records that are stored in slow, persistent media. Caching systems greatly
improve the performance of various services in, for example, information
retrieval, data analytics, social networks and e-commence. Caching systems are
already widely deployed but need to scale efficiently to support emerging big
data applications. To better serve multiple flows of data requests on a caching
system, a fundamental question is whether the cache space should be pooled
together to serve these flows jointly or be divided to serve them separately.
While system-based approaches have yielded good intuition and first-order
solutions, it is important that new theories be developed to provide a
quantitative characterization of cache networks that can lead to optimal or
near-optimal solutions. This project will develop a much-needed theoretical
foundation for cache systems in emerging data processing systems, with concrete
plans to transition the theoretical results into practical implementations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried across the following
interrelated thrusts. (1) Characterizing miss ratios of competing flows on
least-recently-used (LRU) caching: A unified theoretical framework will be
developed to investigate critical factors that impact the cache miss ratios,
including request rates, data popularities, item sizes, and overlapped data
items across different request flows. The new insights will be used to directly
improve the performance of real caching systems. (2) Optimizing data caching for
server clusters: this thrust investigates whether servers should be pooled
together or not, and how to optimize the sizes of different server clusters as
well as where to route data requests for multiple caching clusters. A joint
optimization of data caching and job scheduling will also be addressed. (3)
Transition from theories into practice: This thrust will leverage open source
projects, Memcached, Redis, Hadoop, Spark and Tachyon, to validate the
theoretical results by real experiments, and to transition theories into working
systems by adding new modules and modifying existing
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project may benefit society, industry and
academia. The insights from the mathematical analysis and the new algorithms
developed through this project are expected to play a key role in improving the
performance of cache networks, for example, for in-memory key-value stores. They
can contribute to both theoretical research and practical technologies. A
specific focus will bridge the traditional separation between stochastic
operations research and computer engineering education. The research results
from this proposal will be integrated into a new graduate-level course. Other
broader impacts include industry collaborations for practical use cases and
technology transfer, undergraduate summer programs, strategies for engaging
women and other under-represented groups, and the development of a strong
research lab so that it is also a teaching lab.