* 1717635
* SHF:   Small:   Collaborative Research:  PEGASUS:  ProgrEss GuAranteeS for Universal tranSactions
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Peter Pirkelbauer, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2020
* USD 249,780.00

Software scalability and reliability on multi-core systems is a crucial and
urgent issue that needs to be addressed. Transactional processing is a promising
programming model for developing parallel applications across many domains,
including scientific and application software, that simplifies the development
of correct concurrent software. This project will develop transactional
techniques that overcome many current limitations, and it will explore the
optimization of these techniques on systems with support for transactions. The
intellectual merits are the development of novel techniques for constructing
transactional data structures on systems with and without hardware support for
transactions. The project will create a first approach for transactional
processing with progress guarantees. The project's broader significance and
importance are to make accessible to the industry a set of prototype data
structures and programming techniques that furthers the reliability and
performance of software on current and future multi-core systems. The project
will also develop critical human resources in systems programming. The project
will lead to a number of fundamental and practical outcomes. Transactions have
been recognized as a promising alternative to lock-based systems. However,
transactions as currently implemented in software or hardware have different
drawbacks, with the absence of a progress guarantee being the most fundamental.
To overcome this problem, this work further develops the notion of transactional
data structures that are based on lock-free techniques, thereby guaranteeing
progress. The project will also extend the applicability of commutable
transactions to various data structure types including commonly used linked and
contiguous memory data structures. The project harnesses transactional hardware
to accelerate the execution of common cases and demonstrates the applicability
by prototyping a set of important containers. Finally, this project will
evaluate the outcome against