* 1717885
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  GAMBIT:  Efficient Graph Processing on a Memristor-based Embedded Computing Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Hai Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Recently, graph processing received intensive interests in light of a wide range
of needs to understand relationships. Graph analytics are widely used in key
domains in our society, such as cyber security, social media, infrastructure
monitoring (e.g., smart building), natural language processing, system biology,
recommendation systems. These important applications all fall into fast-growing
sectors in computer science and engineering research. On the other hand, in many
emerging applications, the graph analytics are ideally performed in the edge
(e.g., a mobile or embedded system) in order to allow the relationships between
events to be discovered in the field where they are unfold. Unfortunately, the
existing embedded systems equipped with conventional computing units like
CPU/GPU cannot efficiently process large graphs in real time. Instead, large
data centers are required to perform the graph processing, either incurring
extra latency and energy due to data communication or only providing forensic
(offline) graph analysis. This research aims to effectively enable graph
analytics in embedded system with disruptive emerging technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support graph analytic applications with the limited
hardware resources in embedded systems, this project seeks to develop GAMBIT --
a memristor-based embedded computing framework for efficient graph processing.
Our research program aims to develop multi-layer techniques to enable highly
efficient (e.g., 1000X) and scalable real-time graph analytics in embedded
systems (i.e., network edge). It contains research efforts across circuit,
architecture, system and vertical integration. (1) At the circuit level, the
project proposes a memristor-based graph computing core to enable efficient
computations for graph processing. (2) At the architecture level, the project
proposes the complete memristor-based graph processing architecture for
partitioned graph and various algorithms. (3) At the system level, the project
develops a graph analytics framework for embedded systems and integrates it with
a popular embedded OS. (4) For integration, the project proposes to develop an
emulator of the proposed architecture and cross-layer HW/SW co-design
techniques. This project contributes to society through engaging high-school and
undergraduate students from minority-serving institutions into research,
attracting women and under-represented groups into graduate education, expanding
the computer engineering curriculum with graph processing and other emerging
applications in embedded systems, disseminating research infrastructure for
education and training, and collaborating with the industry.