* 1717045
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Fast Online Machine Learning Algorithms for Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Atilla Eryilmaz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

In addition to their traditional use for human-to-human or human-to-machine
communication, wireless networks are also envisioned to form the backbone of
many emerging applications in health care, transportation, and power
distribution. The smooth operation of these applications critically depends on
the satisfactory operation of the wireless networks that are responsible for the
efficient and timely transfer of information between agents, despite abruptly
changing network conditions and stringent application-specific service
requirements&lt;br/&gt;Existing state-of-the-art wireless network resource
allocation does not account for the stringent and changing requirements of the
application demands. This research proposes to leverage and extend the emerging
area of machine learning to develop new approaches to low-delay wireless
networks that are necessary for the support of essential services with
applications in diverse domains including low-cost healthcare, energy savings,
and security. Advances made in this research will benefit the society-at-large
by enabling efficient and low-cost access to such services in the future. The
project will also help advance the training and education of future engineers
with a strong foundation on both the theoretical underpinnings and the practical
considerations for the design of efficient wireless network algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad objective of this project is to develop a
unified machine learning and resource allocation framework for future wireless
networks that can adapt to rapidly changing dynamics and statistics at the
physical layer and the increasingly stringent service requirements at the
application layer. The fundamental problem in machine learning is to make
decisions in a stochastic system when the statistical model underlying the
system is unknown a priori. While there has been much activity on this problem,
many features unique to wireless networks are not considered, including rapidly
changing network dynamics, interactions and dependencies among multiple users,
and transient delay performance. The focus of the proposal is to design fast,
online learning algorithms which lead to dramatic improvements in network
performance, by taking into account the unique characteristics of wireless
networks.