* 1717542
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Crypto-for-Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Phillip Rogaway, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The collection, retention, and misuse of private information can pose threats to
individuals, institutions, and collective values. Cryptography can be a useful
tool to help address these concerns, enhancing our security and our ability to
feel secure. Historically, however, this potential benefit has been largely
unrealized, perhaps because most of the research in cryptography have gone to
securing electronic commerce and to investigating foundational questions in the
field. Cognizant of this, the PI's research aims to develop and popularize
scientific work in cryptography that is more directly connected to securing
people's communication. The work aims to be as scientifically well founded as
the most rigorous theory-focused cryptography, but to be more directly oriented
towards improving people's communication security and preserving for the
individual some protected, private space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
follow the traditions of practice-oriented provable security, which deals with
definitions, practical protocols, and concretely analyzed proofs. The first aim
is to treat constructs like onion routing and anonymous key-distribution within
this framework. The goal is to have clear, quantitative, and self-contained
definitions, protocols, and proofs for privacy problems that are well-known,
particularly to practitioners, but that lack satisfactory foundations. Next, the
research will investigate a new approach for secure messaging: communications-
efficient messaging, in the star topology, with an untrusted server as the hub.
Senders send their messages to a server, and receivers pluck their messages from
it, but neither the server nor a global adversary will know who has sent what to
whom. Finally, the research will study the privacy and authenticity of secret-
sharing schemes, including deterministic secret-sharing of high-entropy secrets.
This work will inform the development of a state-of-the-art secret-sharing tool
for at-risk stakeholders. Some of the work will be facilitated by a new
definitional paradigm, oracle silencing, in which a na√Øve game-based
cryptographic definition is automatically modified, using a notion's correctness
condition, to withhold credit for trivial adversarial wins.