* 1717066
* RI: Small: Optical Skin For Robots: Tactile Sensing and Whole Body Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Akihiko Yamaguchi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 440,000.00

This project will enable robots to feel what they touch. The key
idea&lt;br/&gt;is to put cameras inside the body of the robot, looking outward
at the&lt;br/&gt;robot skin as it deforms, and also through the robot skin to
see nearby objects as they are grasped or avoided. This approach addresses
several challenges: 1) achieving close to human resolution (a million biological
sensors) using millions of pixels, 2) reducing occlusion during grasping and
manipulation, and detecting obstacles before impact, and 3) protecting expensive
electronics and wiring while allowing replacement of worn out or damaged
inexpensive skin. Humans replace the outer layer of our skin every month. One
theory as to why current robots are so clumsy is that they have little or no
feeling in their skin. Robots that can feel when they touch will make better
servants and be more useful, especially when taking care of older adults and
others needing help walking, dressing, cleaning, or feeding. A soft touch is
needed in many tasks in the home and workplace. Teaching robots to do new tasks,
and robot learning,&lt;br/&gt;will be much easier if robots can feel what they
are doing. Robots will also be safer, and safer to work with, if they can feel
accidental contact or the size of forces they are applying. Possible
applications of this approach include aware furniture and car interiors that
feel what a human is doing or wants to do, aware&lt;br/&gt;clothes, aware tools,
and aware floors, walls, and ceilings. Optical skin-based sensing is a
practical, affordable, manufacturable, and maintainable approach to sensing for
touching and helping people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical goals for the
project include first building and then installing on a robot a network of about
100 off-the-shelf small cameras (less than 1 cubic centimeter) that is capable
of collecting information, deciding what video streams to pay attention to, and
processing the video streams to estimate forces, slip, and object shape. The
wiring, solder joints, and other connections in the sensing system don't have to
repeatedly deform or face cyclic or variable stresses--major sources of failure.
The materials that do deform or are stressed (the outer layer of the skin) can
be optimized for sensing, grasping and manipulation, and mechanical robustness,
and can be easily and cheaply replaced when worn or damaged. The researchers
will evaluate their work by co-developing an "optical skin" for hands and a
synergistic soft hand. A transformative idea is to aggressively distribute high
resolution imaging over the entire robot body. This reduces occlusion, a major
issue in perception for manipulation. Given the low cost of imaging sensors,
there is no longer a need to restrict optical sensing to infrared range finders
(single pixel depth&lt;br/&gt;cameras), line cameras, or low resolution area
cameras.