* 1717349
* AF:Small: Fundamental High-Dimensional Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The availability of high-dimensional data in important application areas has
made efficient tools to handle such data the need of the century. This proposal
addresses some of the most basic questions arising from this need. The topics
targeted in this project are on the frontier of research in algorithms,
targeting well-known open problems with promising new ideas. Progress on these
problems is sure to unravel mathematical structure and is likely to yield new
tools. As the field of algorithms continues to expand (and extend its reach
beyond computer science), such tools have become
indispensable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI was the founding director of the
Algorithms and Randomness Center (ARC) and continues in-depth collaborations
with scientists from other fields to identify problems and ideas that could play
a fundamental role in understanding the complexity of computation. The topics
and findings of this project will be used to design graduate courses and
contribute to undergraduate ones. The graduate courses will be the basis for
textbooks to benefit the research community. In addition, up-to-date surveys on
these topics will be prepared by the PI and
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sampling, Learning and Optimization in high
dimension are intricately linked at many levels: reductions between problems
from one topic to another, insights from one that apply to another, common
analysis techniques and similar contexts (e.g., large, high-dimensional data).
This project is motivated by quest for a theory of efficient algorithms, a
theory that would include algorithmic tools, lower bounds and analysis
techniques, in addition to questions that arise from the quest but are of
independent mathematical interest and provide new ideas for classical
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project seeks to find efficient
algorithms for sampling in the oracle model as well as for explicit polytopes,
faster sampling and optimization using Riemannian geometry; algorithms for
learning polyhedra, the analysis of neural networks with a single hidden layer,
robust estimation and unsupervised learning in the presence of noise, and
algorithmic considerations in the representation and analysis of very large (but
not dense) graphs.