* 1717392
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: iPROBE - An Internal Shielding Approach for Protecting against Frontside and Backside Probing Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Domenic Forte, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2022
* USD 293,333.00

With the proliferation of electronics into every day life, integrated circuits
(ICs) process and store more sensitive information than ever before. The
extraction of on-chip assets, such as keys, firmware, personal and information,
threatens state-of-the-art military technologies, commercial industries, and
society alike through counterfeiting, theft, fraud, development of exploits, and
much more. Although protection against software and non-invasive methods of
extraction has been widely investigated, physical probing has received little
attention. In particular, Focused Ion Beam (FIB) is a powerful tool that allows
attackers to not only to access and probe assets, but to destroy and/or bypass
existing countermeasures. Since FIB capabilities are almost limitless, the best
approaches should make probing as costly, time consuming, and frustrating as
possible. However, a significant barrier in doing so lies in the fact that the
time, effort, and cost to design a FIB-resistant chip must remain reasonable,
especially to designers who are not security experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates iPROBE, the first ever computer-aided design (CAD) approach
aimed at hindering frontside and backside probing attacks on integrated
circuits. As a CAD solution, iPROBE relieves the designer's burden by
automatically balancing the security and overhead of various countermeasures.
Compared to ad hoc countermeasures such as top level meshes, it also allows
protection to be concentrated on only the most sensitive portions of a design,
thereby lowering cost. iPROBE takes design assets as input, and uses
information-theoretic and test-inspired metrics to identify all nets requiring
protection. During physical design, nets are ranked in terms of their
sensitivity and vulnerability to probing. Internal shields are constructed using
existing functional nets as well as additional test nets to surround the highest
ranked nets. Cutting through the functional nets ideally renders the chip
useless or destroys the sensitive data. Similarly, cutting through test nets can
be detected and used to trigger self-destruction. t-private circuits and other
countermeasures are integrated with the internal shield to further increase
attack complexity. For evaluation, benchmark circuits are implemented with
conventional flows and with iPROBE. Area, power, and timing between the two are
compared to estimate the iPROBE's impact on performance. Security is evaluated
using a custom-built IC probing evaluation tool previously developed by the PIs
(with upgrades for backside attack evaluation) and using FIBs in the PIs' lab to
execute real attacks on iPROBE-designed chips that are fabricated through MOSIS.