* 1717867
* NeTS: Small:  A Theoretical Approach to MAC Design for Communication Between Low Cost, Ultra-Low Power Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Dan Rubenstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2021
* USD 515,981.00

The Internet-of-Things is being extended to everyday physical objects by placing
tags on the objects, which have the ability to sense physical attributes of the
environment and, along with the object's identity, relay information for
processing. The current convention is to have passive tags that must communicate
directly with a powerful tag-reading device, but this limits the tags' ability
to convey information to scenarios where the readers are sufficiently prevalent.
An alternative, more effective paradigm, is to allow the tags to exchange
information with one another, passing information tag-to-tag until reaching a
tag that is in range with a gateway (reader) device. Under this latter paradigm,
the likelihood of objects being "disconnected" from the network will
significantly reduce, making tracking and monitoring more ubiquitous and
complete. Misplacing objects will become a problem of the past, especially in
regions where infrastructure is difficult to deploy, e.g., in emergency and
triage settings, which often have the major challenge of finding objects or
people or assessing conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will have
broad impact, bringing significant benefits to users and society at large.
Specifically, the proposed research will impact society in facilitating the path
toward extending the realm of the Internet-of-Things to everyday objects;
instances include tracking of everyday objects, as well as facilitating the
tracking of objects in specialized domains such as medicine, construction, and
shipping. The educational activities will create a rich set of opportunities for
students to involve themselves in algorithms, modeling, and evaluation work. The
research will also contribute to the educational component as the principal
investigators (PIs) have and will continue to design courses around this
emerging topic and will continue to involve not only PhD students, but also high
school, undergraduate, and masters students in research that directly relates to
this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs explore, from a theoretical
perspective, the fundamental limits of tag-to-tag communication, in particular
how to maximize communication rates in networks built from these ultra-low power
devices in environments where they must sleep for large fractions of time (in
order to harvest/conserve energy) and operate in an unsynchronized manner. From
a practical perspective, protocols will be designed and tested that can perform
transmission at rates close to these fundamental limits. The research will
create a stochastic optimization framework that is used in design and
development of practical distributed protocols. The theoretical algorithms
obtained in this research will be also tested and implemented using actual
prototypes.