* 1717241
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Heat/Mass Structure and Fluxes Through the Full Thickness of Greenland?s Percolation Zone
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Joel Harper, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 04/30/2023
* USD 758,699.00

Much of the snow that covers the Greenland Ice Sheet experiences melting during
summer months. This meltwater percolates and refreezes within the underlying
snow. Over time, this altered snow, which is referred to as firn, can reach to
depths of 100 meters. These changes in firn structure consequently alter the
heat flow within the ice, and between the ice sheet and the atmosphere. As yet
however, the full structure of the firn layer is unclear as observations have
been limited to shallow depths. To address this important lack of understanding,
the investigators propose a field study focused on drilling a number of deep ice
cores, with the goal of characterizing the thermal and physical properties of
the deep firn ice. This information is essential to predicting ice sheet changes
in volume and sea level rise. The project involves graduate and undergraduate
students, an early career scientist, and includes public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test the hypothesis that the
deep firn in the low elevation regions of Greenland experience densification
governed by water infiltration/refreezing and thermally enhanced compaction. The
project will develop a novel hot water drilling system to quickly penetrate 100
meters through the technically challenging conditions of intermixed cold and wet
firn. In situ data collection will include digital temperature strings, video
and core logging, and an instrumented drill stem. This work will yield a full-
depth characterization of firn thickness, density, permeability, and thermal
status. Moreover, drilling conducted a decade earlier in the region will permit
the investigators to assess changes in firn properties over time. Ultimately,
understanding meltwater retention and refreezing processes across Greenland?s
accumulation area is essential for advancing prediction of ice sheet volume
change,flow dynamics, and sea level change. The project will provide field and
laboratory research experiences impacting a large number of undergraduate and
graduate students. The project will support a newly funded young investigator,
and will include outreach activities targeting the general public and middle
school students in Greenland and Western Montana.