* 1717640
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Foundations of Applied Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Mihir Bellare, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2021
* USD 326,521.00

Currently, on an almost weekly basis there are reports on security breaches
which expose private information such as passwords or credit card numbers to
cyber criminals. In order to address this problem, this project develops
theoretical foundations and cryptographic approaches, and analyzes these new
mechanisms. This project focuses on three areas of great practical interest: (1)
the recovery of a cryptographic key by an adversary; (2) delegatable format-
preserving encryption which, for example, allows the in-place encryption of
credit-card numbers while limiting the damage in case of a compromise, and (3)
user authentication on the Internet. The broader impact of this work is in that
the team will develop a software library PlayCrypt with the goal to make
cryptography more accessible to a larger population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Key-
recovery attacks discussed in the literature lack precise models and rigorous
estimates of success probability. To address this shortcoming, this project
defines metrics for key-recovery security in order to enable rigorous claims
about attacks and to be able to prove hedging theorems that complement
moderately good security bounds under strong metrics with better bounds under
these newly-developed key-recovery metrics. This is of great interest and value
as key-recovery attacks are considered much more damaging in practice than
violations of semantic security. Furthermore, this project defines security
metrics for delegatable format-preserving encryption (FPE). FPE is widely used
for in-place encryption of credit-card numbers, and delegation allows the damage
from physical compromise of terminals to remain local. The project is also
geared to inform current standardization efforts. As a third direction, this
project considers client-to-server authentication over the Internet. Today's
paradigm of passing the password to the server over a server-authenticated TLS
(Transport Layer Security) channel exhibits many vulnerabilities. This project
formalizes the notion of piggy-backed authentication which allows the client to
convince the server of its identity without handing it its password yet
designing this mechanism in such a fashion that allows its implementation within
the current TLS-based web-security architecture in order to maximize the impact
of this work in practice.