* 1717656
* III: Small: Distributed Semantic Information Processing Applied to Camera Sensor Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Roberto Tron, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 312,610.00

In many applications, sensor networks can be used to monitor large geographical
regions. This typically produces large quantities of data that need to be
associated, summarized and classified in order to arrive to a semantically
meaningful descriptions of the phenomena being monitored. The long-term guiding
vision of this project is a distributed network that can perform this analysis
autonomously, over long periods of times, and in a scalable way. As a concrete
application, this research focuses on smart camera networks with nodes that are
either static or part of robotic agents. The planned work will result in systems
that are more efficient, accurate, and resilient. The algorithms developed will
find wide applications, including in security (continuously detecting suspicious
individuals in real time) and the Internet of Things. As part of the broader
impacts, the project will produce educational material to explain the scientific
results of the project to a K12 audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will introduce a novel framework for consistently, efficiently and reliably
extracting semantic information across a network of smart cameras. The project
will revolve around three pillars: (i) solving the consistent multi-camera
feature matching problem: find if a feature seen at a node has been seen by
other camera nodes, and if yes, find the most consistent correspondences using a
variation of decentralized hashing; (ii) autonomously finding emerging patterns
(e.g., images from different individuals) through feature clustering, using a
distributed algorithm for computing k-medoids; (iii) employing a new distributed
decision tree inference paradigm that allows the network to take consistent
decisions about the world (for example, the identity of an individual) while
spreading computations across the network. The project website will provide
access to the results of the work, including papers, downloadable code, and
educational material.