* 1717356
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Exploiting Physical Properties in Wireless Networks for Implicit Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Hongbo Liu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 160,000.00

The rapid development of information technology not only leads to great
convenience in our daily lives, but also raises significant concerns in the
field of security and privacy. Particularly, the authentication process, which
serves as the first line of information security by verifying the identity of a
person or device, has become increasingly critical. An unauthorized access could
result in detrimental impact on both corporation and individual in both secrecy
loss and privacy leakage. Unlike many existing studies on user/device
authentication, which either employ specialized or expensive hardware that needs
experts for installation and calibration or require users' active involvement,
the emerging low-cost and unobtrusive authentication solution without the users'
participation is particularly attractive to effectively complement conventional
security approaches. Due to the rich wireless connectivity and unique signal
characteristics in pervasive wireless environments, this project takes a
different view point by exploiting unique physical properties in wireless
networks to facilitate implicit authentication for both human and mobile
devices. The proposed research could advance our knowledge in exploiting the
physical layer information in wireless networks to capture unique physiological
and behavioral characteristics from human during their daily activities. It
could also enhance our understanding in developing deep learning techniques to
authenticate people based on their activities in the physical environments.
Additionally, the educational efforts include curriculum development, K-12 and
undergraduate involvement, and underrepresented student engagement in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on building a holistic
framework that leverages fine-grained radio signals available from the
commercial wireless networks to perform implicit user/device authentication. The
proposed framework aims to advance the foundation of integrating fine-grained
physical properties in wireless networks to enhance wireless security. The
research reveals that the fine-grained signal properties in wireless networks
are capable to capture unique physiological and behavioral characteristics from
human in both stationary and mobile daily activities. The proposed framework
develops smart segmentation on the wireless signals and extract unique features
that enable the capability of distinguishing individual. It further develops
deep learning techniques to authenticate people based on their daily activities
in the physical environments. The authentication process does not require active
user involvement nor require the user to wear any device. This project also
develops efficient techniques to detect the presence of user spoofing and
localize attackers to facilitate the employment of a broad array of defending
strategies.