* 1717610
* CIF:Small:Submodular Optimization Techniques for Sensing, Signal Processing, and Inference.
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Gregory Wornell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

A rapidly growing collection of modern systems rely on sensors to collect
measurements from which inference is performed via suitably designed signal
processing. These include autonomous vehicles, environmental monitoring systems,
smart buildings, security and surveillance systems, air traffic control, and
many others. Moreover,in many of these existing and emerging applications, there
are often stringent energy, cost, bandwidth, or other constraints that must be
taken into account in the system design. Problems of
placement,&lt;br/&gt;scheduling, and functionality of sensors have traditionally
been difficult optimization problems. This research develops the important role
that submodular optimization techniques have to play in addressing such
problems. Indeed, while there has been significant development in submodular
optimization tools and applications in recent years, a wealth of applications
involving sensing, signal processing and inference have yet to be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigates several instances and
aspects of these problems, including: optimization of spatial arrays in passive
and active sensing systems subject to diverse practical constraints; joint
optimization of sensor placement and scheduling for efficient learning of
environmental dynamics; optimization of spatial and temporal sensing subject to
computational constraints on the associated signal processing for the inference
task of interest; development of families of submodular information measures for
target applications involving&lt;br/&gt;both high- and low-level inference;
development of robust, adaptive, and universal designs for sensing that mitigate
the effects of incomplete knowledge of aspects of the system and environment;
and optimization of sensing system parameters beyond space and time via weighted
selection formulations exploiting submodularity in the absence of convexity.
Each of these investigations involves the development of the required analysis,
algorithms, and architectures, guided by contemporary motivating applications.