* 1717457
* Workshop on Future Combustion Research to Mitigate Carbon Emissions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Ajay Agrawal, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2017
* USD 35,000.00

1717457 Agrawal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to support the costs of
the meeting and the travels of the participants who attend the workshop on
Future Combustion Research to Mitigate Carbon Emissions. This proposed workshop
will be held at the conclusion of the 10th US National Combustion Meeting in
College Park, MD, April 26 to 27, 2017. Workshop participants will consist of
the following groups: (1) invited speakers who are eminent scholars on selected
topics, (2) invited panelists selected based on research background and
interests, and (3) program managers and decision makers in combustion research,
and (4) other participants interested in the workshop topic. The workshop
discussion will be focused on emerging opportunities to guide the future
combustion research. Workshop findings will be documented in a report that will
be disseminated to the wider technical
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion research has resulted in significant
improvements in air quality. However, the future research must target low
emissions concurrently with high efficiency, which directly impacts greenhouse
gas emissions. Research ideas that offer the potential to drastically increase
energy efficiency will be explored in this workshop. An initial list of five
topics has been identified, including (1) sustainable fuels, (2) carbon
recycling and sequestration, (3) the Food, Energy, and Water (FEW) Nexus, (4)
big data and analysis, and (5) diagnostics and environment. The invited speakers
will make technical presentations, facilitate discussions, and assist in report
writing on respective topical area. It is anticipated that novel research areas
in helping mitigate carbon emissions will be formulated. Results of this
workshop are expect to greatly influence future research directions in the
combustion field.