* 1717130
* SaTC:  STARSS:  Small:  Collaborative:  Managing Hardware Security in Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Qiaoyan Yu, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2021
* USD 156,667.00

Vertically stacked three-dimensional (3D) integration of semiconductor chips is
an emerging technology to ensure continued growth in transistor density and
performance of integrated circuits (ICs). Despite the well-characterized
advantages and limitations, the hardware security of such circuits has not
received much attention. With shrinking number of trusted circuit manufacturers,
trustworthiness of electronic devices is a growing concern. Vertical integration
brings unexplored and unique challenges in managing hardware security. This
research develops a cross-layer framework to manage and guarantee hardware
security in 3D ICs. The systematic framework developed by this research assesses
and enhances trustworthiness of 3D ICs for both commercial and defense-specific
applications. Proposed project also supports diverse educational and outreach
programs with emphasis on underrepresented groups in both New Hampshire and
Stony Brook, Long Island. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing hardware security
solutions are for 2D ICs manufactured by a trusted foundry. Unfortunately, new
security problems arise when multiple dies from different vendors are stacked in
a 3D IC. Proposed research targets these security weaknesses with an emphasis on
the trustworthiness of vertical communications. Solution mechanisms to prevent
attacks on the vertical communication path will be investigated to achieve
secure die-to-die communication. A secure power delivery architecture will be
designed to detect small hardware Trojans in any die within the stack. A
switching noise analysis based scheme will be investigated to detect malicious
behavior in vertical communication paths.&lt;br/&gt;