* 1717218
* NeTS: Small:  Collaborative Research:  BRICK:  Breaking the I/O and Computation Bottlenecks in Massive MIMO Base Stations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Joseph Cavallaro, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2021
* USD 274,000.00

Massive multi-antenna (MIMO) wireless systems, in which the base-station is
equipped with hundreds or thousands of antenna elements, will enable
unprecedented data rates, cell coverage, and transmission reliability compared
to that of existing cellular communication systems. The presence of hundreds or
thousands of radio-frequency (RF) transceivers and antennas, however, results in
excessively high internal data rates, which results in chip-interconnect and
computation bottlenecks that prevent a straightforward deployment of this
technology in practice. This project will develop new technologies that rely on
decentralized signal processing at the base-station in order to avoid these
bottlenecks, which leads to feasible and scalable solutions that enable base-
station designs with thousands of antenna elements without sacrificing
performance or reliability. In addition to enabling massive MIMO in practice,
the project will advance future cellular networks through collaboration with the
telecommunications industry, with the Argos massive MIMO testbed, and other
network research testbeds. The project's broader impact on education and
outreach will include multiple components, including (i) training a diverse
group of students as part of a collaborative, multi-institutional research team
in the areas of communication theory and circuit design, (ii) integrating
outcomes of the work into undergraduate and graduate courses, and (iii) making
research outcomes broadly available through public-domain software packages and
open-education resources via OpenStax courseware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project develops novel decentralized algorithms as well as very-large scale
integration (VLSI) and general-purpose computing on graphics processing units
(GPGPU) architectures based on antenna clustering and parallelization, for the
uplink (users communicate to base-station) and the downlink (base-station
communicates to users). The main idea of decentralized baseband processing is to
divide the signal-processing workload at the base-station into multiple
computing fabrics that are each connected to only a subset of RF transceivers
and antennas. To reduce the chip-interconnect and computation bottlenecks the
project investigates (i) optimization-based algorithms that exchange consensus
information among the antenna clusters and (ii) message-passing-based algorithms
that avoid such consensus exchange altogether. The most promising algorithm
solutions will be implemented on field-programmable gate array and GPGPU
clusters to assess the efficacy and limits of the developed solutions with real-
world performance, hardware, and bandwidth constraints. The results of this
analysis will provide guidelines that enable optimal massive MIMO base-station
designs that use decentralized baseband processing.