* 1717775
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  EUReCa:  Enabling Untethered VR/AR System via Human-centric Graphic Computing and Distributed Data Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xiang Chen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,799.00

Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) devices, especially their mobile
versions are newly emergent technologies. However, a major challenge that VR/AR
technologies faces is the gap between the increasing needs for graphic and data
processing and the limited computing capability of the mobile hardware. Two
researchers from GMU and Duke form a team to develop an innovative VR/AR system,
namely, "EUReCa", which tackles the challenge of human-centric graphic
processing and distributed data processing. This research studies VR/AR system
design using standard workloads to understand the computation source utilization
that leads to development of usage model, and reduces the computation loads via
task allocation, thereby enhancing the efficiency and scalability of
computation. The research outcomes will benefit both research and industry at
large by integrating the innovations of human interaction and advanced data
processing technologies. The education plan enhances existing curricula and
pedagogy by integrating interdisciplinary modules on computer graphic, embedded
systems, and machine learning with newly developed teaching practices, and gives
special attention to women and underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project performs three tasks. Task 1 models the computation
resource utilization of VR/AR systems by considering the system configuration
and dynamics of user operations. Task 2 explores efficient human-centric graphic
rendering framework for reducing computation loads of VR/AR systems. Task 3
exploits novel schemes to enhance computation efficiency via balancing the
computation loads and data allocations in graphic rendering and deep neural
network (DNN) applications. The techniques will be evaluated on mobile devices.