* 1717368
* III: Small: Robust Reinforcement Learning for Invasive Species Management
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jenica Allen, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 497,335.00

Invasive species cause significant ecological and economic damage in the US and
worldwide. Mitigation of these problematic species is difficult because both
treatments and surveillance are expensive. Fortunately, more computational
tools, ecological information, and precise models are available than ever
before. This project will leverage these advances to develop methods that can
compute a new class of smart strategies for efficiently controlling invasive
species. Such strategies must work well in face of the vast complexity of
ecological systems and inherently limited observational data. Since an
intervention to manage an invasive species can be very costly, yet have impacts
that last years or decades, it is important to optimize treatments areas to
mitigate risk. To manage these challenges, the project will develop methods that
compute management strategies that are unaffected by the ecological complexities
and data uncertainty. This research will also help to put a new class of data-
driven management tools in the hands of land managers and decision makers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using data to optimize strategies for managing invasive
species is a spatio-temporal optimization problem, which falls under the broader
class of reinforcement learning. To tractably manage risk, the project will use
the new methodology of robust optimization in the context of reinforcement
learning. This research project will make four fundamental contributions that
will advance the state of the art in methods for quantifying and mitigating
uncertainty in complex data-driven decision-making. First, it will build a
comprehensive and realistic dynamic system test-bed in which addressing
uncertainty is paramount. This test-bed will constitute a dynamic mechanistic
model of how invasive species thrive and spread. Second, it will develop
practical algorithms for quantifying and modeling uncertainty due to imperfect
observational data. The quantification algorithms will be based on insights to
machine learning methods and the maximum entropy principle. Third, it will
address model uncertainty which is due to the dynamic model simplifying reality.
And fourth, it will develop new approaches to choosing a level of spatial
aggregation to trade off between different error types.