* 1717571
* CSR: Small: Using Burstable Instances for Cost-Efficacy in the Public Cloud: When and How?
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* George Kesidis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Public cloud providers are exploring the use of resource overbooking for
improving their profitability. As overbooking in the airline industry helps
companies sell more tickets and thereby ensure fuller flights, overbooking in
the public cloud helps providers create and sell more virtual machines
(instances). While such instances are cheaper, they are more difficult to use
because their resource capacities vary over time. The goal of this project is to
develop an understanding of such burstable instances - so called due to the
sporadic or "bursty" nature of their capacities - and help tenants run their
workloads cost-effectively. The project will engage in outreach to industry,
particularly to continue active collaborations with IBM, Google, and Amazon.
Efforts will be made to convey enhancements to provider-side consolidation
techniques to these industrial partners via student internships, talks, and
complementary proposals for research/teaching credits. The project will involve
under-represented minorities in computer science and engineering, particularly
women graduate students. Finally, the work-product of the project will be
publicly disseminated on the web, together with developed code, to ease
experimental reproduction and validation by other
parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop fundamentally novel
methodologies for inferring undisclosed parameters governing resource regulators
(e.g., variants of token buckets) for burstable instances. Integrating such
situational awareness of effective capacity and employing it in application
programming platforms (memcached, Spark, and Hadoop) would pose significant
challenges since a plurality of resource management strategies in these
platforms will now need to co-exist. A final set of research contributions will
address novel provider-side concerns related to enriching future burstable
instances with more diversity and flexibility for tenants taking into account
their more careful usage of these instances. A website for the project will be
created at the following URL: http://www.cse.psu.edu/~bhuvan/burstables.html.
This website will contain all source code (tenant workload enhancements,
provider-side enhancements in Apache Mesos or kubernetes, scripts for running
and interpreting experiments, etc.), data, and documents (technical reports,
code descriptions, papers at conferences and journals) resulting from the
project. The contents will remain available for researchers well beyond the
duration of the project.