* 1717972
* CHS: Small: Towards Next-Generation Large-Scale Nonlinear Deformable Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Yin Yang, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2020
* USD 432,707.00

Using a digital computer to accurately simulate soft objects that deform under
external interactions is a fundamental problem in a wide range of scientific and
engineering fields. For example, without being able to deliver a faithful force-
displacement response, virtual surgical training is hardly effective and
provides users with misleading experiences. In the past decade, the number of
simulation degrees of freedom (DOFs) for deformable models has increased from
hundreds to hundreds-of-thousands and even millions. Computing hardware that has
become more and more powerful has contributed significantly to this development,
but unfortunately it is unlikely that in the future computer simulation will
continue to benefit dramatically from increased processor frequency. Indeed, in
the last few years the chip industry has already moved the emphasis from a
faster processor clock to multi-core architectures. On the other hand, with the
widespread adoption of advanced acquisition devices/techniques, the complexity
and scale of the data that can be handled by computers have grown exponentially,
and large-scale geometries are becoming ubiquitous in modern 3D data processing.
This new era of data explosion imposes unprecedented challenges on deformable
simulation. Existing methods typically use one-stop solvers that calculate all
the unknown DOFs of a system, but that is computationally intensive due to the
underlying high-dimensional numerical integration. Even with state-of-the-art
hardware, deformable simulation can still take hours, days, or even weeks for
massive scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clearly, conventional simulation
methodologies fail to well accommodate distributed computing resource
allocation, and become more and more cumbersome with bigger and bigger datasets.
This calls for rebranded algorithmic frameworks and dedicated numerical
procedures for large-scale geometrically-complex and nonlinear deformable models
that empower next-generation graphics applications. Motivated by these grand
challenges, this project systematically investigates a collection of theoretical
advancements, computational techniques, and numerical implementations that push
the frontier of large-scale nonlinear deformable models to "post Moore's law."
Specifically, the intellectual merit of the research will comprise the following
aspects:&lt;br/&gt;o The project will devise a theoretically grounded domain
decomposition based parallel deformable simulator. By weakening inter-domain
linkages, the domain-level computations become independent and parallelizable.
The coupling mechanism will be generalized and enriched so that non-conforming
and overlapping domain decompositions are made possible. This includes an in-
depth optimization of the domain tessellation under specified hardware
configurations. Simulation reusability will be further enhanced through a novel
technique called cellular domains.&lt;br/&gt;o The project will deepen the
current understanding of large-scale model reduction and re-forge this useful
tool in the context of parallel computing. In particular, how to utilize power
iteration to obtain the spectral analysis will be explored. Furthermore,
geometry-based reduction directly dictates reduced DOFs and has a more robust
simulation even under imposed extreme constraints.&lt;br/&gt;o A well-argued
computational theory is less practicable unless encapsulated by a set of
carefully engineered implementations. Accordingly, the project will also design
customized numerical procedures paired with proposed algorithmic techniques, and
the entire simulation framework will be fine-tuned at the system level, solver
level, and sub-solver level by leveraging unique data patterns, numerical
behaviors, and problem structures of domain decomposed deformable
models.&lt;br/&gt;o As a testbed platform, the project will develop a novel
real-time human tongue motion visualization system. Over 8% of U.S. children
have a communication or swallowing disorder. Built upon the new deformation
solver, an ultrasound-imaging-driven real-time human tongue visualization system
will be developed to assist doctors and speech therapists to better understand
the pathological mechanism behind this disease and plan more effective subject-
specific medical/physical treatments.