* 1717736
* NeTS: Small: Proof-of-Concept Study on an Emerging Mobile Data Transportation Network
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Yuguang Fang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 125,000.00

The mandate of the US Department of Transportation (DoT) on light-weight
vehicles to be equipped with communication capability for intelligent traffic
control and safe driving results in a tremendous interest in developing
connected vehicles (CV) technology. However, US DoT has not specified what kinds
of communication devices with what level of capability are to be installed.
Under the premise that more powerful communication devices with higher
computational capability and more storage capacity are deployed in vehicles,
this project aims to carry out a proof-of-concept study on this emerging network
consisting of vehicles with powerful devices. By considering "unlimited" power
supplies from vehicles and relatively "regular" vehicular mobility, the project
seeks to demonstrate that vehicles with such more powerful capability offer an
emerging viable data transportation network to complement existing
telecommunications systems. The proposed research potentially leads to further
development of innovative technologies in leveraging vehicles to transport
exponentially increasing data traffic from various emerging Internet of Things
(IoT) systems and smart cities applications.

Specifically, this one-year project aims to demonstrate how to leverage light-
weight vehicles equipped with powerful cognitive radio (CR) routers with high
computational capability and relatively large storage capacity to perform
spectrum sensing, processing and storing data, making intelligent decisions, and
opportunistically transporting data for emerging IoT systems and smart cities
applications. To achieve this goal, the project plans to design a flexible and
agile cognitive network architecture to effectively take advantage of the added
capability in vehicles. Under this architecture, a suite of spectrum management
mechanisms will be developed from both access point of view and end-to-end
service perspective. Delay-tolerant traffic will shift to this emerging network
where harvested licensed or unlicensed spectrum can be used to opportunistically
store-carry-forward data traffic. By designing various kinds of opportunistic
data offloading mechanisms, the project seeks to explore the effectiveness of
such a data transportation network.