* 1717779
* SHF: Small: Exploring Architectural Support for Full-Stack Equational Reasoning in Critical Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Timothy Sherwood, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 449,888.00

In addition to their usual roles in our everyday lives computers also play
invisible safety-critical roles. They prevent the brakes in cars from locking
up, fly our airplanes through dense air traffic and around large storms, manage
our electrical and water systems, and even control the beating of patients'
hearts. Unfortunately, it still remains difficult to build computer systems for
which one can say anything definitive about reliability of such operation. This
project attempts to change the way in which critical computer systems are
designed and analyzed. The technologies created will be available and accessible
through open repositories, the development of those technologies will provide
both undergraduate and graduate students numerous training opportunities, the
most exciting ideas will be used in outreach efforts to help reach new
generations of engineers, and in the end will help to develop a national
community of embedded systems engineers with the skills and tools necessary to
implement safe and reliable systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this
vision of more robust computer controlled systems we need new approaches to
creating them that includes both the hardware and the software together.
Traditional computer hardware is built for speed and efficiency at all costs,
but often we have more than enough speed and efficiency to get a job done.
Instead, we need systems that, while remaining quite efficient, also are far
easier to understand and reason about. Building on top of powerful theories of
computation (such as lambda-calculus) a new computer system, where every action
it takes corresponds directly to a tractable set of equations, can be created.
Rather than try and solve the resulting equations by hand, this project
reconsiders the way computer processors are designed from the ground up so that
they work in perfect harmony with state-of-the-art computer-automated theorem
provers. To demonstrate that this approach is actually useful on real world
problems the investigators are building a completely new computer system around
this approach with all of the hardware design, computer languages, and operating
system-like software needed.