* 1717701
* PFI:BIC - Next Generation Robotic Intelligence that Provides Psycho-Social Support for Older Adults
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Bertram Malle, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,803.00

An aging America is challenging the U.S. healthcare system. Current and future
health-care personnel, along with family caregivers, will be unable to treat or
even monitor the wide-ranging challenges of the aging population from anxiety to
loneliness, from dementia to physical disability. This project develops
Affordable Robotic Intelligence for Elderly Support (ARIES) as one element in
meeting these challenges. Technology will not, and should not, replace trained
health-care professionals or close members of the family; but technology can
lighten the burden on family members and the healthcare system. ARIES will
provide affordable assistance with small but challenging tasks of daily living,
such as finding keys or reading glasses; remembering medication or appointments;
connecting with friends and family; and relieving agitation and loneliness. To
be effective in these tasks, ARIES must be easily understandable and reliable,
and the research team is developing innovative technological solutions to meet
these goals. The most significant outcome of ARIES will be to facilitate and
improve health care for older populations and enable more people to continue
fulfilling lives in their own homes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
harnesses novel research insights from the cognitive and behavioral sciences,
geriatric psychiatry, computer science, and industrial design, as well as
industry partner Hasbro's expertise in effective, affordable engineering. The
researchers will (a) use behavioral science methods to assess older adults'
major challenges of daily living with which a small, affordable robotic system
can assist; (b) apply inclusive design principles and cutting-edge computer
science to develop a small animal-like robot that can alleviate these
challenges; and (c) provide a systematic assessment of the developed system?s
safety, efficacy, and acceptability in test beds with healthy adults as well as
older people with cognitive impairments. From a computer science perspective,
this project will expand the frontiers of end-user programming and allow user
and robot to engage in mutual teaching and learning. The project is also poised
to lead to engineering advances in object tracking and location technology and
in the expansion of robot skills by levering smartphone capabilities. From a
psychological perspective, the project will provide novel insights into human-
robot interaction (especially when the user has no technical expertise) as well
as advances in the optimal design of function and appearance in robotic
technology for human benefits.