* 1718902
* AF: Small: Symmetry and regularity in the theory of computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Laszlo Babai, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The acronym "NP" describes the class of mathematical puzzles that may or may not
have a solution but if they do, the solution is easy to verify.  (Think of
Sudoku.)  Such puzzles are at the heart of much of the progress behind the
algorithms that power computation and communication, the twin pillars of
societal activity in the information age, including science, commerce, banking,
security, etc. While verifying a solution to such puzzles is easy, just how
difficult it is to find a solution (or decide that none exists) is an open
question, one of the great open problems of mathematics today, known as the "P
vs. NP problem. Many puzzles in the class NP are known to be as hard as they can
get; these problems are called "NP-complete."  At the other end of the spectrum
is the class "P" of "tractable" problems, i.e., problems solvable in "polynomial
time" -- a theoretical benchmark of efficiency.  NP-problems that do not belong
to either extreme (neither in P nor NP-complete) are called "NP-intermediate."
In contrast to the vast collection of important problems known to be NP-complete
and the rich set of problems in P, there are very few natural candidates for NP-
intermediateness.  One of the most prominent among these is the Graph
Isomorphism (GI) problem that asks the simple question, given two networks of
nodes and links, are they in effect the same (after relabeling the
nodes)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has recently achieved a result on the
complexity of GI that has been hailed as a breakthrough.  For three decades, the
best bound was "moderately exponential" (Luks, 1983), still far out in the
intractable domain, but not as bad as "exponential," the suspected complexity of
NP-complete problems.  Recently the PI dramatically reduced the complexity
estimate, down to "quasipolynomial," a complexity status "in the suburbs" of the
tractable domain, borrowing Scott Aaronson's phrase. The result required a
deeper understanding of the interplay between the notions of symmetry and
regularity of mathematical objects.  The gap between these two related notions
is the essence of the GI problem.  "Group theory" is the name of the algebraic
theory of symmetry; this classical branch of mathematics has provided the key
tools for the PI's work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's result generated a
measure of interest across the globe, unprecedented in the PI's career and
seldom seen in connection with any single result; it extended beyond the core
research communities and has fascinated scientists, engineers, educators, and
amateurs.  The PI's first seminar lecture about the result drew an overflow
audience to the largest lecture theater at the University of Chicago and was
live tweeted to a global audience.  Subsequently the PI gave marathon seminars
and lecture series at eminent research institutions coast to coast and overseas
and lectured at conferences in CS, combinatorics, group theory, quantum
computing. The result was widely reported in the popular science press. This
interest attests to the foundational nature of the problem, the
unexpected strength of the result, and the connection of the work to multiple
areas of mathematics and computation theory. While its immediate impact outside
CS is in mathematics, notably in algebraic combinatorics and asymptotic group
theory, it also addresses as well as raises questions pertinent to the
underlying philosophy of computational complexity theory.  Invitation by the
Mathematical Association of America (MAA) to deliver an address at the Joint
Mathematics Meetings (January 2018) underlines the interest of mathematics
educators in the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups of undergraduates have shown
interest.  The PI gave presentations at a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Chicago, at Budapest Semesters in
Mathematics (BSM) (a highly-rated study-abroad program for American
undergraduates the PI helped found decades ago), and a student seminar in St.
Andrews, U.K., arranged by a student who previously attended the PI's lecture at
Chicago.  This year, a student from the Univ. of Michigan who was among the PI's
BSM audience will study under the PI's mentorship in Chicago over the summer. 
(Note: both students mentioned in this paragraph are female, a reflection of the
fact that both BSM and the Chicago REU Site make a special effort to recruit
qualified female applicants.)  Building on the popularity of his work, the PI
continues his outreach with the larger goal of popularizing mathematics, the
theory of computing, and the close interaction of these fields.  A professor at
St. Andrews reported increased interest in group theory since the PI's
presentation there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in the field of quantum
computing have also shown interest in the PI's work.  The central problem of the
theory of quantum computation is to identify computational tasks that can be
solved more efficiently in the quantum model than in the classical model. 
Following Shor's celebrated paper that demonstrated that two of the most
important candidate NP-intermediate problems, factoring integers and discrete
logarithm, can be solved efficiently in the quantum model using "quantum Fourier
transform" (QFT), attention turned to GI as a problem to be attacked by a
nonabelian version of QFT.  While these attempts have as yet not been
successful, the PI's work now provides a more fine-grained approach, some
components of which may motivate a search for a quantum approach.  The PI has
been invited to address quantum computing audiences, even though the PI's work
is limited to the classical model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the momentum
of the GI accomplishment, the PI will explore new frontiers in the area of NP-
intermediate problems, as well as broaden his agenda to include models of
computation where structural symmetry is either part of the problem definition
or is expected to give a new direction to the investigations. Problems of the
first type include canonical forms, hypergraph isomorphism, and the group
isomorphism problem, as well as the equivalence problem for certain classes of
non-explicit structures such as linear codes and permutation groups.  Problems
of the second type include the sensitivity problem for Boolean functions and
problems in the "property testing" model, including local list-decoding of
homomorphism codes, an area initiated by the classic paper of Goldreich and
Levin on Hadamard codes and more recently championed by Madhu Sudan and his
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems at the interface of algorithms and
group theory are expected to play a key role in the entire project.  Beyond the
combinatorial problems that have arisen from the study of GI, the project leads
to analogous questions of the symmetry vs. regularity gap in linear
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important extension of the GI problem is the
question, can one find canonical forms as efficiently as testing isomorphism
under the new result.  The PI expects that isomorphism of hypergraphs can be
tested in time quasipolynomial in the number of vertices and polynomial in the
number of edges, providing an interpolation between the GI result and a 1999
result of Luks on hypergraph isomorphism.  The PI's results on canonical
structures ("Split-or-Johnson routine") invite a study of connections to
mathematical logic, suggested by audience members at a recent workshop at the
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing in
Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The isomorphism problem for explicitly given
groups represents a barrier to further progress on GI; its quasipolynomial
complexity has not been significantly reduced over the past several decades, in
spite of the availability of powerful algebraic machinery.  The PI aims to gain
a better understanding of this barrier in the critical case of nilpotent groups
of class 2.  The related equivalence problem for linear codes may also have
connections to cryptography through the ElGamal cryptosystem.