* 1718947
* High Resolution Solar Physics: Past, Present, Future
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Valentin Martinez Pillet, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 12/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

Solar physics is a branch of physics/astronomy focused on the study of the Sun.
Magnetic fields are especially important to the physics of the Sun since they
can drive phenomena such as the solar wind, solar flares and coronal mass
ejections. These phenomena, collectively referred to as space weather, directly
influence the Earth and our technologically dependent society. The goal of this
project is to conduct a stand-alone workshop that will bring together scientists
that use high-resolution telescopes and instrumentation to study magnetic fields
in the various layers of the solar atmosphere. These types of in-person meetings
are essential to advancing the field of solar physics and provide important
training opportunities for the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop on high-resolution solar physics will be held
August 6-11, 2017 at the Sacramento Peak Observatory in Sunspot, New Mexico. The
workshop entitled High Resolution Solar Physics: Past, Present, Future will
bring together researchers from the solar community to discuss the current state
of the art in high-resolution, ground-based observations of the Sun from the
photosphere to the corona. Topics will include: the photosphere at high
resolution, the chromosphere at high resolution, high-resolution flare
observations, new high-resolution coronal techniques, and observational plans
for the NSF's new Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope.