* 1718834
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Efficient Hardware-Aware and Hardware-Enabled Algorithms for Secure In-Memory Databases
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Rajeev Balasubramonian, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2021
* USD 532,000.00

Many big-data workloads are hosted on the cloud to facilitate sharing and low
cost. Many of these workloads deal with sensitive data, e.g., electronic health
records. Cloud infrastructures are vulnerable to attacks from untrusted
operators with physical access to the computers. These attacks can take many
forms and may compromise privacy or integrity. To guarantee the security of
sensitive data and ensure the cost-effectiveness of shared cyberinfrastructure,
it is vital that these attacks be thwarted while not incurring a significant
penalty in terms of performance, energy, or
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the above attacks are thwarted with
oblivious RAM (ORAM) and integrity trees. These solutions incur significant
bandwidth and capacity overheads and can degrade performance by 1-2 orders of
magnitude. These solutions also show different behaviors on different workloads,
i.e., one cannot ignore system, hardware, and workload effects when evaluating
algorithms for security. To address these problems, the PIs are designing novel
secure hardware, and leveraging commodity secure hardware to design novel secure
systems. The PIs are developing new secure algorithms that require
hardware/software co-design because their behavior is a function of workload
locality properties and hardware constraints, e.g., a distributed implementation
of ORAM enabled by custom memory modules. These new algorithms are being
integrated into scalable in-memory database systems that run on a cluster of
state-of-the-art secure nodes. The project is thus attempting to secure
cyberinfrastructure for sensitive applications, moving well-known approaches
(ORAM and integrity trees) into the practical realm. The PIs are also continuing
their outreach and education efforts.