* 1718470
* CIF:Small:Towards practical coded caching
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Aditya Ramamoorthy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 449,996.00

Content caching plays an important role in facilitating large scale content
distribution over the Internet. Traditional caching techniques typically store
relatively popular content in the local memory (or cache) available at the
users, or at the edge of the network. If a given user request can be serviced
from the cache (instead of the server), the overall network traffic is reduced.
This research will investigate practical issues in the deployment of coded
caching, which is a technique that promises huge reductions in caching network
traffic, albeit under potentially restrictive assumptions. This will pave the
way for the adoption of coded caching in large scale video and audio streaming
websites thus improving the efficiency of the national network
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minimizing per-user delays is one of the
main aims of caching. For example, a given video-on-demand user wants his/her
video playback to start as soon as possible. Moreover, it is not reasonable to
expect that several users want to watch videos at the same time. The
investigator will study practical algorithms that a server can use for
responding to asynchronous user requests. The algorithms will continue to
leverage the rate reductions of coded caching while meeting user-specified
deadlines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another issue with coded caching is that it
assumes that the files at the server can be subdivided into a large number of
sub-files. Specifically, this number grows exponentially with the number of
users and is impractically large even for systems with fifty users. The
investigator will study the of design coded caching schemes where the
subpacketization level is manageable, yet significant rate reductions are
possible as compared to conventional schemes.