* 1718355
* NeTS: Small: Caching Networks with Optimality Guarantees
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Edmund Yeh, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,999.00

The Internet today includes networks of caches--networks with storage
capabilities--that are used in a broad array of real-life networking
applications. They play a central role in commercial systems for the online
distribution of content (for example streaming movies and other videos). Caching
clearly benefits content providers, as it reduces traffic reaching their
servers. It also benefits end-users, as it reduces the latency they experience--
for example the time to download a movie--and network service providers, as it
reduces the overall Internet traffic traversing or exiting their network.
Despite the known practical benefits of cache deployments, a formal,
mathematical understanding of how well caching networks perform remains largely
elusive. The goal of this project is a formal understanding of how Internet
traffic routing and caching can be jointly optimized so as to provide provable
performance guarantees with respect to some set of design objectives, such as
throughput optimization or cost minimization. Optimizing traditional network
operations, such as routing, congestion and flow control, active queue
management, etc., becomes significantly challenging in the context of caching
networks. This work can have a direct and long-term impact on both existing and
future network architectures and commercial systems, including information-
centric networks (ICNs) and content-delivery networks (CDNs). The project is
also an excellent platform for promoting interdisciplinary learning in the areas
of networking and combinatorial and convex optimization, and is well-suited to
undergraduate research, including hands-on projects involving simulation
experiments and validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contrary to prior work on
caching networks, this project provides distributed, adaptive, stochastic
optimization protocols with optimality guarantees over arbitrary network
topologies. In particular, using the proposed methodology, both the
combinatorial nature of caching as well the lack of convexity of natural
objectives are overcome through convex relaxations. The project leverages such
relaxations to design constant-approximation, distributed, adaptive, stochastic
optimization algorithms, making joint routing and caching decisions that are
within a constant factor from the optimal. In addition, the project implements
and evaluates these algorithms over realistic network topologies, under a
variety of real-life network service loads and user
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;