* 1718980
* NeTS: Small: Convertible Data Center Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* T. S. Eugene Ng, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 499,999.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly, the main drivers for scientific discoveries and
technological advances are data intensive computations that are performed in
massive networked computing infrastructures called data centers. Such
computations involve moving data between servers and processors across the data
center network. It is important to be able to adapt the network to match
changing and evolving network communication demands in order to keep data
centers scalable, cost effective, and energy efficient. This project is aimed at
solving that problem. It will develop a new approach for data center networking
called 'network convertibility'. A convertible data center network transforms
its structure dynamically and adapts to different network communication demands
from data-intensive computations. In doing so, it can provide optimal
performance for a wide range of applications without any manual network re-
structuring, resulting in a more efficient data infrastructure to serve the many
application areas that rely on data analytics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Part
2:&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a network convertibility approach which
leverages small port-count converter switches to convert topologies dynamically.
The converter switches are strategically placed and finely integrated into the
physical data center network design, and serve as the agents for convertibility
that can fundamentally alter the network's properties such as average hop count,
topological regularity, clustering properties, etc. to adapt to the application
needs. The network convertibility approach has the potential to enable bandwidth
to be moved to transmission hot spots in a fine-grained manner as needed. It
also has the potential to achieve both easy implementation and high bandwidth
performance by allowing the data center network to be organized/implemented as a
hierarchical Clos network, but with the ability to convert it to a flatter and
less hierarchical network like a random graph. The project will address multiple
challenging sub-problems that are broadly classified into (1) building block
designs, (2) convertible network designs, and (3) control algorithm designs.
Given a convertible network design, algorithms will be developed to maximize the
benefits of the available convertibility for different use cases. The project
will also perform implementation and experimental evaluation on server clusters
in the PI's lab.