* 1718671
* SHF:Small:Device/Circuit Co-design of Negative Capacitance Transistors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sung Lim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

When the supply voltage of a transistor drops, its power consumption reduces
significantly but at the cost of delay increase. A scientific breakthrough found
in 2008 named negative capacitance states that if a ferroelectric material is
used for the gate of a transistor, its delay does not degrade even when the
voltage reduces. This remarkable effect has a potential to offer very low power
yet high performance electronic switches. Existing studies have demonstrated
such benefits at individual transistor-level, but its impact on large-scale
circuits and systems has not been well studied. The goal of the proposed
research is to quantify these benefits first and then to develop ways to further
the benefits. The project, by design, is interdisciplinary in nature and will
cover a large range of topics from material science, device engineering to
circuit design. The project is expected to provide a unique and
interdisciplinary experience for the participating graduate and undergraduate
students. The STEM outreach and education programs described will help high
school and lower-level college students to seek further studies and careers in
semiconductor science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team proposes a
holistic approach to negative capacitance transistor technology that
incorporates experimental research at the most fundamental material-device
level, going all the way up to the full chip level circuit simulations. They
will develop physics-based compact models for their experimental devices and use
these experimentally calibrated models to investigate the performance of
negative capacitance transistors corresponding to advance technology nodes such
as 10 nm and 7 nm. These models will serve as the intermediary that will
translate the results from the basic experiments for chip-level simulations.
Large-scale full-chip designs targeting internet-of-things to high-performance
applications will be built and optimized to maintain the device superiority all
the way up to system and circuit-level. For negative capacitance technology to
successfully resolve the power dissipation bottleneck in computing and spur new
paradigms in electronics, disjoint research in each individual levels in the
hierarchy will not bring about the necessary breakthroughs. The team will
develop an approach where all aspects of physics, materials, devices, compact
models and circuits are optimized in a self-consistent manner.