* 1718651
* CHS: Small: Expanding the Design Space for Interactive Objects Through Development of Advanced 3D Printers and Printing Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Scott Hudson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 516,000.00

3D printing has tremendous potential to improve productivity in American
businesses large and small, and to expand our ability to compete through
innovation. It holds the promise of moving from mass-manufacture of one design
for all, to mass customization where objects can be individualized to meet
personal needs and preferences, as well as the demands of varying tasks. It also
holds the promise of "democratizing" the means of production, by extending a new
ability to manufacture unique products to individuals and small businesses who
could not previously afford to do their own manufacturing. However, there are a
number of barriers which are currently keeping this exciting new technology from
reaching more widespread use. One of those barriers is the limited range of
materials that 3D printers can handle. Currently, nearly all 3D printing is done
in a single hard material such as plastic. However, most of the objects we use
regularly are made from multiple materials, and often include soft materials
which, as of yet, are inaccessible to 3D printers. This project seeks to improve
this situation by exploring the design and implementation of new types of 3D
printers, including: those that can produce soft fibrous materials; those
capable of creating metal objects without the need for high temperatures or
specialized environments; and hybrid printers capable of producing mixed
material objects that include both hard metal and plastic as well as soft
components. The goal is to create simple printers that are inexpensive and
suitable for potential home or small business use. To maximize impact, a premium
will be placed on simplicity of operation, so that the new printers can be run
in your garage or basement if not on your desktop, by people without extensive
training; similarly, there will be no use of exotic materials or chemistry. If
successful, project outcomes will have a wide impact which helps to change the
nature of manufacturing by expanding its availability and flexibility,
especially for smaller scale production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to develop three new types of 3D printers and to explore the design space for
interactive devices which is opened by them. The first will produce prints that
are able to mix soft fibers (produced by electrospinning) with traditional rigid
plastic in a single print. The second will consider printing of layered metal
objects at near room temperature in a way that will support embedding and mixing
of materials, while the third will take advantage of this property to provide
prints which are capable of containing metal (e.g., as a strong structural
core), conventional plastic (e.g., as a functional body) and soft fiber
components (e.g., as a soft skin and/or to provide flexibility where needed).
For each of these printers, the project will explore the substantial new design
space that is opened up at three levels: basic printing capabilities (such as
engineered stiffness variations for custom bending), reusable components that
are enabled by the new materials (such as input sensors or new compliant
mechanisms), and full example objects which will test the practical bounds of
the work.