* 1718666
* NeTS:  Small: Collaborative Research: Hierarchical Framework with Distributed Resource Allocation for Mobile Fog Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jiang (Linda) Xie, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

A mobile fog computing system is composed of geographically distributed 'fog
nodes', which are fixed or mobile computing devices with built-in data storage,
computing, and communication support. Benefiting from small scale, low cost, and
mobility, the fog nodes are able to offload data traffic from the data cloud,
reduce the cost of communications in the networks, and provide real-time,
location-aware data services. In a highly mobile system of fog nodes, resource
allocation is an important yet challenging issue. This research offers novel
advances in improving the design and analysis of mobile fog computing,
especially from the perspectives of resource allocation and mobility management.
The distributed resource allocation framework and its associated designs will
have a tremendous array of potential users and applications. This project is
interdisciplinary by nature, and encompasses concepts from economics, decision
theory, optimization, information theory, communications, and networking. It
also integrates research findings into related undergraduate and graduate
curriculum, K-12 outreach, and diversity support. In addition, transition to
practice and outreach to industry are also part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to design,
analyze, and evaluate a hierarchical framework with distributed resource
allocation for mobile fog computing considering multiple data service operators
serving multitudes of users at the same time. The project consists of three main
research thrusts: (1) hierarchical framework with interactions for resource
allocation; (2) distributed game theoretical approach to model the interactions
among data service operators, users and fog nodes; and (3) distributed mobility
management in mobile fog computing to support dynamic adaptation of computing
resources due to mobility of users and fog nodes. The success of the proposed
research will provide new perspectives on future mobile fog computing network
design.