* 1718637
* SaTC: CORE: Small: The Impacts of Human Decision-Making on Security and Robustness of Interdependent Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Timothy Cason, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 492,037.00

There is a substantial body of work in behavioral economics and psychology
showing that people are only partially rational, and thus consistently deviate
from classical economic theory. People's perceptions of risks, rewards, and
losses can differ substantially from their true values, and these perceptions
can have a significant impact on the investments made to protect the systems
that the individuals are managing. The objective of this research is to
understand the decisions people make to protect their computer systems using
realistic models of behavioral decision-making. The research encompasses formal
theory to rigorously analyze and predict the outcomes that should be expected
under alternative models of behavioral decision-making, and laboratory
experiments with human subjects to evaluate the predictions made by the theory
and to identify new behavioral models. The research will tackle two specific
classes of problems. First, it will identify the impact of behavioral decision-
making in settings where different components of a large interconnected cyber-
physical system are owned by different stakeholders, each deciding how much to
invest in securing their owned assets. Second, it will characterize how
decision-makers choose among different security technologies, open source and
public versus closed source and proprietary, based on their perceived risks and
rewards. The research will lead to a more complete understanding of the
vulnerabilities that arise in large-scale interconnected systems, and guide us
to the design of more secure systems, with corresponding societal benefits.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research systematically and rigorously characterizes
the impact of behavioral deviations from optimal and unbounded rational choice
in security settings. The work includes models of decision-making under risk and
uncertainty, such as prospect theory, and how such models affect the behavior of
agents who manage interdependent systems. The research brings together game-
theoretic analysis to predict outcomes based on models of interacting humans and
systems, computer security concepts to model how vulnerabilities are exploited
and how attacks spread, and behavioral economics experiments to test the
theoretical predictions and refine the models. The research is organized in two
parts. The first part considers a class of interdependent security games on
networks, where each player chooses security investments to protect nodes under
her control; this work models applications such as multi-stakeholder SCADA
systems. The research will encompass general formulations of attack
probabilities, epidemic risks, attack graph models of system interdependencies,
and the optimal design of networks to mitigate security vulnerabilities
introduced by humans' decision-making. The second part considers a general class
of common-pool resource management games, whereby players choose to split their
utilization among multiple resources, each of which provides a certain rate-of-
return and has a certain probability of failure. This class of games represents
conditions in which decision-makers must choose between different public and
proprietary security technologies. The research will characterize the impacts of
prospect-theoretic decision-making and how users react to incentives provided by
the resource operators or vendors. In both parts of the work, the research will
identify how Nash equilibrium security investments and resource utilizations are
affected by skewed perceptions of risks and rewards. Both parts include
controlled behavioral economics experiments using human subjects that will
evaluate the theoretical predictions and potentially yield new models of
decision-making.