* 1718434
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: IoT Circuit Locking, Obfuscation &amp; Authentication Kernel (CLOAK), A Compilable Architecture for Secure IoT Device Production, Testing, Activation &amp; Ope
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Krzysztof Gaj, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 11/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Autonomy, control and actuation opportunities offered by a colossal deployment
of Internet of Things (IoT) open the door to a revolution in the way we live and
interact with our environment. However, widespread adoption of IoT comes with
the danger of its misuse for malicious purposes, threatening the loss of
privacy, property, and life. The scope and reach of potential IoT security
threat grows as fast as the number and reach of IoT devices. Hence, protecting
the hardware of IoT cannot be left as an afterthought. This project aims to
improve the security of the IoT devices throughout their manufacturing and
operational lifespan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To secure the IoT devices throughout
their manufacturing and operational lifespan, this proposal introduces IoT CLOAK
- IoT Circuit Locking, Obfuscation &amp; Authentication Kernel. CLOAK is a
compilable, universal and lightweight architecture for secure production,
testing, cloud activation &amp; operation of IoT devices. The major goals of
this project include: (1) building an open-source compiler to synthesize any
netlist into CLOAK-protected and CLOAK-obfuscated netlist; (2) making the
obfuscation-key a truly moving target that changes from activation to
activation; (3) removing the need to store keys on the IoT devices or on the
cloud by generating it on demand on the cloud; (4) exploring lightweight
cryptography, and its side channel vulnerabilities, to secure the IoT-Cloud
communication; (5) addressing the challenge of safe readout of PUF signature
from IoT device; (6) investigating ultra-lightweight PUF and TRNG solutions; (7)
investigating the functional testing of the CLOAK-protected chips in untrusted
facilities and (8) developing cloud-based CLOAK-management services capable of
configuring, managing, unlocking, licensing, and authenticating CLOAK-protected
IoT devices.