* 1718479
* SHF:Small: Reproducibility and Comprehensive Assessment of Next Generation Sequencing Bioinformatics Software
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Srinivas Aluru, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,984.00

Next-generation sequencing refers to a collection of high throughput DNA
sequencing technologies that have originated about a decade ago, and are now the
de facto equipment underpinning all modern genomics studies due to their cost-
effectiveness and ubiquity and versatility of use. This project is conducting
comprehensive reproducibility and assessment experiments to characterize the
state of the art in the field, and make the findings publicly visible and
accessible. The project results are expected to become a valuable resource for
practitioners, researchers, and the significantly large community of users of
next generation sequencing bioinformatics. The project is involving several
undergraduate students, and raising awareness of research integrity and
reproducibility issues among young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;The project is
establishing benchmark datasets to evaluate bioinformatics software for multiple
next generation sequencers, multiple types of biological organisms, in multiple
application contexts, and at multiple problem scales. The research spans
assessment of software products for read error correction, read mapping to
target genomes and reference databases, and assembly of genomes and
transcriptomes. Reproducibility experiments are conducted to independently
verify results of important software products based on results and datasets
published in the literature. The software products are also evaluated on a range
of metrics - quality of results, robustness and sensitivity to parameter values,
run-time performance, memory usage, and ability to process real-world datasets.
The project work will result in comprehensive recommendations available to
practitioners as well as establishing state of the art to appropriately channel
future research efforts.