* 1718945
* RI: SMALL: Efficient Implementations of Goal-Directed Solvers for Answer Set Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gopal Gupta, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop efficient implementation techniques for
realizing automated reasoning systems that emulate human-style common sense
reasoning. Automating common sense reasoning is important for developing
advanced applications of artificial intelligence (AI), particularly, in areas
where the thought process of an expert needs to be automated, e.g., reasoning
performed by a medical doctor during diagnosis and prescribing a treatment.
Human reasoning is difficult to emulate on a computer, as humans simplify
reasoning by using default conclusions (e.g., if Tweety is a bird, it must fly)
coupled with raising exceptions (if Tweety turns out to be a penguin later,
retract the conclusion about Tweety's flying abilities). Because of this
peculiar nature of human reasoning, approaches based on standard logic do not
work very well: one has to resort to a non-monotonic logic, i.e., a logic in
which conclusions reached now may be withdrawn later as new information becomes
available. Research conducted in this project will result in efficient, query-
driven implementations of these non-monotonic logics. Successful completion of
this project will result in advanced applications such as an automated system
that can advise a physician on how to treat a particular disease, or a self-
driving car's decision-making system that can emulate a human's driving
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will rely on the paradigm of answer
set programming (ASP) to represent common sense knowledge. An answer set program
consists of rules containing (possibly negated) predicates. Current ASP systems
rely on first grounding the answer set program to obtain an equivalent
propositional program, and then using a Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solver to
find models of this propositional program that contain the answer that is sought
by the user. The grounding requirement restricts the range of programs that can
be executed. This project builds upon earlier research on directly executing
predicate answer set programs, i.e., without grounding them first. It aims to
realize faster implementations of such systems by designing a virtual machine to
which an answer set programs will be compiled to and executed.