* 1718457
* RI: Small: New Computational Techniques and Market Designs for Kidney Exchanges and Other Barter Markets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

In the US alone, 35,000 patients with terminal kidney disease get added to the
deceased-donor wait list each year, and 100,000 await for a kidney transplant -
more than all other solid-organ transplants combined. That demand far exceeds
the supply of deceased-donor kidneys. It is possible for a living person to
donate a kidney, but it is unlikely that a given donor can donate to a given
patient due to blood type and tissue type incompatibilities. This opens the door
for kidney exchange where such willing donor-patient pairs "swap" donors. In
modern kidney exchanges these "swaps" are conducted via cycles and altruist-
donor-initiated chains. Prior work in developing the methods, algorithms, and
software for kidney exchanges has already been used by two of the largest
regional kidney exchanges in the US. More importantly, it runs the United
Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) nationwide kidney exchange, which includes 153
transplant centers. This work has uncovered a myriad of open problems in barter
exchanges, which this grant will address by developing computational techniques,
conducting computational experiments, and fielding the fruits of the research.
The research under this grant has the potential to save hundreds of lives
annually in the US alone, and the integration with the deceased-donor waiting
list has the potential to save thousands. The approach also leads to dramatic
improvements in the quality of life by moving patients off dialysis and back
into the productive work force. Societal benefits come also from transplants
being less expensive than dialysis; this effect has been independently estimated
to be $750 million in the US over five years. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will focus on four prongs for kidney exchanges and other barter markets,
as follows: 1. developing computational techniques for automatically deriving
market-clearing policies for dynamic problems; 2) developing computational
techniques for automatically determining dynamically which edges (possible
donations) to test for compatibility and other viability; 3) developing market
designs and computational techniques for integrating the deceased-donor waiting
list and kidney exchange; and 4) developing market designs and computational
techniques for generalizations where a patient can have multiple donors and vice
versa. The techniques developed here will apply to other barter exchanges in a
broad range of other domains as well.