* 1718670
* NSFSaTC-BSF: CORE: Small: The Utilitarian Implications of Privacy Protections
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ronen Gradwohl, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,495.00

In recent years the extent of online tracking has come to light, leading to
calls for stronger privacy-­protecting regulation and technologies. Privacy
advocates argue that the lack of privacy is harmful at individual and societal
levels; others argue that privacy protections bring about less information
sharing, which leads to a decrease in overall welfare (e.g., a decrease in the
efficiency of markets). One major discrepancy between the two viewpoints is that
those who advocate for privacy often emphasize the intrinsic value of privacy,
whereas those who question the benefits of privacy protections believe it may
have a detrimental impact on market outcomes. This project's aim is to bridge
the two approaches by analyzing the effects of privacy protections on overall
welfare while accounting for the intrinsic benefits of privacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We utilize formal game-­theoretic models to study the
utilitarian implications of privacy protecting technologies and regulation in
models wherein the value of privacy is intrinsic. That is, the realized level of
privacy is an input to individuals' utility functions. Instituting privacy
protections has two effects: a direct effect reflected in greater intrinsic
privacy, and an indirect effect arising from the effect on behavior and market
outcomes. Our goals are to identify properties of strategic interactions that
determine the interplay of these direct and indirect effects. When do they
coincide, leading to an overall welfare increase, and when do they collide,
possibly leading to a net welfare decrease?