* 1718216
* III: Small: Cyber Physical Mappings - Empower Building Analytics at Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Cameron (Kamin) Whitehouse, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,853.00

Buildings have profound impact on human health, productivity, comfort, and
energy consumption. For example, building operation is the single largest energy
consumer in the US, accounting for 70% of electricity consumption and 40% of
total energy consumption. Allergens, noise levels, and the availability of
sunlight affect health and well-being, especially given that on average
Americans spend 90% of their time in buildings. Indoor conditions such as
thermal comfort and CO2 and pollutant concentrations have been shown to affect
human productivity by 8-11%, which has an important effect on the national
economy. The performance of the nation's buildings can be significantly improved
with analytics engines that collect and analyze data from the thousands of
sensing and control points that already exist within a typical building.
However, data alone does not inherently have any meaning, and so a person must
manually provide the context (also called metadata) about every sensor and
controller so that the analytics engine can interpret the data. This costly
manual process can take days or weeks for a single building and is a major
obstacle for applying building analytics to a large number of
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates tools to automatically
infer the metadata of data streams, such as the type of sensor or controller
that produced the data and its relation to other sensors, equipment, or rooms in
the building. The approach is based on the hypothesis that the data in buildings
is structured due to weather patterns, equipment operation patterns, and common
design patterns that are observed in many buildings around the world. Metadata
inference exploits this structure to quickly and easily create new metadata
values for a large number of sensing and control points based on known metadata
of other points or other buildings. It develops new learning-based techniques
along three main research thrusts: 1) value inference of individual points, 2)
relationship inference between sensors, and 3) latent metadata inference from
building managers' interactive access behaviors with a building management
system. This research enables industry and institutions to more easily apply
building analytics to new buildings with minimal or even no manual mapping
required. It generates impact on average US building performance along multiple
metrics, including human health, productivity, comfort, and energy consumption.
In addition, the proposed research includes the development of fundamentally new
methods and techniques in the fields of data mining and cyber-physical systems,
and they will be released as open-sourced code. The research activities will be
incorporated into teaching materials for student training and education. Both
graduate and undergraduate researchers will be involved in all phases of this
research, and we will engage and recruit students from underrepresented groups
to participate in this research. If successful, these techniques will generalize
to other types of C activities such as human health monitoring, infrastructure
monitoring, or smart transportation systems where structure can similarly be
used to help infer the physical context of a sensor or controller.