* 1718177
* PFI: BIC: WearNet: Wearable Nanoplasmonic Biosensing Networks for Smart Health Monitoring &amp; Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Edward Furlani, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,047,141.00

Major advancements in the fields of electronics, photonics, electro-mechanical
systems and wireless communication have enabled the development of compact
wearable devices, with applications in diverse domains such as fitness, wellness
and medicine. Despite their potential, existing wearable devices are only able
to measure a few parameters (e.g., heart rate, breathing, temperature or blood
pressure). In parallel to these efforts, nanotechnology is enabling the
development of miniature sensors that can detect different types of human health
events at the nanoscale with unprecedented accuracy. In-vivo nanosensing
systems, which can operate inside the human body in real time, have been
proposed as a way to provide faster and more accurate disease diagnosis over
traditional technologies. Despite the potential of this technology, there are
several limitations in the current systems, such as the cost and bulkiness of
existing portable systems, which limit its real-world impact. The objective of
this project is to develop a smart service system for advanced health monitoring
and disease diagnosis based on wearable nano-biosensing networks. The system
consists of three elements: 1) a nanoplasmonic biochip, to be implanted under
the skin and designed to react to lung cancer biomarkers; 2) a wearable smart
band, integrated by nanophotonic devices for excitation and measurement of the
implant; and 3) a software platform to process the measured signals, extract the
information, and formulate a diagnosis. This technology will significantly boost
the applications of wearable devices, by providing the means to detect different
types of diseases and, in particular, cancer. By partnering with two industry
leaders and pioneers in the fields of solid-state electronics and advanced
biomedical devices, this project is expected to enable cancer progression
monitoring systems, with a broad societal impact. Importantly, integrating
research and industry with education is a priority in this interdisciplinary
effort, which will train the next generation of student scientists (6 doctoral
students supported). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project encompasses four
intertwined research thrusts. The first thrust is focused on the development of
the nanoplasmonic biosensing technology at the basis of this smart health
system. This includes an implantable nanoplasmonic biochip composed of
multiplexed sensor arrays for lung cancer detection from biomarkers in blood, as
well as the optical nano-sources and nano-photodetectors needed to respectively
excite and measure the biosensing signals through reflection, both integrated in
a wearable device. The second thrust is focused on the development of the
software algorithms to dynamically calibrate and operate the nano-sources,
collect and post-process the measured signals at the nano-photodetectors by
considering the intra-body wireless channel, extract the diagnose information
and securely share the collected data with the healthcare provider. The third
thrust is focused on the human factors that impact the design of the entire
system, including the study of the impact and optimization of the nanoplasmonic
biochip in biological tissues, the development of biochip regeneration
techniques for continued operation of the implant, the investigation of the
photothermal effects introduced by the nanophotonic excitation platform and the
implant, and the processing and distribution of sensitive data related to the
users' health. Finally, the fourth thrust will create an integrated testbed for
the entire proposed system, involving in-vitro testing of the biochips with
blood samples of lung cancer patients, ex-vivo testing with biochips implanted
in tissue-equivalent phantoms with blood microcirculation networks, and testing
in cadaver specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by an
interdisciplinary team of researchers at the University at Buffalo with
participation of the Departments of Electrical Engineering, Chemical and
Biomedical Engineering and Orthopedics. Two industry partners contribute and
support the development of this project, Intel Labs (Hillsboro, Oregon, large
business partner) and Garwood Medical Devices (Buffalo, NY, start-up partner).
In addition, the Roswell Park Cancer Institute (Buffalo, NY), a cancer research
and treatment center, serves as a broader context partner and consultant to the
team.