* 1718389
* CCF-BSF:CIF: Small: Coding for Fast Storage Access and In-Memory  Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Lara Dolecek, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 470,000.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by the needs of mobile and cloud computing,
demand for data storage is exhibiting steep growth, both in the direction of
higher storage density as well as a simultaneous ambitious increase in access
performance. A related exciting emerging trend driven by access challenges is
in-memory computing, whereby computations are offloaded from the main processing
units to the memory to reduce transfer time and energy. The challenges of future
rapid storage access and in-memory computing cannot be addressed by the
conventional storage architectures that inevitably trade off reliability and
capacity for latency. This bottleneck calls for innovative research
contributions that can simultaneously maximize the storage density, access
performance, and computing functionality. This project addresses this imminent
challenge by developing principled mathematical foundations that will underpin
future computing systems possessing qualities necessary to address new data-
intensive applications, focusing on fundamental performance bounds, algorithms,
and practical channel coding methods. The results of this project will be
demonstrated on modern data-driven and machine learning applications, will
advance the repertoire of mathematical techniques in information sciences, and
will directly impact future computer system architectures to meet the growing
and wide ranging societal and scientific needs for computing and rapid data
processing. Additionally, the proposal offers several mechanisms for broader
impacts, including engagement with data storage and memory industry through the
existing research center that the principal investigator is leading at UCLA,
curriculum development and the introduction of new graduate courses in the UCLA
on-line master's program in engineering, engagement of undergraduate
researchers, and dissemination of the results through survey-style articles and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has the following three complementary research
goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Invention of new channel codes for reliable and
fast memory access for latency sensitive applications, with the study spanning
general memories and specific schemes for resistive memories in particular. The
proposed schemes will offer non-trivial extensions to vibrant coding subjects:
codes with locality (algebraic and graph-based) and constrained coding;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Invention of new channel codes for which the decoding
is performed directly in memory to enable simultaneously satisfying competing
requirements on latency and reliability. Here, the decoder itself is subject to
computational errors, themselves manifested in a data dependent sense. The
analysis will lead to bounds and practical code designs robust to data-dependent
errors. An exemplar will be codes designed using spatial coupling and decoded
using windowed message passing decoders;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Development of
novel fundamental bounds, algorithms, and channel codes for robust in-memory
computing, with the focus on quantifying the robustness of computing primitives
in statistical inference and other machine learning algorithms used in modern
data-driven applications. These include fundamental performance limits and new
coding-based methods to simultaneously combat sneak paths and computing noise.
Analysis will include coding for (noisy) Hamming/Euclidean similarity
calculations, evaluated in the context of practical machine learning
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will also
contribute to the curriculum development at UCLA and will offer new
opportunities for the engagement of undergraduate researchers from
underrepresented groups.