* 1718133
* CSR:Small:A Server-Network Cooperative Approach to Data Center Energy Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Suresh Subramaniam, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 08/31/2021
* USD 527,172.00

Fueled by the growth in cloud computing which serves critical application needs
ranging from banking to national defense, data centers have become a critical
part of our nation?s infrastructure . Within data centers, servers and the
interconnect networks account for an increasingly significant portion of the
overall energy. This is because many server farms are configured to operate at a
capacity much higher than necessary, and the data movement between servers is
rapidly increasing in volume. This project studies the interplay between the
servers and networks, and devises energy-saving strategies through monitoring
data center workload patterns. With the changing landscape of data center
applications and their communication patterns, this research project offers a
much-needed study through adopting a holistic view of energy consumed by both
servers and networks. The research outcomes will provide direct benefit to US
industry through minimizing data center energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates coordinated server-network energy optimization strategies
that make judicious use of low-power states available in the processor and
network component (micro) architectures while preserving application performance
constraints. The solution approach seeks to design workload-specific energy
management policies that select an optimal set of low power states and dynamic
voltage/frequency settings that are best suited for the workload. To improve
power efficiency, power shifting between heterogeneous components will be
leveraged such that higher performance can be achieved within a specified power
budget. The outcome of this research will include self-adaptive algorithms that
will adjust themselves to the changing workload patterns, and techniques that
minimize time-to-solution.