* 1718007
* CIF: Small: Signal Processing for Quanta Image Sensors: Reconstruction, Sampling, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Stanley Chan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2021
* USD 480,947.00

The proliferation of digital cameras over the past decades has revolutionized
almost every aspect of science, technology and society. However, as we continue
to shrink image sensors to increase spatial resolution and reduce camera size,
the size of the photon-collecting site of a sensor will soon reach a fundamental
limit below which no meaningful signal can be generated. The goal of this
research is to investigate a new type of image sensor called the Quanta Image
Sensors (QIS). Compared to conventional image sensors, QIS offer substantially
higher spatial resolution, temporal resolution, and dynamic range. Because of
these important features, the sensor has the potential to impact a wide range of
applications in digital cameras, consumer electronics, wearable devices, medical
imaging, and physical science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the research
is to develop signal processing theories and algorithms to support QIS. Building
upon previous studies in QIS, this research puts extra emphasis on bridging the
theories to practice. Specific questions addressed include: (1) Image
reconstruction. How to reconstruct images from the massive binary bit-stream
collected by the QIS without using iterative algorithms? (2) Sampling. How to
control the sensor?s sampling mechanism in spatial-temporal resolution, color
space, and threshold to maximize the signal to noise ratio? (3) Application. How
to track fast moving objects using QIS without reconstructing images? Results
from this research will foster new signal processing techniques for imaging in
photon limited environments.