* 1718420
* PFI:BIC: Pre-Departure Dynamic Geofencing, En-Route Traffic Alerting,  Emergency Landing and Contingency Management for Intelligent Low-Altitude Airspace UAS Traffic Management
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Ella Atkins, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2022
* USD 1,050,000.00

With the development of numerous civilian Unmanned Aerial System (UAS)
applications, a large number of unmanned aircraft of various types need to be
safely operated in low-altitude airspace. These UAS also need to safely share
this space with manned aviation traffic, such as general aviation and
helicopters. The FAA forecasts 7 million UAS sales (commercial and hobbyist
combined) by 2020. This project advances and integrates the investigators' novel
concepts of operations and core algorithms into an intelligent UAS Traffic
Management system (UTM). This UTM system would also break market feasibility
barriers for new UAS applications such as urban on-demand air transportation and
UAS cargo delivery. Finally, the insights gained during the development of the
proposed UTM could have profound impact on design and implementation of other
human-centered smart service systems and cyber-physical systems that support
civil aviation, e.g., air traffic infrastructures, operator ground support
systems, communication, navigation and surveillance devices, and vehicle
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;This research proposes an intelligent UTM system
integrating big data architecture and computation power that will coordinate
pre-departure UAS flight plans, detect potential collisions in real time,
generate recommendations to resolve potential conflictions, proactively control
any risk to people and objects on the ground during an emergency landing, and
identify the cause of collisions. The aim of these capabilities is to minimize
the number of collisions and mitigate the impact of each accident. This will be
achieved using large-scale optimization, aircraft guidance and control,
predictive modeling, system verification and validation, and advanced
visualization techniques for information presentation and decision support. The
proposed system has a pre-departure flight plan coordination module that queries
the approved flight plan database and performs conformance checking for every
newly requested flight plan to achieve conflict-free pre-departure traffic
coordination. An en route traffic monitoring and alerting module receives real-
time aircraft position data and active flight plans, performs automated
prediction for potential collision, and generate recommendations to resolve
collisions. An emergency landing and contingency management module queries
multiple databases such as terrain maps, obstacle data, airspace data, public
safety data and real-time aircraft position data to suggest emergency landing
site and calculate the corresponding landing path to minimize the impact risk to
people and objects on the ground. Finally, the advanced human machine interface
will provide information visualization and decision support in an intuitive way
to reduce cognitive inefficiencies and maximize human-in-the-loop performance to
augment UAS traffic controller capabilities. The proposed system will serve as a
complementary component of an ongoing NASA UTM. The research plan has three
phases: (Phase 1) Identification and synthesis of intelligent UTM user
requirements, (Phase 2) Development of the intelligent UTM core algorithms and
system prototype, and (Phase 3) intelligent UTM testing, evaluation, and
integration.&lt;br/&gt;This academe-industry partnership is lead by a
multidisciplinary academic research team: Iowa State University (lead
institution), University of Iowa (Iowa City, IA),and University of Michigan (Ann
Arbor, MI),) with primary industrial partners Rockwell Collins (Cedar Rapids,
IA) and Mosaic ATM (small business, Leesburg, VA) together with broader context
partners the Federal Aviation Administration William J. Hughes Technical Center
(FAA Tech Center) (government agency, Egg Harbor Township, NJ). The partners
will also receive feedback from the FAA Iowa office and Uber Elevate. This
partnership will ensure that the proposed UTM system meets FAA regulations, user
requirements, and market needs.