* 1718755
* RI:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  A Modular Approach to Robot Systems Incorporating Compliant and Soft Elements
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Isuru Godage, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2022
* USD 289,900.00

Biological systems can demonstrate impressive energy efficient manipulation,
from picking up fragile objects to lifting heavy weights. To do so, they rely on
building blocks of varying stiffness, such as bones and muscles. Inspired by
these biological systems, this project is investigating the combination of
"stiff" and "soft" robotic components, creating novel "hybrids" that exploit the
advantages, and conceal the inherent weaknesses, of the individual technologies.
Such "hybrids" aim to bring safe and practical soft robotics to previously
inaccessible domains and applications, including urban search/rescue, disaster
relief, and assistance for the elderly and people with disabilities. The project
will also promote robotics among underrepresented groups at both DePaul and
Clemson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is collaboratively designing,
modeling, creating, and demonstrating a series of innovative soft, modular
robots. The modules are exploiting the hard/soft component interaction and
constrained actuator arrangement to control stiffness independently from
bending. Exploiting modularity, these robots can reassemble, or "evolve", into
different manipulators and locomotors. The project is developing a unified
design and optimization framework to optimize, per user specifications, the
composition of hard/soft modules and optimal sensor placement. Resulting modules
are fabricated and assembled into a variety of robotic configurations to
demonstrate the importance of stiffness modulation in dealing with unforeseen
circumstances. Using these modules, the project is also creating a sophisticated
physical platform for providing new theoretical insights and innovative
operational modes for soft modular robots, as well as demonstrating the
fundamentals of morphological computation. Morphological computation utilizes
physical body properties (e.g., stiffness and bending shape) as a computational
resource that can share the burden of control to optimize stability and
locomotion efficiency in real-time. This thrust is exploiting the intrinsic
resonant motions of modular systems, via stiffness and shape modulation, to
minimize energy loss and improve stability.