* 1718742
* NeTS: Small: Coordinated Beam Discovery, Association, and Handover in Ultra-Dense Millimeter Wave Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Danijela Cabric, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Ever increasing demands for higher mobile data rates have resulted in
exploration of new wireless technologies such as millimeter wave (mmWave)
cellular networks due to large bandwidth availability at mmWave frequencies.
However, higher channel propagation loss and higher probability of signal
blockage in the mmWave band, as compared to the microwave band, have introduced
challenges in establishing and maintaining the link between base stations and
user equipment. In order to compensate for the losses, these devices use a large
number of antennas and narrow beams to achieve high beamforming gains needed to
establish the link. Further, ultra-dense base station deployment is needed to
provide better coverage in the region. As a result, the mmWave cellular networks
face new design challenges: i) establishing the link during initial channel
access, ii) coordinated association of a user equipment to base stations and
allocation of base station resources (beams and time) to users, and iii) beam
adaptation for mobile user equipment and managing handovers in ultra-dense
mobile networks. The proposed technologies are of fundamental importance to
realize future ultra-dense 5G cellular networks, support user mobility and
enable various applications requiring high data rate including video streaming,
cloud computing, virtual reality, and augmented reality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address these challenges and enable
ultra-fast, low delay, and high throughput cellular networks in the mmWave band.
First, it aims to develop an initial access procedure needed to establish the
link between base stations and user equipment using compressive sensing
measurements while considering practical hardware impairments. Next, it proposes
to use the channel parameters obtained during the initial access to associate
users with a specific base station and allocate resources accordingly. The novel
association techniques will allow multiple base stations to simultaneously serve
one user using independent RF chains, thereby increasing the data rate and
reducing the probability of outage. Finally, a novel mobility management
technique based on low-complexity beam-tracking and handover algorithms is
proposed to enable seamless data transfer in ultra-dense mobile network. The
proposed methodology will involve formulation of optimization framework for
problems of coordinated beam association, resource allocation, and handovers and
design of low complexity algorithms that solve the underlying optimization while
enabling their practical realization.