* 1718560
* CIF:  Small:  Understanding Microbial Signaling Through a Communication Theoretic Lens
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

Bacteria are single-celled organisms wherein the intracellular components such
as proteins, DNA and metabolites do not exist in individual components, but are
contained by the cell membrane. They constitute some of the earliest forms of
life (over three billion years old), and have an aggregate biomass that is
larger than that of all animals and plants combined, numbering over five
nonillion (5 x 10^{30}). Despite their simplicity, the operations and
interactions of bacteria are not fully understood, yet microbial communities
play a significant role in bioremediation, plant growth promotion, human and
animal digestion, disease and drive elemental cycles, the carbon-cycle and the
cleaning of water. Thus, it is of significant interest to further understand
microbial populations. An interdisciplinary approach toward the understanding of
cooperative and anti-cooperative behavior in microbial populations with a focus
on signaling methods such as molecular diffusion and electron transfer will be
undertaken. The research objective is to investigate biological group behaviors
that exploit a variety of coupling mechanisms in order to form structures. In
particular, microbial communities that are able to form structures at different
scales will be examined. Problems relevant to two key applications motivate the
research: microbial fuel cell optimization and infection initiation and
suppression and the relationship to quorum sensing. In quorum sensing, when the
concentration of a compound produced by the bacteria exceeds a threshold, the
bacteria express new genes leading to new community behavior such as
luminescence or infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hope is that the fruits of
the research will result in novel bio-inspired systems that naturally rely on
principles of multi-modal sensing and different modalities of control and
environmental conditions. More ambitiously, design methods by which structures
in microbial communities can be induced are sought. Ongoing collaborations with
biophysicists that have been instrumental in model design and validation via
experimental data will be leveraged. Given the expertise of key collaborators,
two strains of bacteria will be the focus: Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Shewanella
oneidensis MR-1. In particular: (1) can one optimize the operation of microbial
fuel cells exploiting electron transfer in bacterial populations and (2) can one
design strategies to understand quorum sensing and potentially prevent infection
without the use of antibiotics? Key questions to address include assessing what
is the minimal amount information needed in order for distributed entities to
form desired structures and geometries as well as engage in desired behaviors.
Bacteria have limited capabilities and the distinctions between communication,
respiration, and ingestion can often be minimal. These activities can provide
either explicit or implicit avenues of communication and thus can exact a
control. Specific problems include: molecular modulation design, bacterial cable
formation via multi-terminal communication methods, models for quorum sensing
including game theoretic approaches and multicellular interaction.