* 1718074
* SaTC:  CORE:  Small:  Collaborative:  A Broad Treatment of Privacy in Blockchains
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alessandra Scafuro, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 249,922.00

Blockchains provide a new perspective on secure, decentralized information
sharing and are projected to be the technology of the future. Blockchains were
first introduced as the underlying mechanism of cryptocurrencies and are used to
secure financial transactions without the need for a central trusted party.
Today, blockchains are also recognized for their potential advantages in various
contexts ranging from identity management to health data records. However,
despite being such a promising tool, the data posted on a blockchain is public
and immortally captured and thus the privacy of the users can be massively
violated if privacy concerns are not taken into consideration. The goals of this
project are to develop a formal model for privacy in blockchains and privacy-
preserving tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a framework that
captures privacy requirements for transactions, data blocks and the mining
process under a threat model that reflects the adversarial capabilities over the
Internet (i.e., composable security). Building on this framework, the
researchers investigate new privacy-preserving mechanisms for existing
blockchain payment systems and the design of new blockchain-based payment
systems with built-in privacy properties that do not require a trusted setup.
Next, the researchers investigate new privacy requirements like hiding the
identity of the miner which is relevant in scenarios where mining a block might
signify the endorsement of the information included in the block. Finally, the
researchers develop techniques to guarantee accountability even in a privacy-
preserving setting where privacy should be preserved only so long as a pre-
specified bad behavior is not detected.