* 1718086
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Expanding TrustZone: Enabling Mobile Apps to Transparently Leverage TrustZone for Attestation and Data Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Wenliang Du, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2021
* USD 497,296.00

Mobile device security is critical to millions of users and mobile operating
system vulnerabilities can lead to exposure of sensitive data (e.g., passwords,
credit card numbers, medical data) or compromise of sensitive operations (e.g.,
banking transactions). This research project is working to answer the following
question: If the device's operating system is compromised, is it still possible
to protect user's sensitive data and operations? The researchers are using new
hardware technology, "Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs)," to enable such
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many new processors offer a TEE, which is
isolated from the normal operating system (OS) environment. Code and data inside
the TEE is protected even when the OS running in the normal environment is
compromised. In the mobile computing environment, only apps provided by the
mobile system vendors are typically able to make use of the TEE, as some of the
app logic must be installed within the TEE. This research project is developing
techniques to enable device-neutral integration of third party apps with mobile
TEEs, focusing on (1) app interaction with the TEE user interface, and (2) TEE-
assisted interaction between app and server. The research team is designing
interaction logic to hide TEE-specific details within the mobile OS, enabling
third party app developers to use the TEE capabilities transparently from the
mobile OS interface. The team is also designing app-to-cloud-server attestation
techniques, to allow a mobile app to prove that communication (e.g., email, HTTP
requests, phone calls, or SMS messages) was initiated by the app on the mobile
device and not spoofed by a compromised mobile OS. The researchers are building
their own TEE-enabled Android smartphone to support the security features
developed by the project.