* 1718880
* CSR: Small: The Deterministic Memory Approach for Predictable and High Performance Cyber Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Heechul Yun, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

High-performance embedded multicore platforms are becoming increasingly
important for cyber-physical systems (CPS) - especially in automotive and
aviation domains - to reduce cost, size, weight, and energy consumption through
consolidation. However, poor time predictability of multicore platforms is a
major hurdle for safety-critical CPS. This project will address the time
predictability problem by proposing a new memory abstraction, called
Deterministic Memory, that enables effective cross-layer collaborations between
software and hardware. Leveraging abstraction and architecture extensions,
resource management techniques and analysis methodologies will be developed to
realize predictable and efficient real-time computing in multicore
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will demonstrate how the proposed
Deterministic Memory abstraction enables innovations in software and hardware
designs. The project will develop new timing analysis methodologies that will
incorporate the new memory concepts, which have the potential to significantly
reduce the gap between theory and practice in multicore real-time systems. The
project will advance safety-critical CPS domains, such as automotive and
aviation, by improving predictability and determinism of the systems without
over-provisioning of resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is expected to
enable efficient consolidation of multiple tasks with different criticality, and
thereby to cut the cost and reduce the size, weight, and power requirements of
the system. Moreover, the research has the potential to help reduce
certification cost of aviation industry by providing stronger isolation with
hardware support. Considering the market size of automotive industry and the
high certification cost in aviation industry, the expected improvements promised
by the research represent potentially billions of dollars in savings.