* 1718791
* NeTS: Small: SMILE -- Towards Smarter Network Edges for Next Generation Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Tamer Nadeem, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 12/31/2017
* USD 491,104.00

As the number of smart devices and their applications continue to grow,
transmission of mobile traffic data over wireless links (i.e., Wi-Fi and
cellular links) is continuing to increase significantly. To cope with the
explosion of smart devices coupled with a growing proliferation of cloud or
edge-based applications, best-effort Quality Of Service is no longer a
satisfactory solution and a new breed of intelligent networks is required. More
specifically, it is now necessary to have greater visibility and control over
the traffic generated from the smart devices in order to deliver optimal
performance and a high Quality of Experience to a variety of users and
applications. Software Defined Networks (SDN) are a way to facilitate wired
network evolution by enabling flexible, controllable, and efficient networks.
Motivated by the unique difference of wireless (vs. wired), this project aims to
develop and evaluate SMILE (SMart and Intelligent wireLess Edge framework) that
supports SDN-like structure at network wireless edge that include both wireless
access devices (e.g., Wi-Fi Access Points (APs)) and end-devices. Extending SDN
paradigm all the way to smart end-devices would realize our objective in making
the network, both wired and wireless, open, flexible and programmable to provide
truly end-to-end management and control in which users could reap the full
benefits of SDN. The proposed research is expected to advance the state of the
art of networking and mobile computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project, SMILE, aims to achieve the following main goals: i) Design and
development of SMILE framework that supports wireless networks to be open,
flexible, and programmable to cope with complexity, dynamic nature, and
uncertainty associated with wireless networks, ii) Draw on the developed SMILE
framework to design and develop three different network services such as edge-
based fine-grained context-aware video adaptation service, and iii) Implement
and evaluate the developed smart protocols and services on medium-scale testbed
of smartphones and Wi-Fi APs as well as simulation tools. All schemes/protocols,
software development, testbed realization, experimental results will be made
open available to the research community. This project will also carry out a
number of educational activities involving K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students, make strong outreach efforts for recruiting and mentoring under-
represented students, and enriching undergraduate and graduate curricula through
exposing students to cutting-edge research in wireless networks, and mobile
computing. In addition, several industrial collaborations are expected within
the scope of this project.