* 1718938
* SHF: Small: A reconfigurable architecture for digital circuit computation by fast, robust, and leakless DNA strand displacement cascades
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2020
* USD 464,999.00

The promise of molecular programming lies in its ability to not only process
information autonomously, but to do so in a biochemical context in order to
sense and actuate matter. For its simplicity and its programmability, one
attractive option for chemical information processing is built upon the DNA
strand displacement (DSD) primitive, where a soup of rationally designed
nucleotide sequences interact, react, and recombine over time in order to carry
out sophisticated computation. The focus of this proposal is the creation of a
reconfigurable DSD architecture akin to a molecular breadboard. Its purpose is
to "scale-up" what is possible with this technology and to "scale-out" its
adoption to new contexts and new areas of study. A small number of fast, robust
and well-understood molecular components will be developed that compose
seamlessly. The necessary tools to facilitate rapid circuit design and
characterization will also be developed. The reconfigurable architecture will be
designed to meet the challenges required in real-world applications ranging from
point-of-care diagnostics to sensing and actuation within molecular systems. Due
to its ease of use, we envision that this molecular breadboard will be an ideal
vehicle to teach molecular programming and to facilitate wider adoption of DSD
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on a new leak reduction
paradigm for DNA strand displacement systems, a new design for robust molecular
computing gates will be developed, experimentally tested, and refined. By
perfecting a set of molecular components suitable for use in modular and
reconfigurable circuits, this will result in a fixed set of dozens of high
quality gates that can be arbitrarily wired-up in order to create bespoke
molecular circuits. A compiler will be developed that takes as input a circuit
or logic function and provides as output the optimized set of biochemical
"wires" necessary to activate the desired logic behavior. If successful, it will
be possible to create and execute fast, leakless and robust molecular circuits,
for circuits 2×-10× larger than have been previously demonstrated and with
completion times 10×-100× faster. This increase in complexity creates an even
greater need for design verification that will be addressed by the development
of more efficient kinetic simulation software. The breadboard promises to be
robust enough for immediate use in applications, such as diagnostics and
molecular imaging, and in new contexts such as paper-based devices.