* 1718287
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Flexible Resource Management and Coordination Schemes for Lightweight, Rapidly Deployable OS/Rs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* John Lange, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2021
* USD 249,964.00

Current cloud systems leverage either heavy-weight virtualization (running
applications inside full-fledged virtual machines (VMs) with their own operating
systems) or containers (light-weight software environments that share a single
underlying operating system). This collaborative project aims to increase the
efficiency of cloud systems by enabling the rapid deployment of specialized
operating system and runtime (SOS/R) environments optimized for particular
applications or runtime systems. This will allow users of applications with
special performance requirements to enjoy the convenience of cloud
infrastructure without sacrificing performance or design constraints imposed by
general-purpose operating systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance
the state of the art in cloud system software by: (a) enabling the development
of a general specialized hosting framework allowing the deployment of arbitrary
system software stacks as both VMs and native co-kernel instances; (b) a set of
interfaces and mechanisms to allow SOS/R environments to react to highly dynamic
and variable hardware resource availability; (c) novel approaches that leverage
hardware virtualization features to host SOS/Rs; and (d) a thorough evaluation
of all of these approaches using realistic cloud workloads at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will enable users of cloud systems to
efficiently deploy diverse and specialized system architectures. This will not
only enhance the capabilities of existing cloud and data center platforms, but
will also enable the deployment of new types of operating systems and runtimes.
Prototype systems produced in this effort will be made available to the general
public as open-source software, and will also be leveraged as teaching and
platforms for courses in operating systems, virtualization, runtime
environments, and general cloud computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data, code, and
results generated from the project will be made freely available indefinitely on
the team's webpages. All software packages will be accompanied by instructions
for building and running them using freely available open-source tools. Data and
results will be made available in compressed archive formats. Links to specific
repositories (such as git repositories for code) will be made public either at
http://hexsa.halek.co or http://prognosticlab.org.