* 1718384
* RI: Small: A New Approach to Integrating Graphical Models in Decision-Theoretic Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Eric Hansen, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 427,000.00

This project addresses one of the central problems of research in Artificial
Intelligence: the problem of planning, or sequential decision making, under
uncertainty and imperfect information. Planning algorithms are widely-used for
control and decision-making problems in engineering and business, with many
practical applications in robotics, process control, logistics, user-adaptive
systems, resource management, and related problems where automation of decision
making is useful. This project considers two widely-used decision-theoretic
frameworks for planning under uncertainty and imperfect information, which are
partially observable Markov decision processes and influence diagrams, and
integrates these two frameworks in a novel way that leverages their
complementary advantages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates these two
frameworks by showing how to generalize algorithms for solving influence
diagrams, especially classic variable elimination algorithms, so that they use
algorithmic techniques for solving partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs) to improve scalability, as well as to represent plans and
strategies more compactly. The generalized variable elimination algorithms
developed in this project can behave like traditional algorithms for solving
influence diagrams, or like traditional algorithms for solving POMDPs, depending
on the order in which variables are eliminated. From this perspective,
algorithms for influence diagrams and POMDPs that once appeared dissimilar can
be viewed as special cases of the same, more general algorithm. More
importantly, this perspective allows these complementary algorithmic techniques
to be combined in new ways, leading to planning algorithms with improved
performance, wider applicability, and easier-to-interpret results. The project
focuses on several related research problems that will extend this approach and
make it more useful in practice, including the development of new heuristics for
variable elimination ordering, the development of approaches to improving
planner performance by leveraging problem structure, including context-specific
independence, and the development of an integrated approach to bounded-error
approximation that will allow tradeoffs between plan quality and computation
time. Although the project focuses on finite-horizon planning problems, the
integrated approach may also be used in solving infinite-horizon planning
problems with non-Markovian structure. In addition to the intellectual impact of
this research, the project will contribute to education, student mentoring, and
outreach.