* 1718160
* CSR: SMALL: Virtualized Accelerators for Scalable, Composable Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Gu-Yeon Wei, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

This project seeks to develop fundamental technologies to enable the next-
generation of computing devices that will power future ubiquitous computing
devices such as smartphones, self-driving cars, and autonomous robots. The
project develops novel tools and techniques at both the hardware and software
layers of computer systems. This project will also train new graduate engineers
in architecting complex computing systems, modern software and hardware design
methodologies, and cutting edge machine learning techniques. All of these
skillsets are in broad demand in US industry but have been underrepresented in
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous architectures comprising
general purpose processors, graphics processors, and hardware accelerators
designed for specific computing tasks have been widely adopted in today's
computing systems for both edge and cloud devices. Specialized computing blocks
provide tremendous benefits in energy efficiency. However, a major challenge in
the design of such systems is the loss of generality and flexibility that has
limited their adoption to a small set of application domains that do not often
change. Increased flexibility could be unlocked if accelerators were built from
smaller dynamically composable blocks, but existing approaches are difficult to
program and scale poorly. This project proposes a design flow to generate a
templated System-on-Chip (Soc) with a composable accelerator system that can be
physically instantiated for a range of computing platforms. Through a
virtualization layer, collections of physical hardware blocks are exposed to
software as virtual accelerators. To efficiently search the large design space
of the SoC, new design space exploration techniques are under investigation.