* 1718297
* SHF:Small: Collaborative Research: Tailoring Memory Systems for Data-Intensive HPC Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Qing Liu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2021
* USD 147,998.00

High-performance computing is of strategic importance for computational science
and engineering in the United States, and is on an accelerated path to
sustaining scientific discovery at much increased flops. To advance the
scientific discovery to the next level and allow new science missions to be
accomplished in a timely manner, it is critical to address the memory
performance holistically in high-performance computing platforms. This project
provides architectural and system support and optimization for building memory
systems tailored for data-intensive applications, e.g., big data analytics. This
project offers research and educational opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students, and trains a new generation of computer scientists and
engineers in the area of high-performance computing. &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to address the research challenges in building an efficient
memory system by designing new techniques from several aspects. It develops a
novel centralized memory refresh scheme at the cluster-level to manage memory
refresh overhead, which has been increasingly performance-impacting and energy-
consuming. It designs a new memory scheduling policy, taking advantages of new
memory characteristics. It makes memory characteristics/peculiarities be
available to the processor and operating system, so that they can make well-
informed decisions to fully exploit memory performance potentials. It leverages
in-memory computing to enable efficient in-situ processing. The integration of
all these techniques provides a holistic solution to building an efficient
memory system tailored for data-intensive applications.