* 1718400
* NeTS: Small: Leveraging Opportunistic Pushing for CDNs and Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Aaron Striegel, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 01/31/2021
* USD 110,000.00

A vibrant and healthy wireless network edge is essential to the modern economy.
New technologies such as the Internet of Things, self-driving vehicles, and a
host of new automation technologies rely on robust, high-speed wireless
technology for operation. Unfortunately, the demand for wireless connectivity
has far outstripped the amount of wireless spectrum available. Using more
spectrum and improving spectral efficiency are some longer-term solutions. A
more immediate approach is to explore how to flatten the demand curve - reducing
peak demands through aggressive time shifting and content caching. The focus of
this research is to explore how the free storage space that sits unused on
mobile devices can be leveraged by content providers and network operators to
radically improve wireless performance. In short, the research seeks to push
data during idle network times to avoid overloads during peak times. Whether it
is a crowded sporting event or a crowded subway station, the intended result of
the work is mobile devices that download data more quickly while operating with
longer battery lifetimes. The work seeks to make wireless network performance in
crowded venues remarkably better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, free space
on mobile devices is made securely writable by trusted content providers and
network operators, effectively allowing the network operator to push content
dynamically to a device. The mechanisms and trade-offs that occur in large scale
wireless systems (WiFi, cellular) present numerous challenges with respect to
how and when to push content to the devices such that there is a net gain to
overall wireless network system health. The work proposes to develop the
architecture which seeks to allow devices in tandem with the network to sense
redundant content. Mobile devices and the network operator constantly monitor
and detect redundancy, triggering thresholds by which redundant content is
efficiently pushed appropriately in the network through D2D (device to device)
sharing and targeted broadcasts. Content is pre-staged during network idle
periods or high bandwidth opportunities to time shift, improving the perceived
Quality of Experience of the user in both responsiveness and efficiency. The
project will develop prototype apps, create a Software Development Kit for
Android and iOS, and conduct robust evaluations in demanding, dense
environments.