* 1718820
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Solving Real-Life Instances of Optimization and Clustering Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Yury Makarychev, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,986.00

The project aims to develop efficient algorithms for computational problems that
arise in business, engineering, and science. The project will have an impact on
theoretical computer science (TCS) by improving our understanding of the nature
of real-life instances and designing better algorithms -- with provable
performance guarantees -- for them. Additionally, the results will be relevant
to researchers in other areas of computer science, including machine learning
and optimization. In particular, this project will provide researchers with new
practical algorithms. Through its wide-reaching results, the project will
strengthen the connection between TCS and other areas of computer science.
Further, the project will be of interest to researchers in mathematics,
mathematical physics, and statistics, in part because one of the key models
considered in this proposal has been introduced and studied in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will collaborate on this project with
graduate and undergraduate students at the Toyota Technological Institute at
Chicago (TTIC) and the University of Chicago. Additionally, he will invite PhD
students from other universities to work on the project during summer months.
The PI will incorporate the topic of this proposal in his graduate courses.
Specifically, he will include introductory material on the topic in his graduate
Algorithms course and more advanced material in his course on metric geometry in
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many problems that arise in business,
engineering, and science are very hard in the worst case: for them, there are no
"universal" efficient algorithms -- i.e., algorithms that solve all possible
instances in reasonable (polynomial) time. However, real-life instances are
usually considerably simpler than the most difficult ones. The goal of this
project is to identify what makes real-life instances computationally tractable
and to design efficient algorithms for solving them. These algorithms will solve
many real-life instances of computational problems by exploiting their
structural properties (at the same time, the algorithms may fail to solve the
most difficult instances, which, however, almost never appear in
practice).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to design efficient algorithms -- with
provable performance guarantees -- for real-life instances of computational
problems, one has to define a formal model for real-life instances. This
proposal will explore existing generative and descriptive models for real-life
instances of clustering and optimization problems, including semi-random
stochastic block models and models based on different stability assumptions. The
project will also develop new, more advanced models. The PI will design new
algorithms for these models and analyze existing heuristics.