* 1718700
* AF: Small: Algorithms for New Memory Models
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jeremy Fineman, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 347,980.00

Accessing memory and storage has a substantial impact on the performance of
computer programs, particularly when operating on large data sets. As such,
memory-efficient algorithms (or algorithms designed to optimize for memory
accesses) have received significant attention both in theory and practice. With
new developments in memory technology and usage, however, the classic models
less accurately capture true system performance characteristics. The goal of
this project is to develop a theory for new memory models that more closely
capture important performance features arising from recent shifts in memory
technology and usage. The project advances the state of the art in several
directions, including new performance models, new memory-efficient algorithms in
these models, new techniques for understanding the performance of algorithms,
and new lower bounds to explain the limits of algorithm performance. The
algorithms studied are themselves fundamental building blocks in larger systems,
and importing any new efficient solutions into existing programming platforms
could directly improve the performance of diverse software systems. As part of
the project the PI will develop educational materials, and any reference
implementations developed as part of the project will be made available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies algorithms in two classes of
new memory models, namely the cache-adaptive model and the asymmetric-memory
models. The cache-adaptive model is a way of modeling the fluctuations in
effective memory size that occur when multiple processes compete for space in a
shared cache. Efficient cache-adaptive algorithms should have more robust and
predictable performance on parallel systems. This project considers the
following areas relating to cache-adaptive algorithms: (1) new cache-adaptive
algorithms, (2) new cache-adaptive data structures, (3) more general performance
theorems, and (4) how sensitive the algorithms and their analyses are to worst-
case adversaries. An asymmetric-memory model is a model where writes are
significantly more expensive than reads; asymmetric models are relevant, e.g.,
to phase-change memories and other emerging memory technologies. This project
studies (1) new algorithms for asymmetric memory models, including implicit
representations of solution outputs that allow for a sublinear number of writes,
and (2) lower bounds for algorithms in these models.