* 1718135
* SaTC: TTP: Small: Modular Platform for Web-based Secure Multi-Party Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2022
* USD 515,577.00

This project designs, develops, and applies a modular infrastructure for
building web-based applications that allow individuals and organizations to
benefit from privacy-preserving data aggregation and analysis in contexts where
data sharing is encumbered by confidentiality concerns, legal restrictions, or
corporate policies. Today, individuals and organizations face a tension between
the explosion of valuable data that can be collected and processed and the
threat of the exposure of data (which may be sensitive) due to malicious actors,
criminal enterprises, and software errors. In response, entities often isolate
their data, and in the process forego opportunities to benefit from
collaborative data analysis. The infrastructure addresses these circumstances by
allowing software developers, entrepreneurs, social scientists, and
organizations to build web-based applications that leverage Secure Multi-Party
Computation (MPC), a collection of cryptographic techniques that have been known
for 35 years. In the last decade, MPC techniques have been implemented in
several software frameworks, and specialized individual deployments of MPC
include work on tax fraud detection, disease surveillance, and pay equity
assessment. However, MPC's social benefits are only broadly realized when it is
possible to design and assemble lightweight, user-friendly, web-based MPC
applications that decision-makers and stakeholders without a cybersecurity
background can understand and that the public and underserved populations can
access and utilize. Software libraries, packages, and applications developed and
evaluated over the course of this project will have tangible impacts on the ways
in which sensitive data corpora can be used by multiple individuals,
organizations, and policymakers to identify trends, diagnose problems, test
hypotheses, and inform policy decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
lowers the barrier for the design, development, and deployment of MPC
applications by delivering two types of open-source software: (1) libraries for
building back-end frameworks and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) that
can support web-based MPC-enabling services and (2) front-end frameworks for
developing client-side functionalities that can operate in a standard browser or
on a standard mobile device. Collectively, this software infrastructure enables
a diverse collection of MPC functionalities suitable for a variety of deployment
scenarios and user roles. The effort selects, adapts, translates, refactors,
optimizes, and encapsulates existing MPC algorithms and frameworks with a focus
on two operational metrics: (1) enhancing accessibility and driving adoption of
MPC, and (2) operating with minimal overhead in low-performance production
environments. Three real-world use cases identified by early adopters of MPC
technology will inform and ground the work: a pay equity analysis by the City of
Boston and the Boston Women's Workforce Council, a mobile health intervention
app for addiction recovery, and an effort to design a livelihood assessment of
underserved populations based on data sets maintained by a variety of distinct
organizations. All three test cases provide essential feedback that can direct
efforts leading to successful delivery and utilization of MPC in practice by
elucidating the suitability of existing MPC functionalities for such
applications, the necessity for optimization or customization of such
functionalities for individual scenarios, and the organization and decomposition
of such functionalities around real-world participant roles and workflows.