* 1718672
* PFI:BIC - Flexible,equitable, efficient, and effective distribution (FEEED)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Steven Jiang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,102,714.00

This project develops a smart service system to assist hunger relief
organizations, like food banks, in the Flexible, Equitable, Efficient, and
Effective Distribution (FEEED) of food to those in need. One in eight people in
America struggle with hunger. Food banks try to connect excess food to these
families in need but face many challenges. The true need is uncertain; donated
food has a limited shelf life; warehouse networks and receiving agencies have
capacity constraints; and the donated food supply is unpredictable in timing,
quantity, and quality. These challenges are becoming increasingly complex as
food banks must distribute food equitably to those in need, efficiently maximize
donated supply, minimize waste and distribute food in a cost effective manner.
The existing tools used by food banks provide information to facilitate all
levels of decision making but are limited in their ability to (i) provide a
comprehensive picture; (ii) recommend improvements; and (iii) learn from and
respond to the highly dynamic and uncertain environment. FEEED will synthesize
data from various sources to automatically predict, visualize, learn from
decision maker?s actions, and identify strategies to advance operational
effectiveness of food collection, distribution, and resource management and
fundamentally transform the way food banks operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FEEED
advances the management of complex dynamic distribution systems that require
intelligence to effectively utilize data to improve decision making. This
research project will involve the exploration and development of: (1) a novel,
stochastic modeling framework to adapt to the dynamically changing objectives of
the human decision maker, thus enabling the system to learn over time and more
effectively recommend solutions tailored to the decision maker's preferences;
(2) an intelligent operational guidance engine and knowledge base that help food
bank staff operationalize complex modeling into their daily processes; (3) a
framework for synthesizing and managing big data in the humanitarian relief
sector; and (4) human/machine communication modalities that facilitate user
understanding and visualization of smart system analysis, predictions and
recommendations. This research addresses the critical intersection of
humanitarian relief, engineering, computer science and industry by linking
donations management and food distribution to supply chain management and forges
a relationship necessary to address this significant global challenge. The
proposed research integrates discovery in industrial engineering and computer
science with industry best practice knowledge for the development of technology
that can be applied for flexible, equitable, efficient, and effective
humanitarian relief operations worldwide.