* 1718139
* CHS:  Small:   A Perceptual-based Approach to improve Synthetic Crowds
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Brian Ricks, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 12/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

In principle, crowd simulations could help designers make buildings both nicer
and safer by allowing them to explore how people would move through the building
in both normal and emergency situations. However, it is unclear whether existing
tools for simulating crowds reflect the motion of actual people, which makes
designers hesitant to use them. This project's goal is to develop a method that
allows people to visually compare the realism of computer-generated crowd
movement to real crowd movement. The idea is that the more a simulated crowd
looks as real as an actual crowd, then the more likely that the algorithm used
to generate the simulation and the simulation itself will be useful in building
design and will be trusted by building designers. The team will address these
questions by (1) processing videos of real crowd motion in buildings to generate
3D reconstructions, then (2) asking both non-experts and facilities managers to
(a) rate the realism of parallel videos that use the real crowd paths versus
simulated crowd paths through the reconstructed building and (b) comment on
aspects of the videos that affect their ratings. These data will be useful for
both evaluating and improving the quality of future crowd simulation algorithms;
to this end, the team will release the videos, datasets, algorithms,
experimental tools, and results to help other researchers in this and related
areas. They will also use the materials in college courses aimed at simulation
and modeling, as well as developing outreach experiences for middle and high
school students and outreach materials for building
designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To generate the experimental materials, the team
will first process crowd videos drawn from existing crowd movement video
databases when possible and captured by the team when needed to represent
conditions not available in those databases. They will then extract people's
initial locations and paths, using Catmull-Rom splines to compensate for noise
in the extraction of location and building features and variations in frame
rates between videos, as well as creating a 3D reconstruction of the facility.
For generating simulated paths, they will use the captured starting location,
time, and ending location as input to a suite of open source agent-steering
algorithms that represent a wide variety of simulation approaches. To remove
visual cues from the original films that might influence judgments, both the
original paths and the simulated paths will be generated using the Unity 3D
graphics rendering and physics engine, which is commonly used in crowd
simulation research. Finally, the team will develop an interface for rating and
annotating pairs of videos (and, for longer videos, video segments) for realism.
This interface will be used in the experiments described above in which
participants compare real and simulated renderings, as well as comparisons
between different segments of the same video, to collect as wide a variety of
data as possible on factors that affect realism judgments.