* 1718405
* NeTS: Small: Lightweight, Accurate Network Estimation at the Wireless Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Aaron Striegel, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless technology has emerged as a critical piece of our modern, national
economy. As more users, devices, and services lean heavily on a blend of WiFi
and cellular service, it becomes important to understand whether our national
wireless infrastructure will meet the demands of tomorrow. Unfortunately, the
instruments for understanding such environments have lagged woefully behind and
have not adapted to modern wireless technologies. The focus of this work is to
bridge that gap to deliver significant improvements in handling WiFi and
cellular. This research seeks to deliver instrumentation ten times faster than
current technology while minimally draining the battery or impacting other
users. The proposed work further explores whether one can achieve such
instrumentation entirely for free, taking advantage of work the mobile device is
already doing at present but simply ignoring. The research will create new
software development kits to provide a ready-made wireless toolbox for app
developers to cleverly improve the vast suite of apps available
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work seeks to explore the extent to
which both modern WiFi and cellular links can be rapidly characterized,
conducting both extensive lab experiments for validation as well as realizations
of the software as additions to popular open source web serving and video
streaming software. The proposed work centers on taking advantage of the
intrinsic aggregation properties of most modern wireless systems. Through the
clever use of sliced, structured, and reordered packet trains, the proposed work
operates within existing TCP constructs to deliver accurate network
characterization from 0-10 Mb/s in under 250 ms while requiring less than 100 KB
of bandwidth. The net result is an characterization that presents that Available
Bandwidth on the end-to-end path with minimal network and energy cost. In
addition to the impacts of the software, multiple PhD graduate students will be
trained, multiple REU (Research Experience for Undergraduate) students in under-
represented groups will be mentored, and results will be disseminated through
top tier publications. Final broader impacts include releasing extensive
tutorials through an YouTube for the broader public on wireless issues.