* 1718633
* SHF:Small:Neuromorphic Architectures for On-line Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Tarek Taha, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 439,998.00

With the increasingly large volumes of data being generated in all fields, it is
difficult to draw meaningful understanding from the information. Deep learning
is a collection of new algorithms that have been developed recently to make it
easier to understand large volumes of data. These algorithms typically have two
phases of operation: training and inference. In the training phase, the
algorithms learn how to interpret data, while in the inference phase the trained
algorithms process new data based on what they learned earlier. Training
generally requires high power computing. This project will develop novel
computing systems for training that require low power consumption. This makes
them suitable for portable systems, and hence could enable the design of
significantly smarter products that learn continuously from their environment
and are able to better interact with the environment. The proposed work includes
outreach to K-12 students and also training of undergraduate, graduate, and
minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel computing systems to be
developed will employ memristor circuits to accelerate the training phase of
deep learning algorithms. Memristors are nanoscale resistive memory devices. The
PIs will develop and characterize the memristors and then design deep learning
circuits for training based on the characterized memristor devices. The PIs will
also design computing systems based on the training circuits to be developed.
These computing systems will have applications in a broad range of fields,
including low power consumer products and high power clusters of computers.