* 1718130
* NeTS: Small: Modeling and Alleviating Physical Impairments in Translucent EONs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Maite Brandt-Pearce, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Society has shown an endless appetite for new data-rich applications running
over the Internet, which depends on fiber-optic networks to carry its traffic.
Elastic optical networks (EONs) are widely seen as the logical evolution of
current large-scale fiber-optic core transport networks due to their flexibility
and ability to support growing capacity demands. They can also deploy advanced
signal processing techniques to balance the requirements of high resource
efficiency and high signal quality. The goal of this proposed work is to design
long-haul EONs and invent algorithms that wisely employ its system resources,
including the optical spectrum as well as physical network equipment. The
objective is to minimize resource usage, implying low capital expenditure and
low operational cost, while satisfying expected increasing traffic needs. Better
network design and dimensioning algorithms will enable providers to meet their
customers demands far more quickly and cost-effectively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research entails using an accurate model of
physical-layer impairments within the design and management of translucent EONs.
By using a network-state-dependent performance prediction instead of the
transmission reach in the routing and resource allocation procedure, significant
spectral and equipment savings can be gained. This cross-layer approach trades
off computational complexity for increased resource usage efficiency. The
research agenda begins by modifying the currently popular Gaussian-noise model
for physical layer impairments for modern long-haul networks to be easily
computed as a function of the network state. Then the project addresses the
design of long-haul EONs by solving two fundamental problems:&lt;br/&gt;-
Algorithm design for routing and resource allocation based on accurate physical
impairment estimation; classical approaches to solving this problem have relied
on worst case estimates that significantly overprovision the network.
&lt;br/&gt;- Theoretical models for EON behavior in the presence of network-
dependent physical layer impairments;the goal is to abstract physical layer
parameters to make resource allocation calculations more tractable and less
sensitive to small changes in those parameters. &lt;br/&gt;The project will be
performed in collaboration with a research team at Nokia Bell Labs to ensure
industrial relevance of the work.