* 1718342
* AF:Small: Continuous Perspectives on Accelerated Methods for Combinatorial Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Lorenzo Orecchia, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 497,504.00

&lt;br/&gt;Efficient algorithms are at the heart of any modern computing
systems. In the classical study of algorithms, the notion of efficiency has long
been taken to equal polynomial running time in the size of the input. However,
the recent rise of massive datasets, for which even quadratic running times may
be practically infeasible, has led to a rethinking of this assumption. This
effort has led to a number of breakthroughs on fundamental problems, such as
computing the maximum flow through a network, which can now be solved in
essentially linear time in many cases. These advances are largely based on novel
algorithmic tools stemming from convex and numerical optimization, which heavily
rely on continuous mathematics. Based on this paradigm, the PIs aim to provide
improved algorithms for two classes of problems that are important both in
theory and practice: maximum flow problems and submodular optimization problems.
These problems are central to computer science and have wide applicability to
many real-life problems. The project will support and train two Ph.D. students
and a postdoc in algorithm design and optimization at Boston University. The
proposed research requires a useful exchange of ideas between theoretical
computer science and continuous optimization, strengthening existing ties as
well as forging new connections between the two areas. The continuous viewpoint
provides a new perspective on algorithm design that the PIs plan to disseminate
broadly and to incorporate into their optimization courses at Boston
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs will delve
deeply into the connection between efficient discrete optimization and
continuous mathematics by considering the following continuous approach to
algorithm design: algorithms are initially conceived as continuous trajectories
through the space of solutions to the problems, e.g., as described by a set of
differential equations; these trajectories are discretized to yield true
discrete-time algorithms that are provably fast. We plan to exploit the new
understanding of algorithms obtained through this framework to provide improved
algorithms for two classes of problems that are important both in theory and
practice: maximum flow problems and submodular optimization problems. The main
technical focus of the project will be understanding and leveraging the idea of
"acceleration", which plays a central role in convex optimization, as it yields
optimal gradient-descent algorithms for a large class of functions. A very
recent line of work initiated the study of accelerated methods from a
continuous-time perspective using ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and
classical discretization tools. More precisely, these works aim to represent a
class of accelerated methods via ODEs whose dynamics describe the continuous-
time limits of the discrete algorithms, while the discrete algorithms can be
interpreted as appropriate discretizations of the continuous-time curves
described by the ODEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on this
recently established viewpoint to make progress on central combinatorial
optimization problems involving graphs and submodular functions. In particular,
the project aims to exploit the rich combinatorial structure present in these
problems to construct improved discretization procedures for known dynamical
systems corresponding to accelerated algorithms. Specific problems of interest
include: (a) Maximum s-t flows and connectivity problems in graphs and networks
- The emphasis will be on leveraging convex optimization techniques such as
acceleration in order to obtain faster approximate solutions for these problems
in undirected and directed graphs. (b) Constrained submodular maximization
problems - A particular area of focus will be on designing new continuous
algorithms and discretization for solving known continuous relaxations of
submodular objectives under structured constraints, such as packing and covering
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;