* 1718801
* PFI:BIC Affordable Flexible Robotic Technology to Enhance Work Performance of Farmers with Mobility Restrictions
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Donatus Ohanehi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,117,677.00

A growing elderly population is creating a crisis in the farming industry. With
the lack of alternative solutions available, robotics could become a welcomed
approach for assisting farmers and farm workers with mobility limitations and
strength deficits. This award leverages an interdisciplinary academe-industry
partnership to jointly develop flexible robotic systems that are designed to be
wear by farmers with mobility limitations to assist them in performing
activities of daily living. The research team's goal is not only to adapt state-
of-the-art flexible robotics technology to the needs of farmers with mobility
limitations, but also to educate stakeholders regarding the availability and
role of assistive technology to augment their performance at work and improve
their quality of life. In particular, the funded effort consists of a
combination of 1) technology development in order to take out-of-the-box
flexible robotics technology and make it suitable to this particular population;
2) development of a test bed which will allow for technology testing in typical
daily activities; 3) coordination of a service delivery system to provide
education, health-based agricultural resources, and community-based services
addressing life and farm-based goals of farm workers and farm families.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team aims at demonstrating a new use of
flexible robotics for the care of farmers and farm workers while performing
their daily activities. The investigators will advance knowledge on the actual
design of wearable robots (both hardware and software) that can perform a set of
tasks to facilitate farmer's mobility and decrease the possibility of secondary
injuries. Specifically, the researchers will develop modules to support the
back, knee, and hand and assist with motion of these joints. The research plan
includes understanding the motions and activities typically performed by
farmers, designing the robotic modules to be comfortable and compatible with
being worn daily; understanding the user inputs and adapting control algorithms
that will enable the robotic modules to best assist with their wearers'
mobility; add and study the impact of flex-sensors and force sensors into the
structure of some modules. Additionally, motion information collected by the
system will help create a data-driven health monitoring system whereby health
service providers could understand how a patient's mobility is changing over
time. Undergraduate students will be involved in supplementing graduate student
work, in interactions with client farming communities, and in ground-level
activities aimed at educating the public in innovative, assistive technologies
for people with disabilities. The PFI project plan for educational outreach
includes several activities such as summer camps, senior design capstone design
experiences, and service learning opportunities for engineering and agriculture
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution is Virginia Tech with
faculty from Mechanical Engineering, Agricultural Leadership, and Community
Education, Industrial and Systems Engineering, Engineering Education and the
Virginia Cooperative Extension. The primary industrial partners are TORC
Robotics (small business, Blacksburg, VA), and Total Motion Physical Therapy
(small business, Blacksburg, VA) together with two nonprofit broader context
partners, AgrAbility Virginia (nonprofit, Salem, VA) and Easter Seals UCP
(United Cerebral Palsy, Salem, VA). It is expected that this partnership will
have broader impacts across the National AgrAbility community where engineers,
service providers, and industry professionals collaborate to assist injured or
disabled farmers in their respective states. In addition, AgrAbility Virginia
will provide the means for education, evaluation, and farmer participation in
the system design. The synergy of all the institutions involved in this project
will facilitate the translation of research and education outcomes to the broad
community of farmers.