* 1718380
* AF: Small: Integrated Knowledge Discovery and Analysis Using Sum-of-Squares Proofs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brendan Juba, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 445,997.00

Developing approaches to subjects as diverse as advertising, bioinformatics,
counterterrorism, fraud detection, politics, sociology, and so on are based on
data analysis. This project will develop new algorithms for data analysis with
strong guarantees of their correctness and efficiency. Tools based on these
algorithms will be usable as-is, without expert knowledge, in innovative data-
driven applications far removed from academia. The project will also involve the
training of students in advanced techniques for data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms considered in this project involve
automated reasoning with an algebraic logic known as "sum-of-squares." Automated
reasoning requires a delicate trade-off between expressiveness and simplicity,
to facilitate reasoning that is both fast and effective. Sum-of-squares is
capable of expressing much statistical reasoning, and yet is sufficiently simple
to allow the design of tractable algorithms for reasoning. This project will
consider how these algorithms can be used to reason about an overall
distribution or population from a sample of data drawn from it. The main aim of
the project is to develop efficient algorithms that guarantee that all of the
relevant statistical facts are discovered during data analysis. The project will
further develop these algorithms to solve problems in domains such as Computer
Vision and Natural Language Processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
development of domain-specific algorithms, the project will consider sum-of-
squares reasoning with high-degree polynomials. Although such reasoning in the
standard sense is intractable, the project aims to simulate reasoning with such
high-degree expressions with the aid of the sample of data from the distribution
to be reasoned about. The project will also investigate the expressive power of
sum-of-squares with such high-degree expressions. Specifically, the project will
investigate whether or not such reasoning can simulate other logics such as
resolution (or vice-versa), and will further investigate the extent of its
ability to basic capture statistical notions.