* 1718977
* NeTS: Small: Spatial Spectrum Sensing-Based Device-to-Device (D2D) Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Lingjia Liu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 01/31/2018
* USD 353,819.00

The continuing growth of mobile data applications is expected to trigger a large
increase in mobile traffic over the next decade. Direct device-to-device (D2D)
communications between user devices that offload cellular network traffic has a
great potential to be an integral part of the solution to address this mobile
data challenge. In this project, the researchers will introduce a novel spectrum
access model, called sensing-based D2D communication, to significantly improve
the overall network spectral-efficiency of a mobile broadband network. In
sensing-based D2D, users utilize spatial spectrum sensing to explore temporal
and spatial spectrum transmission opportunities within the underlying cellular
network bands. Equipped with spatial spectrum sensing, these users can
efficiently utilize the available non-occupied cellular spectrum while providing
enough protection to legacy base-station-to-device users. This project will
result in a new enabling technology for future mobile broadband networks and
will also effectively enrich educational materials by providing software and
hardware-based implementation and experimental
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project has three interconnected
thrusts. In the first thrust, a comprehensive framework for both theoretical
analysis and practical design of sensing-based D2D that connects the user-driven
spatial spectrum sensing to the overall network performance will be developed,
using detection theory and stochastic geometry. In the second thrust, optimal
system design and resource allocation of sensing-based D2D will be identified.
Existing techniques, such as distributed caching and millimeter wave
communications, will be integrated into sensing-based D2D. In the third thrust,
the performance of the developed schemes will be evaluated using both software
and hardware test-beds to obtain ideas on real-world performance. The key aspect
of the proposed research is that the success of the project will lead to a big
shift from currently popular design methodologies used for wireless networks and
can provide a comprehensive response to mobile data growth challenge under
realistic system assumptions.