* 1718033
* CSR: EAGER: Quality-of-Experience-Aware Runtime Optimizations for Heterogeneous Multi-Core Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Ann Ramirez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 06/30/2021
* USD 278,382.00

Given the pervasion of consumer devices in diverse operating environments, with
a myriad of heterogeneous device resources and applications, designers can no
longer pre-define optimization goals (e.g., maximum performance, minimum energy,
Pareto optimal tradeoff, etc.) given extremely diverse end-user quality-of-
experience (QoE) expectations (e.g., expected user-touch input response time,
global positioning system (GPS) accuracy, video playback quality, battery life,
etc.). To customize device operation, users typically can only select high-level
system settings (e.g., screen brightness, power saving modes, etc.). This
coarse-grained method ignores fine-grained configurable parameters with high QoE
adherence potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will explore
adapting fine-grained configurable parameters, ranging from cache configuration
and pipeline issue width, to more efficient task scheduling in heterogeneous
multicore systems, to use of different algorithm/process variations trading off
reduced accuracy for increased battery life. Since allowing users to specify
this level of device configurability is impractical, future devices must contain
an automated runtime optimizer with functionality, architecture, and methods to
change the device configuration to rapidly and accurately adapt, predict, and
adhere to user QoE expectations.