* 1718848
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Measurement and Modeling of Industrial Control Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 05/31/2019
* USD 249,319.00

Operators of industrial control systems have limited software tools for
obtaining situational awareness of their networks and processes. This project
seeks to characterize network traffic for a rich variety of industrial control
networks. Because the research community lacks access to (mostly proprietary)
data sets from operating control systems, our ability to identify anomalous
behavior and protect weaknesses is a concern for critical U.S. infrastructure.
The research team has obtained a collection of network data sets that will allow
them to study the performance (and security) properties of various types of
industrial control systems, including wastewater treatment, power, and solar
energy. By examining the similarities and differences of these data sets, this
analysis will yield models of critical infrastructure control system traffic
that will aid in anomaly detection and further our understanding of these
networks in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will characterize network
flows, and perform deep-packet inspection in a protocol- and process-aware
fashion. The project will develop open-source tools implementing anomaly
detection algorithms to be used by researchers and the process control industry.
Since the anomaly detection tools are passive, they can ultimately be deployed
in the operational environments of industrial partners to help them improve the
visibility and understanding of their control networks. This work will be
performed in collaboration with researchers in Israel under the US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation joint funding program.