* 1718375
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Cardiac Password: Exploring a Non-Contact and Continuous Approach to Secure User Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Shambhu Upadhyaya, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2022
* USD 394,582.00

Most traditional security systems authenticate a user only at the initial log-in
session. As a result, it is possible for another user, authorized or
unauthorized, to access the system information, with or without the permission
of the signed-on user, until the initial user logs out. This could be a critical
security flaw even for high-security systems. Traditional one-time (e.g.,
password) or two-factor (e.g., password with fingerprint) authentication methods
are no longer sufficient. Continuous authentication is a form of dynamic, risk-
based authentication that changes the perspective of authentication from an
event to a process, and has the potential to address the vulnerability of
existing security systems by continuously verifying the user's identity during
the session use. This interdisciplinary team explores a novel continuous
authentication through a transformative non-contact heart-based biometrics. This
project could transform the understanding of non-volatile components in cardiac
motion, and convert this new knowledge and related technologies into improved
security in increasingly vulnerable cyberspace. The project establishes a unique
inter university research and education program on cyber security, which
involves both K-12, undergraduate students, and underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cardiac Password project investigates a
holistic hardware/software solution to secure and trustworthy continuous
authentication via non-contact cardiac motion sensing. The new authentication
system can recognize humans in a non-contact, unobtrusive and even non-line-of-
sight fashion. Towards this goal, the project has three thrusts. First, the team
develops a high-fidelity non-contact cardiac motion sensing device. Second, the
team investigates invariant cardiac descriptors and propose continuous
authentication methodologies. Third, the team assesses the performance,
usability, and vulnerability of the proposed Cardiac Password system. The
outcome of this research can advance state-of-the-art heart-based biometrics in
user authentication, and provide insights on developing more undeceivable,
disclosure-resistant and user-friendly biometric solutions. The investigators
will disseminate the results of the project through publications, talks, and
demos, and integrate the research results into education curricula.