* 1718798
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Heterogeneous Response Regression from Complex Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kun Chen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Predictive modeling is one fundamental problem in supervised machine learning.
Traditional predictive modeling approaches typically built one predictor for
each prediction task. However, in many real world problems, one needs to build
predictors for multiple inter-correlated tasks simultaneously. For example, in
real-time anesthesia decision making, the anesthesia drugs will have impact on
multiple indicators of an anesthesia patient, such as anesthesia depth, blood
pressures, heart rates, etc. The anesthesiologist needs to consider all those
different aspects as well as their intrinsic dependence before s/he can make the
decision. The goal of this project is to conduct systematic research on
heterogeneous response regression, which builds multiple regression models for
heterogeneous responses as well as exploring the relationship among
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project's heterogeneous response
regression framework is based on a tailored latent factor model that captures
the relationship among different responses in a low-dimensional space. The
response heterogeneity will be captured by utilizing the exponential family
distributions and beyond. The model parameters can be learned through
regularized maximum likelihood estimation via a majorization-minimization
procedure. Moreover, a distributed solution based on the alternating direction
method of multipliers can be derived to enhance the scalability. The project
will also make the framework more flexible by (1) adding individualized effect
terms to capture sample/feature heterogeneity and induce task dependency; and
(2) leveraging a functional model to account for time-varying predictors and to
make the prediction time-sensitive. The project will demonstrate the
effectiveness of its method in disease risk prediction and financial stability
modeling.