* 1718771
* CIF:Small:Model-Based Blind Demixing for Signal Processing and Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Justin Romberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,703.00

The research centers on novel numerical methods and supporting theory for the
multichannel convolutive blind demixing (MCBD) problem, where the responses for
a set of inter-related time-invariant systems are estimated by observing only
their outputs. The MCBD problem arises in many well-known applications in signal
processing and communications; one of our goals for this project is to provide a
unified framework for solving these problems that has a firm algorithmic and
theoretical foundation. The goals are to provide a fundamental analysis of the
information theoretic limits of MCBD, along with scalable algorithms that
operate with provable performance guarantee at or near these limits. New
applications of the MCBD problem will also be explored in the area of machine
learning. In particular, the investigators will study how solutions to the MCBD
problem can be used as an efficient method for both for the initialization in
training deep convolutional neural networks, and for solving inverse problems
associated with generative models.

The work will combine classical statistical approaches and modern optimization-
based techniques for constrained inverse problems. Of particular interest is the
role that structure plays on making the problem identifiable, and on the
stability of the solutions when the observations are corrupted by noise.
Scenarios where this structure comes from domain-specific knowledge will be
considered, along with scenarios where the model is data-driven. The algorithms
developed in the project will be validated on applications in astronomical
imaging, neuroimaging, medical imaging, seismic imaging, underwater acoustics,
and deep learning. The proposed research has direct relevance to next-generation
array processing for massive MIMO communications, device-to-device communication
for the Internet-of-Things, and new integrated circuit RF transmitters. The work
also may open a new direction in parallel MRI. The research activities will be
complemented by new graduate courses focusing on modern mathematical methods for
the next generation of data scientists.