* 1718262
* RI: Small: Modeling Vividness and Symbolism for Decoding Visual Rhetoric
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Rebecca Hwa, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,978.00

This project develops systems for analyzing and inferring the non-literal
messages conveyed in the media through persuasive images and text. Computational
representations of two persuasive strategies are devised to model the mapping
between observable information and underlying messages. First, this project
models "vividness": through analyses of how human subjects perceive images and
text, the system aims to identify relevant regions in which creative techniques
were used to draw the viewer's attention. Second, this project models
"symbolism": through analyses of semantic relationships between concrete objects
and abstract concepts, the system aims to decode symbolic associations that
humans make. The ability to automatically understand vividness and symbolism is
key to building computational intelligence that can make inferences about what
the media implies. This interdisciplinary project also has an educational
component of potentially increasing the media literacy of school students, and
involving college students from diverse backgrounds into computational research.
The work can be used to discover patterns in how the visual rhetoric in the
media evolved over time or how it differs in different
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research pursues three directions. First, a
framework for judging vividness (i.e., to what degree an image as a whole is
vivid; what part of an image is vivid; and whether a text snippet is vivid) is
developed. Data about the vividness of a variety of images and text is collected
from human annotators. Cues and techniques such as saliency, attention,
sentiment, memorability and abnormality are used to build prediction models for
vividness. Second, two pipelines for detecting symbolic references are
developed. One pipeline hypothesizes potential signifiers from an image, then
uses textual resources to map these to signifieds. The other pipeline directly
hypothesizes what the signifieds might be, and obtains training data for these
from web resources. The outputs from these pipelines are combined to generate
the signifier-signified pairs. Third, a method for generating explanations of
the strategies is developed, using the vividness and symbolism outputs. Numerous
resources to be shared with the research community are developed over the course
of the project.