* 1718570
* SHF: Small: Design/Technology Co-Optimization and Exploration in Emerging Scaling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* David Pan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

As the semiconductor industry reaches 10nm/7nm technology nodes and beyond, more
innovations will be realized through alternative or emerging scaling such as
novel process/material and device engineering to seek equivalent scaling
effects. Such scaling demands closer design and technology co-optimization and
explorations. This project will seek to develop novel CAD algorithms, tools, and
methodologies to bridge the future IC design and technology gaps in the new era
of emerging scaling. The proposed research, if successful, will have tremendous
impacts on the $350 billion semiconductor industry which is at a critical point,
transitioning from conventional scaling to emerging scaling. The PI will work
with industry collaborators for technology transfer to benefit the overall
industry and society. The highly interdisciplinary nature of this research will
be tightly integrated into curriculum development and student training/outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical problems to be addressed
include: (1) new sub-resolution directed-self-assembly (DSA) patterning and
layout co-optimizations; (2) new mask and layout optimizations for future hybrid
lithography technologies considering emerging processes/materials and design
requirements; (3) future standard cell and routing architecture exploration; (4)
physical design for next-generation nano-devices.