* 1718698
* CIF: Small: High-Dimensional Analysis of Stochastic Iterative Algorithms for Signal Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Yue Lu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 515,560.00

Optimization lies at the heart of modern signal and information processing. In
recent years, the soaring quantity of information that is being acquired and
becoming available makes computational and algorithmic issues increasingly
important. This project contributes to an understanding of the fundamental
limits of various stochastic optimization algorithms when dealing with high-
dimensional data. Since such algorithms are the workhorse in many estimation,
inference, and machine learning tasks, this research is well-posed to make
significant and broad impact on many applications. Examples include real-time or
low-latency medical image reconstructions, distributed computation on power
grids, and the training of artificial neural networks for image
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI studies a family of
efficient stochastic iterative algorithms for solving large-scale convex and
nonconvex optimization problems that arise in various signal estimation tasks.
The broad goal in this project is to analyze the exact dynamics of these
stochastic iterative algorithms in the high-dimensional limit. This asymptotic
analysis provides a complete characterization of the typical behavior of the
algorithms. The theoretical investigation draws upon techniques from the
statistical physics of mean-field interactive particle systems, the weak
convergence theory of stochastic processes, signal processing, information
theory, and optimization. The theoretical analysis can be used to clarify the
effectiveness of such stochastic methods for large-scale optimization and to
establish their fundamental performance bounds. The insights obtained from the
analysis can also be used to guide the design of new scalable algorithms to
achieve optimal trade-offs between estimation accuracy, sample complexity, and
computational complexity.