* 1718310
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards End-to-End Knowledge Discovery in Complex Brain Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Xiangnan Kong, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 266,819.00

Modeling the brain as a networked system has become a popular paradigm in
neuroscience. Knowledge discovery on brain network data has the potential to
revolutionize the way we understand the brain and provide a basis for developing
new treatments for neurological disorders. However, today knowledge discovery
systems on brain networks are still extremely hard to build. Researchers must be
taught in tedious details how to design the pipeline of data processing and
adjust the parameter settings in different processing stages. To address this
problem, the project will aim to build an end-to-end system for knowledge
discovery in brain networks that learns to integrate different processing stages
and self-adjust with minimal human intervention. Educational activities will
include curriculum development and training of students in the areas of data
science and neuroscience. Result dissemination is planned via publication in
relevant peer-reviewed conferences and
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make fundamental contributions to
realizing this vision, it is necessary to go beyond the pipeline-based
approaches, where the multiple stages of the knowledge discovery are studied in
isolation. It has been shown that end-to-end systems can significantly alleviate
the problem of laborious efforts in building pipelines and making adjustments.
In the planned system, the four stages of the knowledge discovery on brain
networks (i.e., node discovery, edge discovery, feature mining and statistical
learning) will be integrated and studied together instead of being studied in
isolation. This project will investigate innovative ideas on unifying different
stages of knowledge discovery in brain networks: (1) collective brain network
discovery, where the node discovery and edge discovery stages are deeply
integrated into a unified framework; (2) label-contrasting edge discovery, which
unifies edge discovery with model inference stages; (3) collective edge
discovery unifies the edge discovery and statistical learning stages; (4) node-
compressing sub-graph mining, node discovery stage and feature mining stage; (5)
an end-to-end system across all four stages, which allows the learners in
different stages to work together and form a unified learner for brain network
analysis. The project will takes a next logical step in brain network research.
It will build intellectual and formal connections between data mining and
neuroscience. The project results have the potential for automating brain
network analysis. In terms of broader impacts, the project will deliver new
analytic tools that are broadly relevant to the study of the brain in cognitive
neuroscience. These tools also have broad clinical applicability for early
diagnosis of neurological injury, for evaluation of treatment response, etc.
Educational activities will include curriculum development and training of
students in the areas of data science and neuroscience.