* 1718161
* NSFSaTC-BSF: CORE: Small: Foundations of Lattice-based Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Vinod Vaikuntanathan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Over the last two decades, lattices have emerged as a powerful mathematical
basis for cryptography. For one, Lattice-based Cryptography has resisted quantum
attacks while conventional crypto systems succumbed to it in the mid-90s.
Secondly, Lattice-based Cryptography has been instrumental in realizing new and
exciting functionality which is beyond the reach of conventional cryptography.
The most notable examples, perhaps, are Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) and
general Attribute Based Encryption (ABE) which, respectively, allow us to
compute on and achieve expressive access control of encrypted data. Finally, it
has also been shown that basic lattice-based constructions such as digital
signatures, pseudorandom functions and key exchange can be made very efficient,
to the point that we now have growing interest from the government (NSA and
NIST) and the industry (Google) in deploying lattice-based cryptographic
solutions. Success in our endeavor will have implications beyond the
cryptography: enabling new solutions for privacy concerns in a world where data
and computations are increasingly being outsourced, as well as providing
security in a post-quantum era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
three-fold: (a) New Cryptographic Constructions from Lattices: although we have
made great strides in constructing advanced cryptographic primitives such as
fully homomorphic, attribute based and functional encryption on standard lattice
problems such as the learning with errors problem, much is left to be done.
Perhaps the most prominent goal is to come up with a construction of program
obfuscation (and thus, nearly all of cryptography) based on the hardness of
standard lattice problems; (b) Efficient Lattice-based Cryptography: we aim to
improve the efficiency of existing cryptographic constructions, starting from
pseudorandom functions all the way to homomorphic and attribute-based
encryption, an endeavor that is of tremendous importance in translating
theoretical advances into practically useful objects; and (c) Foundations of
Hardness of Lattice Problems: we aim to advance and deepen our understanding of
the hardness of cryptographically relevant lattice problems. The project
involves a significant educational component that consists of designing new
courses in cryptography, making the lecture notes publicly available, giving
expository lectures, writing survey articles and monographs intended for a broad
audience, organizing a seminar series and a workshop on lattices, and advising
graduate and undergraduate students.