* 1718702
* SaTC:  CORE:  Small:  Collaborative:  Guarding the Integrity of Mobile Graphical User Interfaces
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Felix Xiaozhu Lin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2020
* USD 266,000.00

Today?s mobile applications and services display information to the user via a
Graphical User Interface (GUI). Unfortunately, an attacker may tamper with that
display, maliciously hiding, altering, or entirely fabricating display contents.
User apps or the cloud services providing the information may be entirely
unaware of the tampering. Mobile operating systems, such as Android and iOS,
cannot guarantee the integrity and correctness of the app GUI content. This
project is developing techniques to guarantee the integrity and correctness of
security-sensitive GUI regions, to ensure that what a user sees in those regions
is exactly what the app (or cloud service) intends to display.

The researchers are developing the concept of a protected GUI region called a
"viewport," which a cloud backend may statically associate with an app. The
intent is to ensure that only the GUI of the application is able to display into
the specified portion of the screen. The researchers are developing a viewport
security enforcement monitor, using hardware features of the ARM processor, and
developing programming and operating system support for viewports. The project
exploits a synergy of hardware features, including virtualization, ARM
TrustZone, and modern display controller with support for overlaid layers.
Finally, the research team is evaluating the security assurance provided,
performance overhead, and ease of use by application developers.