* 1718014
* NeTS: Small: Improving Web User Experience Using Eye Gaze
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Samir Das, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 495,305.00

Web page access is one of the most popular applications on the global Internet,
and is a key element of the digital engine that drives the economy. While the
technologies that support Web applications are well-developed and ubiquitous,
mechanisms for high quality user experience have not been built into their
development. (As one example, almost every user has experienced delays in
accessing content while ads download.) Existing techniques for Web optimization
focus on ensuring fast downloads, but research has shown that this has poor
correlation with good user experience. Further, download speeds are limited by
network conditions; network congestion or low access network bandwidth can make
them painfully slow. This project aims to address this problem by developing
techniques for Web page optimization that significantly improve user experience
by downloading the content of value to the user first.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's primary goal is to ensure that objects on a
Web page are loaded in the order in which the user consumes them, thus
significantly improving user experience. The key idea is to use user's eye gaze
as a signal for user's consumption of Web objects (or alternately the user
interest). The project will develop novel techniques to use gaze signal to
prioritize Web page loads, using commercial eye-tracking technology, and
leveraging the researchers' experience in eye-tracking in other applications.
The fundamental contributions of this project are to (1) Develop a utility-
driven optimization framework to dynamically reprioritize Web page loads based
on the user eye gaze, object sizes, and network conditions; (2) Remove the
human-in-the-loop by building high-level saliency models of eye gaze based on
the characteristics of the Web page. The gaze tracking will only be used
infrequently, to seed and update the model. (3) Design a large scale
crowdsourced technique to track user gaze to drive the optimization and
modeling; and (4) Evaluate the optimization and modeling specifically in terms
of user experience by conducting large scale, crowdsourced, user evaluation.