* 1718071
* SaTC: CORE: Small: A Privacy-Preserving Meta-Data Analysis Framework for Cyber Abuse Research - Foundations, Tools and Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Nathan Fisk, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 538,333.00

This project develops and deploys a mobile communications metadata analysis
platform, designed to predict incidents of youth harassment or abuse, drawing on
participatory methods to drive research design decisions and maintain youth
privacy. By analyzing communication patterns - rather than content - in
collaboration with youth participants, this project makes innovative
contributions by facilitating a contextualized understanding of youth abuse and
harassment. In turn, this analysis supports the development of new, privacy-
enhancing tools which allow for early intervention in instances of abuse and
distress. Starting from the hypothesis that abused or distressed youth display
observably different patterns of communication, the data collected allow
researchers to visualize and analyze the everyday communication networks of
youth in new ways, providing new opportunities to understand the structures and
conditions of youth sociality and forms of abuse while simultaneously developing
new predictive models and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this
project 1) designs new methods grounded in participatory design that allows for
a better understanding of the ways in which youth conceptualize privacy, adult
supervision and surveillance online; 2) develops a highly scalable and
practically deployable mobile platform for performing large scale metadata and
survey analysis, taking the privacy needs of end users as a core design
principle as identified from the first outcome; 3) ensures that the platform
guarantees full anonymity to participants, while also allowing for longitudinal
and flexible survey administration, metadata collection, and seamless scaling;
4) extracts novel features in the spatial and temporal domain from communication
metadata logs (from texts and calls) that associate with cyber harassment and
abuse; 5) leverages the features extracted to design context aware machine
learning algorithms to quickly detect abnormal patterns from metadata logs. The
project trains a number of graduate and undergraduate student in inter-
disciplinary research. Long term impact of this project scale well beyond youth
populations, and the project more generally moves towards the development of a
fully anonymous, confidential, needs-based social scientific research platform.