* 1718952
* SaTC: CORE: Small: An Exploration of Schedule-Based Vulnerabilities In Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sibin Mohan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Many safety-critical systems such as automobiles, aircraft, medical devices, and
power plants are controlled by real-time, embedded systems. As such systems are
interconnected via networks such as the Internet, they have become increasingly
vulnerable to cyber attacks. This project is studying vulnerabilities of such
systems, how attackers might avoid detection, and protection strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the surveillance phase of a cyber
attack against an embedded, real-time system (RTS). The researchers are
addressing the following question: How can an adversary extract critical
information about an operational RTS, while avoiding detection? In this
environment, task scheduling (e.g., when will an import program be executed?) is
exceptionally critical information, enabling an attacker to launch a targeted
attack against specific, important tasks. To succeed in gathering the necessary
information and launching an attack, the attacker must avoid perturbing the
system in ways that might reveal his or her presence. The researchers are
developing algorithms and side-channel metrics to study what they could reveal
about system schedule characteristics and task start times and duration
estimates. Based on these studies, the team is designing randomization-based
mitigations for such attacks. Results are evaluated both through simulation and
through experiments on real embedded platforms.