* 1718084
* CSR: Small: Self-Monitoring Virtual Machines for Performance Guarantees in Public Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Yinqian Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

With its massive pooling and multiplexing of computing resources, the cloud
offers both large organizations and small businesses the prospect of lower
information technology costs, lighter administrative burdens, and rapid scaling
of resources. However, multi-tenancy in public clouds makes critical computing
resources, such as processor, memory, I/O devices, and storage, shared among
virtual machines that are operated by different users. The performance of
applications running in public clouds, therefore, may be affected by their
neighboring virtual machines due to contention on the shared computing
resources. Nonetheless, existing cloud performance monitoring tools do not offer
visibility into hardware resources; cloud users have no choice but to blindly
run computations on these public services in the hope that the performance is
not negatively affected, for instance, by the neighbor's resource-depleting
applications. The lack of performance guarantees is a hurdle faced by all cloud
users to fully embrace the economic benefit of cloud computing, and especially
by those whose applications demand stability and predictability of the runtime
environments. This proposed project aims to solve this problem by developing
novel techniques that allow cloud users to monitor the resource contention on
the physical cloud servers without the help of the cloud providers.
Specifically, the proposed work entails the design, implementation, and
evaluation of self-monitoring virtual machines, which leverage the nested
virtualization technology and side-channel analysis techniques to monitor the
contention in shared computing resources and proactively migrate nested virtual
machines to avoid severe performance degradation.

The project will make broader societal impacts in the following aspects: First,
new education tools will be developed through the proposed project.
Specifically, one of the outcomes of the intended research will be Amazon
machine images with which a derivative cloud can be created on top of public
clouds. Enabled by this derivative cloud, students of the operating systems or
system security courses can obtain hands-on experience with cloud computing;
they will also have access to nested virtualization environments to conduct
operating system kernel development. Second, the project will be integrated into
NSF's LSAMP (Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation) program, to help
increase underrepresented minority student recruitment, retention, and
attainment of STEM degrees, and also to enhance the participation of
underrepresented minority students in system research. Third, the project will
produce open-source tools that enable self-monitoring VMs in public clouds,
which will be made available in the form of source code (available on the
project homepage) and Amazon machine images, to encourage adaptation and
adoption of the developed techniques.