* 1718854
* CSR: Small: Extending Smartphone Battery Life via Prescriptive Energy Profiling
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Samuel Midkiff, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 06/30/2020
* USD 475,000.00

With over 2 billion users worldwide and over 2 million applications (apps) each
in Google and Apple's digital marketplaces, smartphones have advanced human
society into the mobile era. Despite the far-reaching societal impact of
smartphones, the user experience has been severely limited by smartphone battery
life. The obvious idea of extending smartphone battery life is to improve the
battery technology, which, however, has stagnated in the past 15 years, and
battery capacity is generally viewed as nearing the limits of physics. Instead,
this project pursues a course of research to significantly extend smartphone
battery life by reducing the energy drain of various software running on the
smartphone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to tackle a major smartphone
battery drain contributor, app energy drain when running in the foreground, with
the goal of reducing it by 2x. The proposed research includes major thrusts that
will develop the first set of prescriptive energy profiling techniques that will
transform energy profiling from a "passive" app development step into a
"proactive" process: (a) It will develop the first capability to automatically
uncover the causal relationship between parameter configurations and
framework/library method invocations, a unique and hard program analysis problem
in framework-based mobile programming; (b) It will develop the first capability
to automatically identify an energy-efficient implementation of similar tasks, a
generally intractable problem but attainable for mobile apps by comparing
similar apps that are widely available in the huge mobile app
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this project is heightened
by smartphones being an important enabler of Internet access for disadvantaged
people in both developed and developing countries, and hence being an important
tool in overcoming the "digital divide". Technically, this work will have a far-
reaching impact outside of the area of developing energy efficient mobile apps
by increasing compiler capabilities for general event-driven computer programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A project repository will be maintained to provide access
to code, raw experimental data showcasing the effectiveness of the developed
techniques, and processed results and technical publications. The repository
will be maintained during the three-year project period and the two years
afterwards, to foster research activities by others in this important area.