* 1718956
* NeTS: Small: Designing an Advanced Mobility Management and Utilization Framework for Enabling mmWave Multi-Band Ultra-Dense Cellular Networks of Future
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Hazem Refai, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Harnessing millimeter-wave spectrum can solve the two long-standing, interlocked
problems in mobile cellular networks: spectrum scarcity and interference.
Therefore, deploying dense small-cell networks using millimeter wave and
sub-5GHz spectrum is being pursued as a way to mitigate current wireless
capacity problems. While advent of such multi-band ultra-dense networks may
solve these two problems, it gives birth to a new challenging problem: managing
user mobility efficiently and seamlessly in such a dense network consisting of
cells of varying sizes on a wide range of frequency bands with entirely
different propagation characteristics. As handling user mobility is essential in
a mobile network, ensuring the viability of seamless and efficient mobility in
emerging cellular network architectures calls for a shift from the way user
mobility is currently managed. The overarching goal of this project is to
trigger this shift by transforming mobility management from being a reactive to
a proactive process by developing an Advanced Mobility Management and
Utilization Framework (AM-MUF). This project offers strong workforce training in
a highly sought-after multi-disciplinary skill set needed to conduct proposed
research, while ensuring participation of women and other underrepresented
groups, and K-12 outreach. The project also leverages collaboration with key
national and international stakeholders in cellular ecosystems to: 1) validate
the mobility prediction models with data from a live network; 2) evaluate
proposed solutions on a full scale outdoor 5G testbed; 3) conduct field trials
on a real network; 4) promote adaptation of the project outcomes by 5G
standardization bodies through a testbed-based demonstration of
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AM-MUF will be developed through three interlinked
research thrusts: 1) First, the project will develop practically implementable
models for predicting a range of attributes of user mobility in ultra-dense
multi-band networks; 2) Second, the prediction models will be leveraged to
develop agile and scalable next generation solutions, algorithms and protocols
for proactive mobility-based robust optimization and proactive mobility-based
load balancing; 3) Third, the project will derive: the fundamental limits of
accuracy of the prediction algorithms under different system configurations
including cell density and mobility scenarios; and performance bounds of the
developed solutions for a given prediction accuracy. To achieve this ambitious
goal, the researchers will leverage a systematic methodology consisting of
analytical modeling, system level simulations, synthetic data based training and
testing, real data based validation, a full scale 5G test-bed based evaluations
and field trials on a real network.