* 1718549
* AF: Small: Learning and Optimization with Strategic Data Sources
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yiling Chen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this research project is to develop new results in machine learning
and optimization when training data for machine learning or information about
optimization problems is acquired from strategic sources. We are blessed with
unprecedented abilities to connect with people all over the world: buying and
selling products, sharing information and experiences, asking and answering
questions, collaborating on projects, borrowing and lending money, and
exchanging excess resources. These activities result in rich data that
scientists can use to understand human social behavior, generate accurate
predictions, find cures for diseases, and make policy recommendations. Machine
learning and optimization traditionally take such data as given, for example
treating them as independent samples drawn from some unknown probability
distribution. However, such data are possessed or generated by people in the
context of specific rules of interaction. Hence, what data become available and
the quality of available data are results of strategic decisions. For example,
people with sensitive medical conditions may be less willing to reveal their
medical data in a survey and freelance workers may not put in a good-faith
effort in completing a task. This strategic aspect of data challenges
fundamental assumptions in machine learning and optimization. The research
project takes a holistic view that jointly considers data acquisition with
learning and optimization. It will bring improved benefits in business,
government, and societal decision-making processes where machine learning and
optimization are widely applicable. The research project also involves the
mentoring of PhD students, innovation in graduate teaching, and engagement of
members of underrepresented groups in research.

The PI will pursue a broad research agenda developing a fundamental
understanding of how acquiring data from strategic sources affects the
objectives of machine learning and optimization. The first set of goals aims to
develop a theory for machine learning when a learning algorithm needs to
purchase data from data holders who cannot fabricate their data but each have a
private cost associated with revealing their data. A notion of economic
efficiency for machine learning will be established. The second set of goals
will further advance the frontier of machine learning by designing joint
elicitation and learning mechanisms when data are acquired from strategic agents
but the quality of the contributed data cannot be directly verified. The third
set of goals will develop optimization algorithms with good theoretical
guarantees when parameters of an optimization problem may be unknown initially
but the algorithm designer can gather information about the parameters from
strategic agents.