* 1718475
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Batch Techniques for Practical Private Information Retrieval
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ryan Henry, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 08/31/2020
* USD 322,598.00

Private information retrieval (PIR) is a cryptographic primitive that solves the
seemingly impossible problem of letting users fetch records from untrusted and
remote database servers without letting those servers learn which records the
users are fetching. The research literature on PIR is vast; for over two
decades, the cryptography, privacy, and theory research communities have studied
PIR intensively and from a variety of perspectives; compelling applications for
PIR abound in the resulting research literature. Alas, despite a series of
significant advances, existing PIR techniques remain notoriously inefficient and
none of the numerous PIR-based applications proposed in the research literature
have been deployed at scale to protect the privacy of users "in the wild". This
project entails an integrated research agenda that couples a strong theoretical
component with an ambitious practical component centered around developing,
analyzing, and implementing novel "batch" IT-PIR techniques, which can
potentially alleviate the "prohibitive cost" problem for so-called information-
theoretic private information retrieval (IT-PIR), the most performant and well-
studied category of PIR protocols. Beyond improving performance, the new batch
techniques also improve the "expressiveness" of PIR, exposing intuitive APIs
through which applications can safely, easily, and efficiently interact with IT-
PIR protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIR has long provided compelling solutions
in theory to a wide array of important problems, but it has seen little adoption
in practice due in part to the inefficiency and limited expressiveness of
existing techniques. Indeed, traditional PIR constructions let users fetch just
one data record at a time by encoding the record's index (i.e., its physical
locations relative to the other records in the database) in a cryptographically
protected query. This project builds on preliminary results by the PI, which
extend that basic functionality to not only let users fetch several records
(i.e., a "batch" of records) for a lower cost than that of fetching each record
separately, but also to let users fetch such batches of records using
"contextual" queries that specify which data they seek, as opposed to
"positional" queries that specify where those data happen to reside in the
database. The main research goals are to (i) develop theoretical frameworks to
better understand the mathematics underlying batch IT-PIR, to (ii) use insights
gained from these frameworks to improve upon and generalize the known
constructions, and to (iii) use the improved constructions to implement
practical, privacy-respecting alternatives to a selection of existing privacy-
agnostic products and services. The new batch IT-PIR constructions will be
incorporated into the open-source Percy++ library, an effort which will deeply
involve both graduate and undergraduate students.