* 1718991
* RI: Small: Extracting and Understanding Sparse Structure in Spatiotemporal Data in Neuroscience and Other Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Saeed Saremi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

Sparse coding and manifold learning are two methods that, each in its own right,
have proven essential for understanding the structure in complex high­
dimensional data. The goal of this project is to combine these two methods to
yield a qualitatively more powerful approach to analyze data. The investigators
will develop the mathematics of sparse coding of spatiotemporal data and combine
it with approaches from manifold learning. The tools emerging from this research
will bring benefits to society since they are applicable to many areas of
technology and medicine, such as signal processing, image and video coding,
medical imaging, neural data analysis, neuroprosthetics, and can be expected to
have implications for understanding information processing in the visual cortex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sparse coding is a concept originally developed in
neuroscience to account for sensory representations in the brain, which now sees
widespread use in many image and signal processing and data analysis tasks.
However, there are critical limitations with current approaches to sparse
coding. One major issue is that sparse representations can be brittle, changing
abruptly over time or in response to small changes in the input, and they can be
quite sensitive to parameter settings, initial conditions, and the particular
choice of sparse solver. Another limitation is that if the data lie in a low­
dimensional manifold, such as sound waveforms or images, the connection between
the sparse codes of the data and the geometry of the underlying low dimensional
space is lost. The team conjectures that both of these limitations should be
addressed together. Building on previous work and their own preliminary studies,
they will develop a theoretical framework for sparse coding to reveal conditions
under which the results of sparse coding are unique. Based on these theoretical
insights, they will design novel algorithms for robustly revealing persistent
sparse structure in spatio­temporal data. Finally they will develop a new signal
transform, called sparse manifold transform, that combines traditional sparse
coding with manifold learning.