* 1718080
* SHF: Small: Approximate-Computing Enabled Robust 3D NAND Flash Memories
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jun Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Traditional NAND flash has been prevalently used as the storage for essentially
all computer systems. Increasing the NAND flash capacity, to meet the
requirement of today's ever increasing data volumes, has been enabled by
technology scaling. However, further scaling has come to a screeching halt due
to degraded performance and reliability in planar NAND cells. 3D NAND flash
memory design thus opens a new direction for continuous density increase, as
capacity can be multiplied by stacking more cells in vertical direction without
further shrinking the cell sizes. Nonetheless, 3D NAND also faces new challenges
in reliability due to its new architecture. Using strong error correction
mechanisms is limited by potential high power consumption, implementation area
and long operation latency. On the other hand, there is a trend in relaxing data
accuracy during computing and data stores as many of today's applications are
tolerant to a small amount of errors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
leverage such approximate storage of data to improve the reliability,
performance and endurance of 3D NAND flash memories. The research will first
construct reliability models to guide architecture designs. Then, mechanisms for
achieving approximate storage through tolerating errors and approximate
programming will be developed and evaluated. Finally, new techniques will be
developed to exploit approximation for mitigating disturbance, cell-to-cell
interference, retention loss, and for improving performance as well as endurance
of a 3D flash memory. The success of this project will fuel the continuous
scaling of the mainstream storage technology. It will also enable pervasive
adoption of 3D NAND flash memories for embedded systems, personal computers and
clouds, which will have a tremendous drive for the innovations in storage
industry. Trained students will become future taskforce to continue technology
innovations in computing.