* 1718258
* III: Small: A New Perspective on Grouped Variable Selection via Modern Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Rahul Mazumder, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 318,000.00

This project will investigate new statistical learning methods for grouped
variable selection problems that require addressing spatial proximity as well as
physical, structural, and temporal constraints in data. For example, in genetic
studies, it is often known that a group of genes in the same genetic pathway
behaves as a group; in neuroscience applications, spatially contiguous regions
of the brain often behave as homogeneous units; in industrial applications, with
categorical covariates, a factor with multiple levels is often treated as a
single unit. The project will design new statistical learning methods based on
mathematical optimization that broadens the paradigm of disciplined statistical
and computational modeling for grouped variable selection problems. The research
will also involve mentoring of graduate students and collaborations with
industrial partners. The project will involve curriculum development and the
creation of software for public use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
explore computational methods based on mixed integer optimization to address the
grouped variable selection problem. While convex relaxation based procedures and
greedy methods have played a significant role in this problem, the power and
versatility of mixed integer optimization methods have been largely unexplored.
The project will investigate this new direction, leveraging the advances in this
field of mathematical optimization over the past ten to fifteen years.
Successful execution of this project will create new tools, significantly
enriching a statistician/machine learner's toolkit of interpretable models with
principled computational and statistical properties. The project will
investigate possible gains in statistical performance by using advanced
computational methods over popularly used, computationally friendlier
alternatives. The research will explore fundamental connections of the new
approaches with existing methods. The research quest will stimulate activity at
the intersection of machine learning, statistics, operations research,
mathematical optimization and the applied domains. Software will be developed
for the methods proposed.