* 1718435
* NeTS: Small: Handheld mm-Accurate Positioning for Wearables
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Swarun Kumar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,999.00

This proposal develops a system that can track wearables on a user's body with
millimeter (mm) accuracy using a handheld device in the user's pocket. Unlike
past work, it does so without the need for external infrastructure (e.g. cameras
or antenna arrays) or inaccurate, bulky and battery-powered sensors on the body.
The proposed work attaches tiny radio frequency identification (RFID) tags that
are cheap (costing a few cents) and completely battery-free on to on-body
devices or the user's clothing. It then monitors the locations of these tags
from a handheld RFID reader in the user's pocket. Unlike past solutions that use
bulky, many-antenna RFID readers to locate RFID tags, our approach needs only a
single-antenna reader that is both compact and portable. The proposed work will
be fully implemented and evaluated on commodity RFID hardware and tags; the
solution opens up a rich set of applications. Consider medical tests such as
Electroencephalogram (EEG) that can become truly 'wearable', with electrodes on
the head positioned automatically without requiring time-consuming manual
measurements by a physician. Or consider smart textiles that can now serve as
gesture-based interfaces that track a user's movements relative to handheld
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research presents three
contributions: (1) It proposes a novel approach to disentangle wireless signals
traversing different paths from RFID tags to a single-antenna RFID reader - a
key challenge in positioning research. It achieves this without relying on
bulky, multi-antenna arrays used in past literature. Its core idea is to use
signals from teams of RFID tags to separate wireless signal components along
different paths. (2) It investigates a solution to locate RFID tags relative to
other tags whose positions are known. It seeks to do this using an algorithm
that leverages similarity between the wireless signal paths experienced by the
tag of interest and neighboring tags whose locations are known. (3) It fully
integrates the system to target two applications: i) A wearable EEG system that
tracks electrodes on the head using RFID tags attached to them. This eliminates
the need for cumbersome manual measurements that doctors perform today before
administering the test, allowing EEG to be truly portable. ii) A smart fabric
with embedded RFID tags tracked by a mobile device to track the users movements
both for continuous fitness monitoring and to create a gesture-based user
interface.