* 1718267
* SHF:Small: Enriching Session Types for Practical Concurrent Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Frank Pfenning, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Concurrent programming is becoming increasingly prevalent because of the
distributed nature of many applications and the prospect of performance gains.
However, concurrent programming is also notoriously error-prone because of the
presence of data races and deadlocks. A promising approach to concurrent
programing is message-passing concurrency, due to its higher-level of
abstraction. Message-passing concurrency has been adopted by various practical
programming languages, such as Erlang, Go, and Rust. Servo, for example, is an
experimental browser engine developed in Rust that exploits message-passing
concurrency for tasks, such as DOM traversal, layout painting, and JavaScript
execution. This research project studies the application of session types to
practical message-passing concurrency, while addressing the pitfalls of data
races and deadlocks. Session types allow the expression and compile-time
checking of the protocols of message exchange. The project's intellectual merits
are to lift the expressiveness of session types to accommodate today's
concurrent communication patterns, while remaining truthful to their logical
foundation. The project's broader significance and importance are its provision
of both a foundational and practical view on concurrent programming, the
development of curricular material at the sophomore-level, and a session type
extension for Rust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The logical foundation of this research
project is the recently discovered Curry-Howard isomorphism between
intuitionistic linear logic and session types, which relates linear propositions
to session types, sequent calculus proofs to concurrent processes, and cut
reduction to message-passing communication. Existing work building on this
foundation provides strong guarantees, but also narrows the applicability of
session types. The aim of this research is two-fold: (i) to increase the
applicability of session types, while keeping their logical foundation intact,
and (ii) to demonstrate practicality of the resulting techniques to real-world
software development. For (ii), the project explores the application of the
techniques resulting from (i) to the Servo code base. For (i), the project first
explores the introduction of shared channels to support programs that demand
sharing by the nature of circumstances or for performance considerations. Key
concerns in this exploration are the prevention of data races along shared
channels to guarantee session fidelity and the assurance of a form of global
progress. In its simplest form, global progress will lack deadlock freedom, a
property holding in the purely linear setting. In a second phase, a logical
interpretation of deadlock prevention is derived. In a third phase, the project
explores the enrichment of session types with dependent typing for the
expression and verification of properties that are not primarily protocol-
related. In all cases, proofs of soundness as well as a prototype of a session-
typed concurrent programming language accommodating the developed techniques are
given.