* 1718883
* SHF: Small: Distributed Timing Analysis and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Martin Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

In order to design next generations of complex microelectronic systems, major
innovations in the design of EDA (Electronic Design Automation) software are
needed. Timing analysis is a core EDA technology. It is the task of analyzing
the timing of electrical signals propagating through various parts of the chip,
thus allowing designers to determine if a design meets performance requirement.
Given the ever-increasing chip design complexity, the need to efficiently
analyze circuit timing with billions of transistors is quickly becoming the
major bottleneck to the overall chip design process. A typical approach to
mitigate this issue is to break down a chip design into several partitions and
run timing analysis in parallel using the multiple cores in a single computer.
For today's billion-scale designs, generating timing reports can consume up to
400 GB memory. The proposed research will advance knowledge in EDA by addressing
this need. It will also add new knowledge to other fields such as general
distributed computing and network optimization since ultimately we will need to
solve large-scale optimization problems in distributed environment. The broader
impacts of this project include microchip design technology advancement and the
education of next generation engineers. Microchips are at the heart of modern
information and communication systems. The proposed research improves chip
design technology that will benefit the society at large. New research results
will be passed on to undergraduate and graduate students through dissertation
research, course projects, homework, and classroom
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the design complexity continues to grow
larger, building a high-end computer is neither cost-effective nor scalable.
Therefore, recent trends are driving the requirement for distributed timing
analysis (DTA) in EDA tools. However, DTA has by far received little research
attention and remains a critical problem. A successful distributed timer means
not only a faster path to design completion but also the chance of breaking
cumbersome design hierarchies, which has the potential to tremendously improve
the overall quality of design. Distributed timing is also one of the major
hurdles to overcome for EDA to be cloud-friendly, which is believed to deliver
the next leap of design productivity and unleash new opportunities. This
research proposal proposes to build an efficient, scalable, robust and secure
distributed timing analysis system.