* 1718335
* SHF: Small: Vertically Integrated Persistence
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Raju Rangaswami, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2020
* USD 458,000.00

A new generation of data storage devices based on persistent memory technology
are becoming available. Persistent memory devices address many shortcomings of
previous generation technology including performance, power consumption, and
device size. They have the potential to empower businesses and consumers with
new and better capabilities. When these devices made available, either as part
of a packaged digital service or within self-contained devices, they have the
potential to vastly benefit the consumers of technology. This project builds the
core software capabilities necessary for ensuring that the full potential of
this new technology is realized and delivered to the end consumer. In
particular, this project creates enabling technologies for operating data center
servers, personal desktop and laptop computers, as well as mobile tablet
computers and smart-phones more efficiently and at lower cost. Existing software
support for storage are built around a set of core assumptions and goals that
are rendered obsolete by persistent memory based storage devices. In this
project, the PI will develop a new set of guiding principles for software that
supports such devices from the ground up. In particular, this purpose-built
software takes a vertically integrated approach using a minimalistic cross-layer
design across components of the software stack. The new stack addresses the
cornerstones of systems infrastructure including all levels of software and
hardware, including application, compiler, the operating system, and the device
access hardware infrastructure including the device itself. Educational
activities include involvement of undergraduate students and incorporation of
project research into courses taught by the PI. Outreach includes recruitment of
under-represented minority students for participation in the project.