* 1718270
* NeTS: Small: Hybrid Switching in Data Center Networks: Systems-driven Modeling and Principled Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Pramod Viswanath, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 476,210.00

Data analytics are increasingly an engine of technical and economic growth. They
typically involve distributed computation across many interconnected servers in
large data centers. The increasing number of applications and the rapidly
growing scale of datacenters are driving a strong need for fast, dynamic and
economic changes in the interconnection patterns among datacenter servers. To
address this, this project will make use of optical circuit switches, which can
handle large data traffic flows with sparse connection patterns. It will develop
scheduling algorithms to manage when to connect servers via these switches,
taking into account practical constraints associated with the switching hardware
as well as practical systems constraints. Addressing this challenge will enable
more efficient use of data center resources for data analytics and other
computationally intensive tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the problem of fast dynamic switching for adaptation to datacenter traffic
patterns. In particular it investigates the issue of balancing the overhead of
reconfiguring circuit switches with the capability of dynamically meeting
traffic demand requirements. The project will design scalable scheduling
algorithms for hybrid switches (combination of optical circuit switches and
electronic packet switches) with direct applications to modern data centers,
addressing a wide range of practical requirements. These goals are addressed via
a two-step approach: (a) Systems modeling, i.e. deriving canonical models of the
optimization problems underlying the constraints of the hardware (speed,
connectivity constraints and switching costs) as well as practical system
requirements (such as throughput and tail latency); (b) Principled algorithms:
deriving scalable scheduling solutions with formal optimality guarantees by
conducting a first-principles study of the underlying mixed
continuous/combinatorial optimization problems. The output of this project is
expected to impact both practical networking designs of modern data centers as
well as the development of next generation optical switches with high
connectivity and small switching costs.