* 1718456
* NeTS:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Transparent Cross-technology Communication in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Tian He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Successful proliferation of wireless technologies in the past decade was led by
multiple and heterogeneous technologies (e.g., WiFi, Bluetooth, and ZigBee) to
accommodate diverse application requirements including system reliability,
timeliness, and energy usage. However, wireless devices and their non-
cooperative behavior lead to critically inefficient utilization of scarce
wireless spectrum. This project develops a collaboration framework taking a
clean-slate approach called Cross-technology Communication (CTC) - enabling
message exchange between heterogeneous wireless technologies (e.g., Bluetooth
and WiFi). The project aims to achieve two goals: (i) address resource under-
utilization to bring significant cost reduction in network operation, and (ii)
enable unique and advanced network functions via collaboration among
heterogeneous entities with different capabilities. The impacts of this project
will be further amplified by 1) embedding the technology on massive off-the-
shelf systems via collaborations with major industry players; 2) improving
curriculum development with enhanced course projects; 3) disseminating research
results through high-profile tutorials and open-source sites; 4) raising
interest in technology among K-12 students and under-represented minority groups
through outreach activities including open houses; and 5) supporting talented
female and minority PhD students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project departs from
the extensive studies in literature that commonly take implicit spectrum sharing
approaches, to uniquely propose an explicit approach by enabling CTC. It enables
cross-technology collaboration to bring advanced services, essentially exploring
the bright side of coexistence. To achieve the goal, the project includes in-
depth systematic study on CTC, contributing novel designs across multiple
domains including: 1) extensive studies on empirical measurement and simulation
to reveal the practical and theoretical limits of CTC capacity; 2) exploration
of CTC design space to achieve gains in throughput, Quality of Service, and
compatibility; 3) building scalable and reliable heterogeneous networks via CTC;
and 4) CTC-enabled services benefiting from collaboration between cross-
technology channel coordination, time synchronization, localization, and energy
management.