* 1718582
* III: Small: Non-Invasive Real-Time Analytics in Database Systems using Holistic Query Compilation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Todd Mowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,774.00

There are two major trends in modern data processing applications that make them
distinct from applications in previous decades. The first is that they are noted
for their continuously changing data sets. This could come from transactions
updating the database or from upstream sources. The second is that they want to
analyze the latest obtained data as quickly as possible. Data has immense value
as soon as it is created, but that value diminishes over time. Therefore, it is
imperative that the queries access the newest data generated in order for their
results to have the most impact. The ability to ask complex questions about data
as soon as it enters in the database is useful in many application domains,
including real-time monitoring systems (e.g., is an incoming packet from a
potential attacker?) and financial services (e.g., is this new credit card
purchase fraudulent?). But current systems contain architecture remnants of
legacy database management systems (DBMSs) that prevent them from taking
advantage of newer hardware support for parallel optimizations. This limits the
types of queries that an application executes on a DBMS that targets data as
soon as it arrives. In turn, this adds additional cost to deploying a database
application in terms of both hardware and administration overhead. Thus, the
goal of this project is to investigate using query compilation to allow non-
invasive analytical operations that are more complex than what is practical in
today's DBMSs. Such query compilation techniques are beneficial to a wide array
of data processing systems. The results of this study will allow organizations
to deploy DBMSs that are able to handle applications with larger data sets and
more complex workloads with fewer resources (e.g., hardware, personnel,
energy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern data-intensive applications seek to obtain
new insights in real-time by analyzing a combination of historical data sets
alongside recently collected data. To support such workloads, database
management systems (DBMSs) need to support complex analytical queries over
diverse data sets. The ever decreasing cost of DRAM is allowing a greater number
of these applications to be memory-resident. As such, in-memory DBMSs will be
used for most analytical and machine learning applications in the future. But
there are remnants of how legacy disk-oriented DBMSs process queries that still
exist in newer in-memory DBMSs that inhibit the kind of high-performance query
execution over large data sets that this project targets. Thus, the goal of this
project is to overcome this barrier through a new holistic approach to query
compilation that integrates it comprehensively throughout the DBMS, and which
builds upon (and adapts) recent advances in "just-in-time" (JIT) compilation
technology and heterogeneous hardware resources. Using compilation to optimize
many different aspects of the DBMS's architecture is important to support future
"Big Data" applications that need to ingest large amounts of new data while
simultaneously executing complex analytical workloads in near real-time.