* 1718474
* SHF:Small: Collaborative Research: Exploring 3-Dimensional Integration Strategies of STTRAM
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Swaroop Ghosh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 233,000.00

The development of high-density memory is fueled by recent advancements in
several critical areas ranging from big data analytics, Internet-of-Things
(IoT), wearable electronics, smart phones, assistive devices, cybersecurity to
weather tracking systems. Currently available conventional memory technologies
face serious challenges in addressing these needs due to increased energy
consumption, scalability limitations, and limited bandwidth. The objective of
this proposal is to develop novel memory devices by enabling 3D integration of
spin-torque transfer RAM devices (STTRAM) with appropriate selector diodes (SD).
These type of memory devices will be massively scalable, energy-efficient, and
fast which will open tremendous opportunities to integrate them in existing
memory architectures to enable various futuristic applications. The project will
integrate education by incorporating research outcomes in PI's academic courses.
Industrial feedback will be sought via collaborations. Under-represented groups
will be involved in science and engineering through several outreach programs at
Penn State University (PSU) and University of Cincinnati (UC) such as Summer
Research Opportunities Program (SROP) at PSU, and Emerging Ethnic Engineers (E3)
program at UC which provides opportunities to the high-school students from the
inner-city schools with economically challenged background to participate in
internships and lab-experience activities. Undergraduate students will be
involved in research via Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program
at both the universities. Dissemination of results will be accomplished by
publications in high-impact scientific journals, conference presentations, and
YouTube lecture videos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
project is in understanding the integration compatibility of STTRAM devices with
SD and developing highly scalable 3D crossbar arrays of memory technologies
based on integrated STTRAM and SD. The objectives will be achieved by executing
the following specific aims: (i) modeling and simulation of STTRAM-SD arrays,
(ii) resilience analysis and optimization studies to minimize the impact of
device-level variabilities on performance metrics, (iii) optimization of STTRAM-
SD architectures for high-performance computing and IoT, (iv) designing,
fabrication, testing, and modeling of novel SD devices based on energy band-
engineered and doping-engineered transition metal oxide and electrode stacks,
(v) designing and fabrication of small-size STTRAM-SD arrays, electrical testing
and modeling to benchmark simulations and experimental results. It is
anticipated that the successful completion of this project will lead to a
fundamental understanding of the compatibility of STTRAM with SD and provide a
platform-technology to develop high-density memories which will have
transformative impact on commercializing and advancing the futuristic
applications.