* 1718595
* SaTC-BSF:  CORE:  Small:  Collaborative:  Making Blockchains Scale Privately and Reliably
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Ryan Henry, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2020
* USD 254,633.00

This research explores ways to simultaneously improve both the scalability and
privacy of blockchain technologies. A blockchain is a massively distributed,
append-only log of transactions that is cryptographically protected from
tampering. Thanks to their capacity towards facilitating fast and inexpensive
transactions across the globe and their powerful scripting-language support for
complex financial instruments, blockchains have already proven to be a highly
disruptive force in the finance and e-commerce sectors. Nevertheless, at least
two major hurdles still stand in the way of mainstream blockchain acceptance: 1)
'traditional' blockchain architectures are not sufficiently scalable to handle
the ever-growing base of blockchain users and the resulting proliferation of
transactions, and 2) despite myriad efforts to improve blockchain privacy, users
of public blockchains remain susceptible to devastating attacks on the privacy
of their accounts and transactions, which often lead to security breaches
causing financial losses for the victims. The approaches explored in this
project provide privacy for blockchain users where previous efforts have failed
by rethinking the one-size-fits-all approach of using Tor to solve all problems
requiring anonymity and/or unlinkability. Indeed, running complex protocols over
Tor is fraught with risks and can open users to subtle-yet-devastating
deanonymization attacks; the tailor-made solutions developed in this project
leverage domain-specific knowledge to mitigate these
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses privacy concerns as they
relate both to traditional blockchain transactions and to newer 'payment channel
network' transactions. Payment channel networks promise greatly improved
scalability by allowing secure (off-chain) payment requiring no interaction with
the blockchain ledger. In the context of traditional blockchain transactions,
this research develops innovative ways to 1) privately publish transactions to a
blockchain by integrating tailor-made anonymous communication protocols directly
into the blockchain communication infrastructure, and 2) privately retrieve
transactions from a blockchain using carefully optimized private information
retrieval (PIR) protocols that support expressive blockchain queries. In the
context of payment channel networks, the project 1) explores the (im)possibility
of performing off-chain transactions privately, and 2) develops a new
theoretical framework and toolkit of algorithms for ensuring availability and
quality of service for payment channel transactions in extreme adversarial
conditions. Additionally, as part of this project, the multi-institution and
transnational team of PIs are deploying a distributed instantiation of the new
private blockchain transaction retrieval solutions, which will be open to use by
the public. Along with training graduate students, the project puts a major
emphasis on undergraduate involvement in this emerging area of blockchain
research.