* 1718600
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Information Disclosure and Security Policy Design: A Large-Scale Randomization Experiment in Trans-Pacific Region
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Andrew Whinston, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 330,768.00

With more prominent data breaches and cybersecurity incidents, cyber insecurity
is becoming a serious problem for every individual and the society. Such
security incidents are partially due to the lack of relevant governmental
polices and the insufficient security protection by organizations managing
information assets. The investigators will design an independent Trans-Pacific
cybersecurity evaluation institution that measures and reports organizations'
security weaknesses. The proposed institution aims at effectively motivating
organizations to achieve a desirable level of cybersecurity. An opt-in field
experiment with a rigorous design will be employed to empirically evaluate the
performance of organizations in the Trans-Pacific region to see how they will
respond to the diversified security performance reports of malicious
cybercrimes, including spam, phishing, and distributed denial of service (DDoS)
attacks. Based on the experimental results, the project will provide practical
and credible suggestions to policy makers and companies improve their security
preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As methods of data analyses, the researchers
will employ potentially useful theoretical and empirical models: (i) a model
that allows endogenous experiments, (ii) static and dynamic models with
strategic interaction between defenders and attackers, and (iii) a cyber-
insurance and reinsurance model which utilizes the PIs' comprehensive security
evaluation metric. The PIs will estimate the policy relevant parameters in these
models using both experimental and observational data. In addition to the
existing dataset on defenders, important data sets that have been collected and
will be used in the analyses of the data for attackers, such as data for
phishing activity, outgoing spam mails, and real time DDoS information. Since
the PIs seek to recover flexible heterogeneous effects of policies, as
cybersecurity data typically exhibit a great deal of heterogeneity, they
introduce semi-parametric identification and estimation methods developed in the
recent econometrics literature. This work contributes to the literature on
randomized field experiments in several ways: (i) to identify the problem of
endogeneity in randomized field experiments due to the existence of external
impact; (ii) in the context of cybersecurity, to redesign a previous experiment
and by introducing empirical strategies that control for endogeneity using novel
datasets on the attackers; (iii) to recover fully heterogeneous effects of
treatments, which departs from a simple and restricted approach commonly taken
in the literature; (iv) as some of the datasets are of high frequency (e.g.,
DDoS real time attack), to develop estimation methods that deal with big data
issues. Theoretical models of this project contribute to cybersecurity
literature by following novel features: (i) a dynamic cybersecurity game in the
continuous-time framework by using stochastic analysis; (ii) a cyber-insurance
model with reinsurance opportunity, and specification of the role of governments
as the ultimate excessive risk taker, and a method for governments to control
organization's cybersecurity investment level by altering the premium.