* 1718901
* NeTS: Small: Learning-Guided Network Resource Allocation: A Closed-Loop Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xin Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 479,000.00

Based on network measurement and user behavior data, much recent work has
studied the modeling and prediction of network utility and user experience using
machine learning techniques. While it provides important insights, prediction
itself is often not the ultimate goal in networks. Ideally, a network could
identify users with poor experience and take proper actions to proactively
improve the overall performance. To achieve this goal, the project advocates a
closed-loop approach that uses learning-aided utility model to explicitly guide
resource allocation in networks and uses feedback to (in)validate and improve
the learned utility model. This investigation provides important insights in
understanding, designing, and analyzing learning-model-aided resource
optimization algorithms. Furthermore, because of its generality, this closed-
loop approach can be applied in other systems with the following
characteristics: 1) the system is too complex to rely on domain knowledge only
to build a white-box utility model; 2) there exists sufficient data so that a
utility model can be learned; 3) to maximize the overall utility, one can
optimize over certain control variables that affect the utility value; and 4)
there exists a feedback loop so that the effect of the control can be observed.
The outcome of the project can be applied to such systems in different
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing this proposed framework is highly
challenging due to the unknown and noisy nature of the network utility function,
and in the context of high dimensionality, coupled resource constraints, and
non-convex optimization. To address these challenges, the project considers two
complementary approaches: a greedy approach and an integrated approach. The
greedy approach has much flexibility in applying diverse learning models, which
may fit different application scenarios better in practice, but is difficult to
analyze. The integrated approach builds upon Gaussian Process (GP) bandits that
integrate both the constructed model and model uncertainty in resource
allocation decisions. This approach is more amenable to theoretical analysis,
although highly challenging. In both approaches, one needs to optimally allocate
resource based on the learned models. The contribution of the project comes from
solving the corresponding non-convex optimization problems. The last step is to
use the closed-loop feedback to build a better or optimal utility model. The
integrated approach aims to develop hierarchical GP bandit algorithms for
dimensionality reduction, ideally with theoretical performance guarantees. The
greedy approach leverages perturbed-exploration schemes for general learning
models and strives for practicality and generality.