* 1718478
* RI: Small: Robot Motion Planning with an Experience Database
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2022
* USD 508,000.00

Motion planning is the problem of determining how to get the robot from one
point to another. Ideally, robots should have past experiences, of their own and
others, inform future actions to operate more robustly and improve their
performance over time. Motion planning, as it is largely practiced today,
focuses on solving one problem at a time and makes limited use of past history.
The goal of this project is to transform the way robots plan their motions by
learning to exploit similarities between different experiences and by creating
strategies that can adapt to wide range of scenarios. The work will create a
bridge between the motion planning community and the information retrieval
community, potentially transforming both fields. Training opportunities for
diverse students will be offered. All developed software is disseminated under
an open source license and infrastructure will enable other researchers to use
the experience databases and contribute to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides a two-pronged approach to transform motion planning using an
experience database. First, hashing will be used on an environment to fetch
roadmaps for similar environments from a database. A roadmap is a graph
representing feasible motions for a robot. These fetched roadmaps will be then
lazily composed and refined to allow the robot to plan efficiently in the
current environment. The use of prior experience will be done in tandem with
planning from scratch; the latter, if successful, can provide a path and add to
the experience database. The second prong in the planned approach will be to
maintain various performance characteristics of a library of motion planning
algorithms. These characteristics will be then used to optimize algorithm
performance and construct a portfolio of algorithms that is competitive across
various problems. The overall framework will be implemented in the cloud.