* 1718713
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Relational Verification for Information Assurance and Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* David Naumann, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 451,931.00

The project investigates how flows of information through cybersystems can be
accurately detected, controlled, and explained. Methods from programming
languages and mathematical logic are being extended to enable the analysis of
information flow, that is, to address data confidentiality and integrity
requirements that must be met to achieve security and privacy goals. These
analyses are the basis for making systems transparent in the sense that
stakeholders will be able to see and understand the flows of information in
cyberspace. The research has the potential to transform computing practice by
ensuring accountability of system designers and builders through evidence that
includes mathematically precise specifications and proofs. By advancing the
science of security, and bringing that science into K-12 education, this project
is helping to broaden society's understanding of computational thinking to
include principle-based models of security and privacy. This in turn will reduce
security risks due to user behaviors, and increase the adoption of beneficial IT
systems while protecting individual privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By formulating
inference and verification problems in terms of relational logic, wherein pairs
of programs and program executions are compared, the research addresses core
problems such as translating programs in high level domain-specific languages
into lower level language with good performance and without risk of security
vulnerabilities and privacy violations. Another problem addressed is correctness
by construction, through instrumentation that monitors information flow within
and across abstraction layers. This research is helping to make it possible for
cybersystems to be designed and evaluated on the basis of evidence including
formal specification and proof for end-to-end requirements, resting on machine-
checked formal proofs of system components and their compositions. The project
is making possible programming frameworks that enable building security in, and
enabling tool developers and security analysts to more quickly address new
concerns -- threats, platforms, languages -- with benefit of reusable modular
theories and techniques.