* 1718481
* CSR: Small: Efficient Many-core Execution Models for Cognitive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Omer Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Society is increasingly dependent on digital machines due to miniaturization and
seamless integration of mobile, cloud and network computing. This project's
objective is to develop an understanding of the computational algorithms, and
devise novel architectural methods that improve the efficiency of the devices
and platforms that will execute cognitive computing problems. Achieving good
performance and scalability for concurrent hardware has been widely acknowledged
to be a hard and important problem. This project singles out communication as a
grand challenge and proposes novel methods for systems ranging from single chips
with many "cores" or processors, through tightly integrated and increasingly
heterogeneous futuristic many-core machines. The proposed research agenda
provides for significant broader impacts related to (1) curriculum development
and student training through industry collaborations and integration of
cognitive computing in computer architecture curriculum, and (2) outreach
through established Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) sites and
supplement programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A set of auxiliary communication
models are proposed to give the programmer new mechanisms based on hardware-
supported explicit messaging to exploit fine-grained parallelism in the
algorithms that represent cognitive computing problems. The resulting
architecture and software concurrency choices are expected to expose many
problem-algorithm-input-machine configurations, and solving for a near-optimal
configuration in real-time is a hard problem. A novel situationally adaptive
execution model is proposed that analyzes and captures this massive search space
to pick the right choices in the spatiotemporally changing runtime settings. The
incorporation of auxiliary communication models in futuristic multicore and
tightly-coupled many-core processors is timely as it will enable performance
scaling trends to continue at ultra-energy efficiency: enterprises and US
mission agencies will be able to deploy multicore technology in real-time
embedded systems, such as self-driving cars. As a broader impact, better
solutions for emerging cognitive computing problems will help improve our cyber
infrastructure, healthcare, and manufacturing, all with significant benefits to
the US economy and society.