* 1718551
* CIF:Small: Covariance Arbitrage: Unlocking the Full Value of Correlation Diversity in Multiuser Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2021
* Aria Nosratinia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 11/30/2021
* USD 399,318.00

In many emerging wireless communication technologies, the acquiring and
transport of information about the state of the wireless channels has evolved
into a first-order issue in the design and operation of the system. A prime
example is observed in massive MIMO, especially the frequency-division duplex
variety. This requires careful handling of channel resources that are used for
training versus data transmission. The project is dedicated to a careful
analysis of phenomena involving channel spatial correlations and synthesis of
novel solutions that benefit from them, leading to more efficient channel
training and transmission especially in scenarios where said efficiency can have
a critical impact on wireless system performance. The research is complemented
by educational and outreach activities, including training of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In massive MIMO, scattering
properties of physical channels produce rank-deficient covariance matrices,
opening the door to a number of interesting proposals for recapturing efficiency
of channel training notably to use medium- to long-term covariance eigenspaces
for pre-beamforming. The variation between covariance properties of wireless
nodes also occurs in scenarios other than massive MIMO. The proposed activity is
dedicated to the building of a theory of correlation diversity in wireless
networks animated by the idea that, much like a trader's arbitrage, it is
possible to profit from differences of covariance eigenspaces, either via
overlap or via separation of eigenspaces. The proposed activity aims to open a
wider domain of applicability than present covariance-based techniques whose
best gains are under certain antenna configurations, number of receivers, and
covariance rank behavior. The proposed activity also ties in with close
counterparts that are found in the time- and frequency-domain, providing an
opening to a comprehensive theory of covariance and coherence disparity.