* 1718708
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Low-cost, Convenient, Non-intrusive Methods for Enabling the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Shigang Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The Internet of things (IoT) has been gaining momentum in both industry and
academic communities. From phones to smart phones, from electricity meters to
smart meters, from cars to connected vehicles, new products have been developed
with enhanced capabilities in data communications, sensing, and information
exchange, thanks to rapid advance in embedded systems and sensor networks, which
integrate miniaturized computing devices with the target objects. However, this
approach of replacing old products with new designs can be expensive and
sometimes inconvenient. The extra cost and deployment time of IoT devices have
become a barrier for the adoption of IoT technologies. The proposed project will
develop alternative IoT-enabling technologies that are easily deployable through
tagging the objects or their environment. Such low-cost, convenient, non-
intrusive methods hold great potential in making significant practical impact
and expediting IoT deployment without redesigning and replacing the products
already in use. The project also offers an interesting education platform for
student training, undergraduate research participation, and outreach activities
in the IoT domain.

The goal of this proposal is to provide an alternative, convenient and non-
intrusive approach that is capable of turning a vast number of existing objects
in the world, without redesign, into semi-smart objects for some of the benefits
promised by the IoT vision. The proposed project focuses on low-cost methods
that attach RFID tags to objects or place tags in the objects' environment. It
exploits the rich information embedded in the physical-layer signals from tags,
such as phase, amplitude, polarization, waveform, and coupling effect to support
IoT applications. The proposed research consists of two major thrusts. The first
thrust investigates the IoT functions where objects are tagged. Based on the
physical-layer properties of the signals transmitted from individual tags, these
functions will determine the properties of the tags' carriers, including their
orientations, locations, speeds, spacing, trajectories, oscillation rates, etc.
The second thrust investigates the IoT functions where the objects' environment
is tagged. Based on the joint physical-layer properties from a set of tags,
these functions will perform object trajectory tracking and hidden content
inspection in a non-intrusive manner.