* 1718924
* CIF:Small:Minimum Mean Square Error Estimation and Control of Partially-Observed Boolean Dynamical Systems with Applications in Metagenomics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Ulisses Braga Neto, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 355,000.00

This research concerns the development and application of innovative signal
processing techniques to dynamical systems associated with the complex
interactions among microbes, human cells, and their metabolic products. This
project investigates innovative methods for estimation and control of processes
that consist of the complex interactions of many switching elements, such as
"presence" and "absence" of a particular microbial species in the human gut,
enabling the characterization of microbial communities and their interactions
with host cells. This project provides life scientists with computational tools
for biochemical pathway discovery as well as rational intervention design, as in
optimal drug scheduling and diet modifications to treat human
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops computational methods for
systems identification and optimal control of Boolean dynamical systems
partially observable through noisy time series data, with application in the
modeling of metabolic interactions in the gut microbiome and their evolution.
This project facilitates the integrative analysis of multimodal microbiota data,
including transcriptomic, metatranscriptomic, metagenomic, and metabolomic data,
enabling the characterization of environmental exposures, microbial communities,
and their interactions with host gut epithelial cells. While previous work on
Boolean dynamical systems has been based on ad-hoc binarization of measurement
data and ignore the presence of unobservable variables, the methodology
developed here allows the state process to be hidden and relies directly on
indirect or incomplete noisy time series measurements of the states. A novel
aspect of this work is that it is based on a minimum mean-square error criterion
for optimal estimation and control, as opposed to maximum-a-posteriori methods
typically used in Boolean and other discrete spaces. This project includes the
construction of likelihood functions for various modalities of metagenomic data
for use with exact and approximate optimal estimation and systems identification
methods using the noisy measurement data. The methodology developed in this
research is validated using novel time series metagenomic data provided by the
project's life science collaborators.