* 1718738
* RI: Small: Multi-View Latent Class Discovery and Prediction with a Streamlined Analytics Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jinbo Bi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Discovering latent subgroups in a sample is an important problem in many
scientific disciplines. Social scientists identify subgroups within a population
based on behavioral patterns to examine differential effects of social status.
Engineers recognize malfunctions of a manufacturing system based on performance
measures to detect design defects. Physicians define subtypes of a disorder on
the basis of clinical symptoms to identify associated genetic risk factors. This
kind of problem involves two sets of variables: a set of descriptors describing
the issue (e.g., behavioral patterns, or symptoms) and a set of moderators or
predictors (e.g., social status, or genetic factors). The ability to accurately
predict the latent classes (e.g., disease subtypes) from predictors (e.g.,
genetic risk) in the absence of observed descriptors (e.g., before symptoms are
developed) will advance many of these disciplines. This project aims to develop
an effective and efficient platform of machine learning algorithms to solve this
problem. The team will effectively integrate research and teaching to engage
students into the proposed study. Validated methods and software will be broadly
disseminated through the project web repository and scientific
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the latent class
discovery and prediction problem by deriving novel and efficient approaches,
including multi-view co-clustering, multi-view subspace clustering, multi-
objective optimization of co-training, and multi-modal deep learning methods.
Parallel and distributed algorithms will be developed to implement and scale up
these methods. A streamlined analytics platform will be constructed to maximize
the utility of the proposed approaches in real-world applications. The proposed
solutions will be evaluated in the analysis of large-scale sensory and
behavioral data. By collaborating with domain experts, the project will (1)
identify risk factors for problematic human behaviors such as binge drinking;
and (2) locate the sensory features most discriminative of gait abnormalities
due to neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease or stroke.