* 1718533
* AF: Small: New Algorithmic Primitives for Directed Graphs: Sparsification and Preconditioning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Many real-life problems arising from social networks, transportation, image
processing, resource assignment and other domains use graphs as a fundamental
underlying structure for modeling and solving problems. Graphs and networks are
widely used formats for representing data via edges that describe pairs of
related objects. There is a growing need for efficient graph algorithms due to
the abundance of large graphs in many of these domains. This project will study
two important tools in the development of efficient graph algorithms:
sparsification, which removes edges while preserving the overall structure of
the graph, and preconditioned iterative methods, which improve the qualities of
solutions. It will also support the development of courses that incorporate
experimental aspects motivated by data science, the training of research-
oriented students, and outreach activities based on algorithmic problem
solving.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to extend key
primitives for efficient algorithms on undirected graphs to directed graphs.
Recent works hinted that two important tools for designing provably efficient
algorithms on undirected graphs, sparsification and preconditioning, can be
generalized to directed graphs when used in conjunction with each other.
Studying these routines together enables a greater range of algorithmic
flexibility: the construction of approximate graphs now only need to preserve
solutions relevant to the convergence of the other loop, instead of for all
possible inputs. The project will focus on extending this interplay between
sparsification and preconditioning through better understanding of the
underlying tools, iterative methods and concentration bounds. Progress on these
tools can in turn lead to improvements on fundamental problems in graph
algorithms such as computing directed random walks, finding maximum matchings on
dense bipartite graphs, and maintaining large matchings on dynamically changing
graphs.