* 1718116
* SaTC: TTP: Small: Collaborative: Privacy-Aware Wearable-Assisted Continous Authentication Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Selcuk Uluagac, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2020
* USD 357,200.00

The login process for a mobile or desktop device does not guarantee that the
person using it is necessarily the intended user. If one is logged in for a long
period of time, the user's identity should be periodically re-verified
throughout the session without impacting their experience, something that is not
easily achievable with existing login and authentication systems. Hence,
continuous authentication, which re-verifies the user without interrupting their
browsing session, is essential. However, authentication in such settings is
highly intrusive and may expose users' sensitive information to third parties.
To address these concerns, this project develops a novel privacy-aware wearable-
assisted continuous authentication (WACA) framework. User specific data is
acquired through built-in sensors on a wearable device. The user data is goes
through privacy-preserving operations throughout the authentication process.
This login procedure can be applied to a wide variety of existing enterprise
authentication systems such as university campuses, corporate Information
Technology divisions, and government agencies. Prototype deployments at Florida
International University (FIU) and Florida Atlantic University (FAU), both of
which serve large and diverse student populations, provide valuable feedback for
future improvements. Continuous authentication and digital privacy are timely
and relevant topics in today's Internet-centric always-on society.

This project exploits the ubiquitous nature of sensor-based wearables by
designing an innovative usable continuous authentication mechanism. By
leveraging the expertise of the project team on authentication, privacy-
preservation, and machine learning, this project addresses the following
problems: 1) Investigation of novel sensory features on wearable smartwatches
and identification of an optimal subset of these features along with distance
measures and machine-learning algorithms to strike the balance between accuracy
and speed; 2) Discovery of novel privacy-preserving mechanisms based on secure
noise-tolerant template generation and comparison techniques, multi-party
computation, and homomorphic encryption; 3) Trade-offs between privacy and
performance to optimize the scheme in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and
security; 4) Security of sensor-based keystroke dynamics against some common
attacks such as simple zero-effort, imitation, and more complex statistical
attacks including, but not limited to, classical keyboard-only keystroke
dynamics attacks; and 5) Development, testing, and deployment of the proposed
framework with a rich set of users, devices, and usage context in a prototype
system. The success of the WACA project will contribute to the growth of
knowledge in privacy and authentication domains and to societal understanding of
these matters.