* 1718377
* SHF: Small: RUI: Before, during, and after requirements elicitation interviews: a comprehensive support for improving the quality of requirements
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Paola Spoletini, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,940.00

Requirements engineering is the set of activities concerned with determining and
communicating the expectations for a new or modified product, and the contexts
in which it will be used. Requirements elicitation, i.e., the practice of
collecting these features, called requirements, is the first of these activities
and is recognized as a critical and difficult stage in the development of
software systems. Among the available elicitation techniques, interviews with
stakeholders are the most commonly used in practice. Normally, they involve two
actors: a customer and a requirements analyst; and their goal is to allow the
knowledge transfer from the first to the second one so that the analyst can
collect precise, correct, and complete requirements. The importance of
interviews is widely recognized and many of the factors that might affect the
knowledge transfer in interviews have been analyzed. However, a comprehensive
approach to improve the effectiveness and the quality of requirements
elicitation interviews has not been studied yet. This research aims at filling
this gap by providing a set of novel techniques and tools to support the analyst
before, during, and after the interview.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "before
support" is concretized in developing a training for students and inexperienced
analysts to teach them, with a hands-on approach, how to perform interviews, how
to avoid the most common mistakes, and how to recognize ambiguous situations and
exploit them to discover hidden knowledge. This part of the research includes
also the creation of a course for undergraduate students to allow them to better
develop their skills as analysts. The "during support" is a tool-based approach
which uses biofeedback and voice analysis to help the analyst during the
interview in identifying the increasing level of frustration in the customer,
which might cause mistrust in the analyst. Finally, the "after support" consists
of a protocol that uses an external observer to analyze recorded interviews to
extract additional knowledge from them and possibly to identify additional
common mistakes. This research has the potential to dramatically improve the
requirements elicitation process, and consequently the software development
process. This can lead to better software, thus benefiting the large segment of
the population that uses and relies on software.