* 1719950
* Building a Community of Science Teacher Educators to Prepare Novices for Ambitious Science Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Amelia Gotwals, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2020
* USD 98,447.00

There is a growing consensus among science teacher educators of a need for a
shared, research-based vision of accomplished instructional practice, and for
teacher education pedagogies that can effectively prepare preservice science
teachers to support the science learning of students from all backgrounds. This
conference will bring together a group of teacher educators to focus on
preservice teacher education and a shared vision of instruction called ambitious
science teaching. This conference is a critical first step toward building a
community of teacher educators who can collectively share and refine strategies,
tools, and practices for preparing preservice science teachers for ambitious
science teaching. The conference has two goals. The first goal is to develop a
shared vision and language about effective pedagogy of science teacher
preparation, focusing on ambitious science teaching and practice-based
approaches to science teacher preparation. The second goal is to initiate a
professional community that can generate, test, revise, and disseminate a set of
resources (curriculum materials, tools, videos, models of teacher educator
pedagogies, etc.) to support teacher educators. The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are immediate and long-term broader impacts
that will result from this conference. One immediate impact is that this
conference will set forth an actionable research agenda for the participants and
the field to take up around ambitious science teaching and practice-based
teacher education. Such an agenda will help shape new work, involving
institutional collaborations,teacher preparation programs, and national
organizations. Such an outcome has the potential to immediately impact the work
of the conference participants and their own teacher preparation programs. In
the long-term, this conference provides an opportunity for the participants to
consider how to use ambitious science teaching to address issues of equity and
social justice in science education and schools. In addition, the broader
impacts of this conference will be to spread a vision of science teaching and
practice-based teacher preparation in which students' ideas and experiences are
the raw material of teachers' work.