* 1719271
* Collaborative Research: Continuation of the Dark Matter Search with XENON1T at LNGS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Rafael Lang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2021
* USD 767,600.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. This award supports the US groups involved in the
XENON1T dark matter search program at the INFN Gran Sasso National Laboratory
(LNGS) underground laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XENON project continues
to captivate the imagination of the public. This is evidenced, for example, by
several TV shows such as "The Big Bang Theory", which on several occasions
featured XENON plots and results. Public interest in science is encouraged
through talks and outreach activities. XENON1T will play a significant role in
solving the dark matter puzzle, by either detecting WIMPs, or putting them under
immense pressure as viable dark matter candidates. In addressing this
fundamental physics problem, these awards will engage many undergraduate and
graduate students as well as post-doctoral researchers, exposing them to a
variety of subjects in physics and cosmology, and training them in state-of-the-
art technologies, thus preparing to become future leaders in the field. Finally,
the instrumentation and techniques used in XENON are relevant to a wide range of
applications, from areas in homeland security and medical imaging, to the
analysis and statistical treatment of large data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program for the next four years will focus on the continued operation of the
XENON1T experiment and its science data analysis. The international XENON
Collaboration of 130 scientists continues to be led by the PI at Columbia
University with key roles served by US members both in the management of the
experiment and its scientific program. XENON1T uses the largest liquid xenon
time projection chamber (TPC) built to-date, with 2 tonnes active Xe target, and
the highest sensitivity to dark matter Weakly Interacting Massive Particles
(WIMPs), at the level of 2 Ã— 10^-47 cm^2 for 40 GeV WIMPs. With funding of this
proposal, the US will remain in the lead of the direct search for dark matter
well beyond the end of the decade.