* 1719249
* Collaborative Research:  The Cuban landscape, quantifying the effects of industrialized agriculture followed by country-wide soil conservation using sediment-associated isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/28/2023
* USD 94,771.00

To minimize the detrimental effects of deforestation and intensive, mechanized
agriculture, conservation agricultural practices are often employed. Although
these lower-impact practices have been implemented around the world, results
have rarely been quantified at a landscape scale. Cuba is a perfect location to
test these effects because 30 years of industrial, mechanized monoculture were
followed by 25 years of necessity-driven, small-scale, organic agriculture after
the collapse of the former Soviet Union. This project will document the effects
of the conversion to organic agriculture and provide important data to inform
soil conservation studies. Through this project, one Masters student, two upper-
level undergraduate students, and four lower-level undergraduate students will
be trained in geoscience research and learn about sustainable agricultural
practices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has two research goals. 1) It
will quantify the effects of wide-spread changes in agricultural land use from
conventional, mechanized monoculture to small-scale organic farming. This
project will use chemical tracers in river sand to measure long-term erosion
rates of the surrounding landscape and will compare those erosion rates to
published data measuring short-term erosion rates. In addition, researchers will
trace the changing depth of erosion during the transition from industrial to
organic agriculture using other different chemical tracers. 2) The project will
develop new techniques for measuring erosion rates in rock types currently not
easily studied, thus expanding areas of the world where erosion rates can be
measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Geomorphology and
Land-use Dynamics Program and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.