* 1719694
* Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations: Algorithms, Analysis, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Douglas Arnold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Much of modern technology is dependent on fast and accurate computer simulation
of physical phenomena. For example, computer simulations enable the development
of high performance vehicles, medical devices, geophysical monitoring and
prediction, and countless other applications on which the health and welfare of
our society depend. Once such a physical system is modeled by a system of
mathematical equations, successful simulation depends not only on powerful
computer hardware but also on mathematical algorithms that can harness the
computer's high speed number-crunching to obtain accurate solutions of model's
equations. While effective simulation algorithms exist for many important
physical systems, there remain many important applications for which fast and
reliable algorithms do not yet exist. Moreover, it is crucial to develop not
only the algorithms, but a robust and rigorous understanding of their
performance, in order to be able to assess and certify their accuracy and
delineate their limitations. This project will develop, improve, and validate
simulation algorithms for two important and challenging classes of physical
phenomena. The first concerns the propagation of waves through complex and
disordered media, such as arises on tiny scales when electrical signals travel
through semiconductors, on massive scales when seismic waves travel through the
earth, and in many other relevant regimes. The second application area is in the
burgeoning field of gravitational wave astronomy, made possible by the recent
detection of gravitational waves from a black hole collision, and highly
dependent on numerical simulation of Einstein's equations of general
relativity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the algorithms used
to simulate complex physical phenomena modeled by partial differential
equations. A key focus of effort will be on the propagation of waves through
complex media, as, for example, the conduction of electrons in a semiconductor
with impurities. This work will study the remarkable effect known as
localization of eigenfunctions, first discovered over 50 years ago in Nobel
prize winning research, and with major ramifications for many systems involving
wave propagation. Until now, the understanding needed to accurately predict and
control localization was lacking, but recent theoretical advances bring it
within reach. A major goal of the research will be fast accurate prediction of
localization from inexpensive processing of the media. This will then open the
way for control of localization: the design of media with desired properties for
applications. The second main direction concerns the simulation of Einstein's
equations of general relativity. The goal will be to develop structure-
preserving finite element methods for the equations, with the potential to
greatly improve accuracy, efficiency, and robustness of simulations of general
relativity. The work will focus on two types of approaches. First will be
methods related to the Regge calculus introduced over 50 yeas ago as a discrete
analogue of general relativity, overcoming the low accuracy of Regge calculus by
developing a family of high order Regge elements and attacking the instabilities
encountered, by using a 3+1 decomposition to separate time-like from space-like
behavior. The second approach will be based on a system known as the Einstein-
Bianchi equations, which hold the potential for leveraging advances in the
numerical simulation of electromagnetic systems for the benefit of numerical
relativity.