* 1719031
* PFI:BIC: iWork, a Modular Multi-Sensing Adaptive Robot-Based Service for Vocational Assessment, Personalized Worker Training and Rehabilitation.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Morris Bell, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,031,638.00

Automation, foreign competition, and the increasing use of robots replacing
human jobs, stress the need for a major shift in vocational training practices
to training for intelligent manufacturing environments, so-called "Industry
4.0". In particular, vocational safety training using the latest robot and other
technologies is imperative, as thousands of workers lose their job or die on the
job each year due to accidents, unforeseen injuries, and lack of appropriate
assessment and training. The objective of this Partnerships for Innovation:
Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project is to develop iWork, a smart
robot-based vocational assessment and intervention system to assess the
physical, cognitive and collaboration skills of an industry worker while he/she
performs a manufacturing tasks in a simulated industry setting and collaborating
with a robot to do the task. The aim is to transform traditional vocational
training and rehabilitation practices to an evidence-based and personalized
system that can be used to (re)train, retain, and prepare workers for robotic
factories of the future. The need for personalized vocational training,
rehabilitation and accurate job-matching is essential to ensuring a strong
manufacturing sector, vital to America's economic development and ability to
innovate. The iWork service is "smart" because it can adjust and adapt to the
individual's abilities as it assesses him/her and help decide on the type of
tasks needed to test and train, based on the job's complexity, difficulty or
familiarity to the worker. The iWork system integrates human expert knowledge to
overcome or compensate for detected worker constraints. &lt;br/&gt;Research has
shown that robot trainers can increase motivation and sustain interest, increase
compliance and learning, and provide training for specific and individual needs.
The iWork system aims to assess and train both the human and the work-assistive
robot, as they collaborate on a manufacturing job. The projected outcome is low-
cost vocational training solutions that can have substantial economic and
societal benefits to diverse economic sectors. Most importantly, if successful,
projected outcomes could impact how millions of persons seeking a manufacturing
job are trained, including those facing a type of learning, physical or aging
disability. The system's mobile, low cost methods accelerate recognizing a
worker's specific needs and improve the ability of the vocational expert to make
correlations between cognitive and physical assessments, thus empowering
traditional practices with user-centric targeted training methods. In addition,
the project's robot-based emphasis on safety and risk assessment, can reduce
liability costs and productivity setbacks faced by industry, due to
manufacturing accidents. &lt;br/&gt;The iWork system uses computational methods
in reinforcement (machine) learning, data mining, collaborative filtering and
human robot interaction to collect and analyze multi-sensing worker data during
a manufacturing human-robot collaboration simulation. Data collected and
analyzed come from sensors, wearables, and explicit user feedback measuring
worker movements, eye gazes, errors made, performance delays, human-robot
interactions, physiological metrics, and others, depending on the task. The
system has a closed loop architecture composed of four phases: assessment,
recommendation, intervention (or adjustment), and evaluation, with a human
expert in the loop. The system generates recommendations for personalized
interventions to the expert, at different loop intervals. Use of the latest
developments in sensing technologies, robotics and intelligent communications,
assess the ability to enhance the intelligence of a robot co-worker with more
human-like learning and collaboration abilities to support the human in
achieving a task. The system is modular and customizable to a particular
manufacturing task, domain or worker robot. Two types of robots are used,
socially assistive robots that provide non-contact user assistance through
feedback and physically assistive robots that provide cognitive, physical and
collaboration skill training. To predict risks of injury due to inattention,
age, vision, or physical and mental issues, motion analysis and kinematics
experiments are conducted to determine the type of safety training needed, to
assess how well a human interacts with a collaborative robot, and how best to
train the robot to help the human overcome identified physical and other
deficiencies in performing a given task. The project integrates three main areas
of expertise, engineered service system design, where assistive robots interact
with and train each other to collaborate; computing, sensing, and information
technologies, where machine learning, data mining and recommender algorithms are
used to identify behavioral patterns of interest, and recommend targeted
interventions; and human factors and cognitive engineering that deploy methods
from the team's expertise in workplace assessment, personalized psychiatric
intervention, and evaluation methods of vocational satisfaction, work habits,
work quality, etc., as they relate to job preparation and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;The project has an interdisciplinary team of experts from
two collaborating universities, University of Texas Arlington (UTA) and Yale
University, representing several fields, including human factors, psychology,
computing, and industrial organization. The project deploys two primary industry
partners, SoftBank Robotics (San Francisco, CA) manufacturer of humanoid service
robots, and InteraXon (Canada), producing mobile EEG devices, who provides
hardware, software and know-how to enhance iWork's functionality in cognitive
activity monitoring. The broader context partners include, C8Sciences (USA),
Assistive Technology Resources (USA), Barrett Technologies Inc. (USA), and the
Dallas Veteran Affairs Research Corp. (USA).