* 1719379
* Targeted Infusion Project: A MakerLab at Delaware State University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Gabriel Gwanmesia, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 09/30/2020
* USD 399,672.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Delaware State University
(DSU) aims to engage undergraduate students in energy-related interdisciplinary
materials science projects in the context of a MakerLab. The project will
provide materials chemistry training to chemistry undergraduate students,
through annual internships and through undergraduate research projects. The
intervention is centered on engaging students traditionally underrepresented and
underserved in STEM with the focus of increasing recruitment, retention,
graduation rates and job placement in STEM-related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to implement
experiential learning activities in the undergraduate chemistry program by
enhancing the integration of education and research in the unique framework of a
MakerLab. The specific objectives are to 1) develop MakerLab starter kits
towards guiding/facilitating hands-on learning in materials science relevant to
energy applications, 2) implement MakerLab learning experiences by offering
access to year-round mini-projects integrated as junior research in the
undergraduate curriculum, 3) develop curricular enhancements to include lecture
and laboratory modules in chemistry courses that apply to the dual offered
courses (DSU and Early College High School at DSU) in the Department of
Chemistry, 4) organize outreach activities targeted to engage general public
awareness of new energy technologies, and 5) disseminate the results of the
project by i) promoting adoption of educational materials by peer universities,
ii) presenting results to the American Chemical Society Education division
symposia, and iii) publishing outcomes of the interventions in peer-reviewed
journals. The accomplishment of the project will enhance the institution's
ability to create challenging instructional programs.