* 1719578
* Generalized Matrix Functions: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Michele Benzi, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,016.00

In recent years the scientific enterprise, like daily existence, has been
greatly affected by the availability of new technologies that have enabled the
collection of an unprecedented amount of data. This continuous creation of
enormous amounts of raw digital information demands new, efficient ways to
extract useful content and filter out the noise inherent in any data-gathering
process. Mathematical and computational techniques of data analysis offer
powerful tools that can be brought to bear, but new challenges arise on a daily
basis. This requires the constant refinement and improvement of existing
techniques, as well as the development of new ones. This research project aims
to produce a new body of mathematical knowledge and new computational techniques
that will enhance the ability to tackle challenges arising from data-intensive
fields of science and engineering including computer vision, compressed sensing,
control, and others. Quantitative finance, network analysis and synthesis, and
medical imaging are other areas where the research can be expected to have an
impact. The principal investigator will study a class of mathematical objects
known as generalized matrix functions and aims to exploit the resulting
knowledge to develop new, efficient computer methods for data analysis. Training
of a PhD student in computational mathematics is also an integral part of the
project.

The principal investigator aims to develop the theory of generalized matrix
functions, a type of matrix function based on the singular value decomposition
of a (possibly rectangular) matrix. The resulting theory is intended to be the
basis for the development of numerical methods for the efficient approximate
evaluation of such matrix functions. The focus will be primarily on large-scale
problems for which the (full) singular value decomposition cannot be computed.
Techniques based on sparsity and low-rank approximations will be combined with
Krylov-type methods (especially the Lanczos and Golub--Kahan algorithms) to
design fast algorithms for solving a variety of problems involving generalized
matrix functions. The algorithms will be applied to problems such as low-rank
matrix optimization, the regularization of discrete inverse problems, and the
analysis of directed networks. As a by-product of this research, new algorithms
for the computation of standard matrix functions where the matrix argument is
only available in factored form will be derived and analyzed. This research
represents a new direction in numerical linear algebra and is expected to
produce useful numerical tools for the solution of a variety of problems in data
science and optimization.