* 1719241
* AWARE-EDP: Coaching and professional development to advance STEM innovation ideas and funding of underrepresented entrepreneurs and scientists
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Damian Saccocio, Management Leadership for Tomorrow
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 208,675.00

The broader impact of the Accelerating Women and underRepresented Entrepreneurs
(AWARE) Entrepreneurship Development Program (EDP) project is to increase the
participation of entrepreneurs and scientists from underrepresented communities
(African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos, Native Americans and women) in STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) entrepreneurship. The
particular emphasis of this project is to broaden the participation of
underrepresented entrepreneurs and scientists in federal innovation research and
development programs, specifically the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
and Partnership for Innovation (PIF) programs. These programs provide funding
for scientists and entrepreneurs to develop advanced innovations that have a
high level of uncertainty and risk of not resulting in a desired prototype or
technological discovery. This project will match underrepresented minorities
with resources and individuals that have business and scientific expertise to 1)
provide coaching and entrepreneurship training 2) advance the development of
ideas for STEM innovations and 3) understand and prepare innovators for the
product development stage prior to applying for SBIR or PFI. The project is
being disseminated through Management Leadership for Tomorrow (MLT), a national
nonprofit that has provided career coaching and professional development
training to over 5,000 African American, Hispanic/Latino, and Native American
program participants over 15 years to diversify the talent pipelines of more
than 100 corporations and social sector organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will address barriers of entrepreneurs and scientists from
underrepresented backgrounds by providing coaching and pathways to funding for
commercializing innovative scientific and technical ideas. Today less than 1% of
venture capital-backed entrepreneurs are underrepresented minorities, and
ventures with all-Black founding teams received 30-60% of the funding amount
acquired by all-White and all Asian venture capital-backed teams. Lack of access
to capital and networks have been documented as limiting factors for
entrepreneurs, with these factors magnified for entrepreneurs from
underrepresented backgrounds. The AWARE EDP program provides opportunities to
educate scientists and entrepreneurs through mentorship and coaching on how to
develop proof of concepts, test the strength and viability of ideas through
informational interviews, understand strategies for success in the tech industry
through boot camps with tech partners, and create an action plan for acquiring
seed funding. The four goals of this program are the following: 1) provide an
entrepreneurship training playbook and coaching to help underrepresented
entrepreneurs and scientists create technical innovations; 2) provide
participants with mentorship and coaching to develop scientific and technology-
based products and services; 3) support SBIR/PFI grant applications and awards
of program participants through workshops with program officers and guidance in
the application process; and 4) provide access to resources for focus groups,
prototype testing, capital introduction and other support services for
entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.