* 1719463
* I-Corps: Diagnostic Tool and Mechanism for Evaluating Performance and Productivity
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Charlene Czerniak, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
application opportunities for video-based performance evaluation. Performance
evaluation plays a significant role in any setting where the quality of
performing specific actions is important to the desired outcome. Businesses and
organizations use evaluation to assess employee/individual performance.
Performance evaluations are commonly a written assessment completed by a
superior or expert at the time the actions occur. This I-Corps project will
support the discovery and understanding of how this video-based technology could
lead to improvements in existing evaluation practices. The technology has the
potential to advance the use of video data for evaluation, further the design
and development of expert frameworks for evaluation and evolve training
development for businesses and organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will explore the potential demand for a video-based performance
evaluation tool. This technology allows a user to observe and evaluate an
individual's performance using recorded video. The video is compared to best
practices resulting in an evaluation of the performance. The results are used to
identify and target intervention/training with the goal of improved performance.
The innovation is designed to improve performance evaluation. The effects of
this technology have been demonstrated through research and development of a
performance evaluation instrument for teacher education that successfully
evaluates performance and informs the development of interventions for further
improvement.