* 1719147
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: The Web Ad Technology Arms Race: Measurement, Analysis, and Countermeasures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zhiyun Qian, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Online advertising plays a critical role in allowing a vast majority of web
content to be offered free of charge to users, with the implicit quid pro quo
agreement that users agree to watch targeted ads to support these "free"
services. Unfortunately, the economic magnetism of online advertising has made
it an attractive target for various types of abuses. For instance, online
advertising incentivizes the widespread tracking of users across websites
raising privacy and surveillance concerns. Malvertising is another serious
security threat to users. As a result, ad-blockers are gaining popularity
because they not only provide a clean browsing experience but also protect user
security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research is motivated by the
observation that websites are now starting an arms race to fight against ad-
blockers that cause significant revenue loss to the publishers. Publishers use
anti ad-blockers to detect the presence of ad-blockers and react in certain ways
(e.g., reminding users to turn off ad-blockers). Specifically, the research will
be primarily focused on two fronts: (1) Measuring the arms race between ad-
blockers and anti ad-blockers, e.g., developing techniques to detect anti ad-
blockers. (2) Understanding the technological means of anti ad-blockers and
possible countermeasures that may follow on the ad-blocker side. The proposed
research will inform industry stakeholders and policymakers.