* 1719406
* CTEQ Schools on QCD Analysis and Phenomenology at the University of Pittsburgh; July, 2017
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Joey Huston, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides funding for the 2017, 2018, and 2019 Coordinated
Theoretical-Experimental Project on QCD (CTEQ) Summer Schools, under the
direction of Professor Joey Huston at Michigan State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics of elementary particles probes the
deepest structure of matter. Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) governs the strong
interactions of elementary particles, and its study at high energies is
increasingly important for both elementary particle and nuclear physics. CTEQ is
a large, multi-institution collaboration dedicated to understanding the effects
of the strong interaction on phenomenological processes at particle colliders.
These effects are crucial for extracting results from most collider experiments.
Since 1992, the CTEQ collaboration has hosted an annual CTEQ Summer School.
These research meetings have played an important role in elementary particle and
nuclear physics by promoting the knowledge of QCD and its applications to
precision measurements at colliders as well as new physics searches. Over 1000
physicists have attended the CTEQ meetings, each of which consists of nine days
of presentations and discussion with 50-100 junior physicists in attendance. The
impact of the CTEQ meetings on the field is profound, and many collaborations
have been generated by this close interaction. Support for this series of
meetings thus serves the national interest by promoting basic science and
helping to train the next generation of scientists working in this field. The
interactive nature of these meetings also encourages the skills necessary for
communicating the excitement and results of fundamental physics to the wider
public.