* 1719165
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Studying Internet Interconnections in the Era of Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Reza Rejaie, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2021
* USD 412,635.00

Maps of the interconnections between pairs of networks or Autonomous Systems
(ASes), such as Internet providers, are important to a wide range of parties,
such as network researchers and network operators, whose activities depend on an
accurate view of the Internet and its interconnections. Systematically mapping
these interconnections is known to be a notoriously difficult problem. Here, the
term 'mapping' refers to first inferring the presence and type of
interconnections (e.g., public vs. private peering) and then geolocating them to
the colocation facility where the interconnections are provided and utilized.
Recently, the introduction of and growing demand for "virtual private
interconnections" (VPIs) has been particularly disruptive for any such mapping
efforts. VPIs are a new interconnection service that is offered at newly
emerging infrastructures called "cloud exchanges" that some of the major
colocation facility providers (e.g., Equinix and CoreSite) have started to
operate in their major markets. By offering VPIs, these cloud exchanges enable
traditional players (e.g., networks operating with an AS number) as well as non-
traditional players (e.g., enterprises that do not own an AS number) to connect
to any cloud provider that is present at the exchange, thereby enabling cloud-
service-related traffic to bypass the public Internet. Moreover, in contrast to
the traditional interconnection options, VPIs can be provisioned in real-time
via the use of web-based portals. The ability of a large pool of non-traditional
Internet players to establish interconnections in the form of VPIs and the
increasingly dynamic nature of this type of interconnection have made the
systematic mapping of today's Internet interconnections even more challenging.
Not only are the existing techniques for mapping Internet interconnections
incapable of detecting VPIs, but even when applied to the traditional types of
interconnections, their applicability and accuracy remain largely unknown.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As more networks utilize cloud services, the concurrent
use of traditional interconnections and cloud-exchange-provided VPIs is becoming
more common and requires a new approach for discovering this 'hybrid'
connectivity, studying its dynamics, and providing a first-of-its-kind
assessment of the type of 'service-to-service' connectivity that is fueled by
the 'cloudification' of today's Internet. The main goal of this research project
is to develop such a new approach and design and rigorously evaluate the
resulting suite of new techniques and open-source tools for inferring and
geolocating interconnections in general, and VPIs at both cloud exchanges and
certain IXPs (Internet eXchange Points), in particular. An online portal that
offers useful visualization capabilities and provides access to a large archive
of geo-aware interconnection maps will be developed as part of this project. The
project will also enable other research groups to contribute to this important
mapping effort, encourage the cross-validation of results by different research
groups, and ultimately produce more accurate maps of the Internet's
interconnections that can be expected to offer unique insights into new ways of
detecting potential Internet vulnerabilities and performance bottlenecks. The
project is complemented by an education and outreach plan that includes (i) the
development of a curriculum for a new course and graduate level seminars, (ii)
the participation of Masters level and undergraduate students in the proposed
work (e.g., measurement, visualization), and (iii) the organization of a K-12
outreach activity where CS students volunteer to teach basic programming
concepts to students at local elementary, middle, and high schools as part of
after-school programs.