* 1719454
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhancing STEM Recruitment, Retention and Engagement by Establishing the Shaw University Center for Computer Science Living, Learning and Research
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Kimberly Raiford, Shaw University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2022
* USD 399,953.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate
programs and/or careers. The project at Shaw University addresses this goal as
it seeks to enhance undergraduate computer science education by implementing and
researching innovative, yet evidence-based strategies in the departments of
biology, computer science, and mathematics. The project is guided by an on-going
evaluation with a strong plan for formative and summative
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement and study four
evidenced-based strategies to improve retention in computer science: social
support within affinity groups; an enhanced first year curriculum; inquiry-based
learning; and exposure to research and faculty mentoring. To provide social
support, all incoming computer science majors will be grouped into a cohort-
based affinity group and housed together. The first year curriculum in biology,
computer science and mathematics for each incoming freshman computer science
cohort will be enhanced and revised. Courses will incorporate inquiry based
learning, programming, real-world data analysis and the applied use of
technology. More advanced computer science students will be involved in research
with faculty. This project will serve as a case study on how to implement
evidence-based teaching methods in the setting of this institution, which can
then serve as a model at other institutions of similar mission and size.