* 1719418
* Collaborative Research:   Ecosystem Evolution and Sustainability of Nutrient Enriched Coastal Saltmarshes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jennifer Bowen, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Schade
* 02/28/2018
* USD 46,864.00

Overview: Salt marshes provide a broad suite of critical ecosystem services but
also face multiple anthropogenic threats including nutrient enrichment and
accelerated sea-level rise. Complex interactions between primary production,
decomposition, sedimentation, and sea level rise determine the tipping point
relative to the rate of sea-level rise beyond which the marsh converted to open
water. Nitrate - the dominant form of coastal N-enrichment - acts as both a
powerful electron acceptor stimulating microbial decomposition and as a
fertilizer stimulating plant growth with the potential to transform saltmarshes
through interactive feedbacks in key plant and microbial processes, potentially
lowering the tipping point relative to sea-level rise. It is urgent that we
understand the impacts of coastal enrichment on saltmarshes in part because of
their globally rapid loss, and in part because salt marshes have become the
focus of large-scale restoration strategies costing millions to billions of
dollars to serve as storm buffers for coastal cities and as "blue" carbon pools
to mitigate climate change. The TIDE saltmarsh experiment is a unique ecosystem-
scale test of how nutrient enrichment affects ecosystem structure, function, and
long-term sustainability. Contrary to well-accepted saltmarsh models, TIDE has
shown that nutrients can drive saltmarsh loss; however, important questions
about causality, and whether geomorphic and ecosystem function will continue to
change or reach a new landscape equilibrium with nutrient loading, remain
unanswered. Given the ongoing changes observed the project to date the PI will
continue the experiment for a total of 13 years to address: (1) long-term
landscape evolution (autocatalytic or self-limiting?), (2) plant mechanisms (Is
environmental filtering selecting for plants with lower belowground biomass that
are less flood tolerant?); (3) microbial mechanisms (Does NO3- remove resource
limitation on the microbes and disproportionately stimulate creek bank
denitrifiers/decomposers?); and (4) the consequences for ecosystem function
(With loss of creek edge marsh, do saltmarshes retain less N?). The
investigators will use a combination of whole-ecosystem experimental
manipulations, genetic approaches, common garden experiments, and enriched
15N-NO3 - additions and delta 15N values in ecosystem components to understand
mechanisms underlying ecosystem geomorphic and N cycle changes. This project
incorporates new researchers to address questions of geomorphologic change,
plant and microbial genetics, gene expression, whole-system ecosystem nutrient
cycling, and denitrification.

Intellectual Merit: This interdisciplinary project involving ecosystem, plant,
microbial, biogeochemical, and geological researchers will test fundamental
questions about controls on ecosystem structure and function and the long-term
sustainability of nutrient enriched wetlands. Many detritus-based wetland
ecosystems worldwide (boreal, tundra, salt- and fresh-water wetlands) are
unexpectedly crossing tipping points suggesting there is a need to re-assess our
theories and understanding on the nature and pace of their response to
perturbation. Developing a predictive understanding of the controls on tipping
points in natural ecosystems, and how these tipping points are altered by human
activities, represents a major challenge in ecosystem science.

Broader Impacts: The broader social impacts of this project lie in addressing a
globally important issue, coastal eutrophication. The educational impacts
include enhancing high school to graduate student interdisciplinary training
through a structured rotation among disciplines and hands-on field research. New
partnerships with minority serving institutions and a RUI women's college will
engage urban, underprivileged and minority students. A whole-ecosystem
experiment is supported as a living lab for education and research
infrastructure for the scientific community. The MBL's Science Journalism
Program and the Parker River National Wildlife Refuge will be used to showcase
the results to the public. Management outreach through workshops co-hosted with
EPA and the Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve will engage local,
state and federal managers.