* 1719625
* EAGER:   Biomanufacturing: Metabolic cell process engineering (MCPE)-based stirred-tank bioproduction of large quantities of human T cells
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Xiaoguang Liu, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,862.00

1645031-Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, cancer caused at least 0.5 million
deaths and 1.5 million new cases were diagnosed in the US. The adoptive transfer
of large numbers of tumor-infiltrating T cells or genetically engineered T cells
with cancer-targeting receptors has shown tremendous promise for eradicating
tumors in clinical trials. The existing methods to manufacture large quantities
of such human T cells, however, have severe limitations of low efficiency,
inconsistency and lack of sufficient quality control. This EAGER proposal aims
to develop a novel human T cell biomanufacturing platform for large-scale,
robust, and high-quality cellular production. The accomplishment of this study
will provide not only the proof-of-concept but also the ready-to-use
bioproduction platform for new means of T cell expansion for clinical immune
cancer therapy. The novel technology employed in the rational production process
engineering will also be able to provide guidelines and apply easily to the
manufacturing of other therapeutic cells. Whereas the results and knowledge
obtained in this study will be useful for both the biopharmaceutical industry
and academic research, all cancer patients may benefit from the products of this
research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this proposal is to
develop an entirely new, metabolic cell process engineering (MCPE)-based,
cellular biomanufacturing platform using stirred-tank bioreactor to produce
reliable and reproducible large quantities of human T cells for immune cancer
therapy, aiming to effectively produce more than 2,000 million T cells with high
quality. The traditional T cell biomanufacturing presents several weaknesses: 1)
low efficiency of mass transfer that often results in heterologous cellular
metabolism, cell viability and product quality; 2) ineffective process parameter
control that causes low robustness, reliability and scalability; and 3) lack of
critical quality attributes in the early and middle stages of process
development, limiting the application of quality by design. This project focuses
on developing an innovative stirred-tank-based cellular biomanufacturing
platform to produce reliable and reproducible large quantities of human T cells
(or CAR T cells) for immune cancer therapy. Supported by Design of Experiment
(DoE), proteomics and metabolomics will be applied to evaluate and determine the
key bioproduction process parameters (such as stirred-tank parameters, media,
supplements, etc.) to control T cell metabolism and cell growth. The oxygen
transfer coefficient-based scale-up strategy will be developed to guide large-
scale manufacturing of T cells, which will be validated using small- and medium-
size tank bioreactors with scale-up factor of 10. In addition, at multiple key
steps of the cellular bioproduction, the T cell quality control will be
established via monitoring and evaluating cellular density, viability, T cell
surface markers and functions. The existing T cell biomanufacturing in flask,
LifeCell bag or Wave bag is limited by the weaknesses of lot-to-lot variation,
heterologous product quality during scale-up, and low reproducibility. The
proposed approach, i.e. MCPE-based fed-batch T cell production in stirred-tank
bioreactor, that enables homogenous cell expansion, high cell density, high
viability and good product quality in large-scale T cell manufacturing would be
a major methodological advance for the field. Moreover, the systems biology
approach will help advance the knowledge of host cell protein expression and
intracellular metabolite profiling of human T cells under various culture
conditions. In addition, the liquid activators in this proposed strategy will
avoid heterologous suspension culture, improve cell growth efficiency, simplify
manufacturing operation and reduce production cost. The critical scale-up
factors learned from this application will guide future large-scale T cell
biomanufacturing. Finally, the quality control at multiple stages of the process
development will help identify potential product quality and process scale-up
pain points during T cell bioproduction. To the PI's best knowledge, this is the
first effort to rationally develop T cell bioproduction process via
understanding the interaction between cellular metabolism and process
parameters.