* 1719320
* 2017 Georgia International Topology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* David Gay, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2020
* USD 98,800.00

This NSF award provides partial support for the octennial Georgia International
Topology Conference, to be held at the University of Georgia from May 22 to June
2, 2017. Topology studies the mathematical properties of "spaces," from the
physical 3-dimensional space and 4-dimensional space-time in which we carry out
our daily lives, to much more abstract spaces such as the space of all possible
configurations of a robot or all possible solutions to an equation. This
conference will bring together about two hundred topologists from around the
world to share state of the art knowledge, hear talks from a select group of
internationally renowned experts on the most important research results of the
past eight years, and develop new collaborations. This conference has a history
of showcasing groundbreaking work and inspiring many generations of topologists,
and this year's iteration will continue that tradition. This grant will support
travel expenses for graduate students, early career researchers and
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the 2017 conference is to have the
most important results obtained during the last few years in geometric topology
and related geometry presented to a wide topological audience,including a large
number of students and recent PhD's, and to introduce young mathematicians to
the techniques underlying these results. The topics will highlight exciting new
developments including advances in hyperbolic three-manifolds, mapping class
groups, symplectic rigidity and flexibility, contact topology, and invariants of
knots, three-manifolds, and four-manifolds. Historically this meeting has
generated tremendous interest among graduate students and recent PhD's. Special
attention is given to inviting young researchers in topology to speak. The
combination of speakers and topics to be presented will offer students and fresh
Ph.D.s a great opportunity to listen to and interact with the leaders in the
subject as well as with successful mathematicians at the beginning of their
careers. To complement the research talks, a series of expository lectures are
scheduled that will introduce young mathematicians to the major themes of the
conference. Previous proceedings of the Georgia Topology Conference have been
among the best of any conference proceedings. Continuing with the tradition, all
of the speakers will be invited to submit articles and conference participants
will be enlisted to help review submitted articles for the proceedings.The
conference website is at:
https://research.franklin.uga.edu/topology/content/2017-georgia-international-
topology-conference