* 1719863
* Multi-Loop Amplitudes for Precision Physics at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Andreas von Manteuffel, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 209,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Andreas von Manteuffel at
Michigan State University.

At the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), the world's largest particle collider, beams
of protons are accelerated to highest energies and collided against each other.
A careful analysis of the particles produced in these collisions allows us to
improve our understanding of the fundamental constituents of matter and their
interactions at smaller distances than have ever been previously explored. In
his research, Professor von Manteuffel aims to enable theoretical predictions
for collider experiments with previously unattainable precision. This work is
essential for unambiguously identifying effects of new particles or unknown
forces. As a result, research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
understanding the physical laws of Nature and the discovery of new physical
mechanisms beyond our present knowledge. Located at the interface of theoretical
particle physics, applied mathematics and computational science, this project is
also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. The PI will involve
graduate students and postdocs in his research, thereby providing training to
junior physicists in analytical and computational methods.

More technically, Professor von Manteuffel will develop and apply new
computational methods for the evaluation of multi-loop scattering amplitudes and
integrals, aiming specifically at the evaluation of radiative corrections
relevant for experimentally observable phenomena. Explicit results will be
provided for key processes at the LHC, involving the Higgs boson, electroweak
gauge bosons, and the top quark.