* 1719540
* Automated Discovery of Content-in-Context Relationships from a Large Corpus of Arctic Social Science Data
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Peter Pulsifer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,947.00

This award is for an Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project research a potentially transformative approach to information management
and knowledge discovery. The research will develop an approach to searching
social science data (handwritten notes, analog and digital video, photos, and
audio records, maps, illustrations, etc.) without associated metadata. The
approach will be tested on a unique document collection generated from the
Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA), originally
funded by the National Science Foundation during the International Polar Year
2007-2008. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging inherent structures and boundary
conditions among embedded levels of granularity in a digital resource collection
(i.e., automated granularity), this project on Automated Discovery of Content-
in-Context Relationships from a Large Corpus of Arctic Social Science Data has
three objectives: (1) manage a document collection without metadata or
databases: (2) generate relational schema without metadata or databases; and (3)
analyze efficiencies and functionalities of automated granularity relative to
metadata and database solutions. Files in Portable Document Format (PDF), which
is a classic type of unstructured data, will be used to generate content-in-
context relationships (i.e, relational schema) objectively and simply from the
inherent structure of the documents.