* 1719780
* RUI:  Exploring Asymmetric Dark Universes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Moira Gresham, Whitman College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 119,573.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Moira Gresham at Whitman
College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astrophysical measurements indicate that most of
the matter in the Universe is composed of an unknown form of matter that we call
"dark matter". Observational evidence indicates that our current understanding
of elementary particles cannot account for it; most dark matter is not composed
of protons, neutrons, and electrons like the "normal matter" whose building
blocks we understand well. Uncovering the nature of dark matter will help us to
better understand the contents of the cosmos and how our galaxy and solar system
came to be. An understanding of the identity of dark matter may also help to
revolutionize our model of the building blocks of all matter. Research into the
nature of dark matter will thus advance the national interest by promoting the
progress of fundamental physical science. The road to understanding the nature
of dark matter will involve the synthesis of observations from a wide variety of
particle and astrophysics experiments. In order to derive meaning from
observations --- especially when they come in diverse forms --- it is critical
to understand the theoretical possibilities for dark matter and their associated
phenomenologies. In her research, Professor Gresham will investigate a
compelling class of possibilities for dark matter that are also related to the
currently unexplained fact that the vast majority of normal matter is in the
form of particles rather than an equal share of both particles and anti-
particles. Professor Gresham's research activities will also have significant
broader impacts. They will enhance undergraduate education through direct
involvement of undergraduates in her research and will increase her ability to
make exciting contemporary particle astrophysics and cosmology topics accessible
to undergraduates. Professor Gresham will also help to increase the
participation of women in physics through her mentoring of undergraduate women
and girls in the community. Finally, she will help to increase science literacy
in her rural community by engaging in science outreach to the public
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Gresham will
investigate the astrophysics and cosmology of dark-matter sectors with a
matter/anti-matter asymmetry mirroring the matter/anti-matter asymmetry in the
visible matter sector. A distinctive possibility within such asymmetric dark
matter (ADM) models is the clumping or collection of dark matter in other
astrophysical objects; by contrast, symmetric dark matter tends to annihilate
(particle with anti-particle) in such circumstances. Professor Gresham will
begin by investigating a class of ADM models in which the formation of bound
states of ADM may have rich implications for the formation of structures (e.g.,
galaxies and stars) in the universe. Comparison of theoretical models to a
diverse set of observations, including possibly observations of gravitational
waves, will be necessary.