* 1719868
* Workshop: Advancing Healthy Communities - the 2017 AEESP Meeting to be held on June 20-22, 2017 at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2017
* Nancy Love, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,999.00

1719868&lt;br/&gt;Lastoskie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biannual Association of
Environmental Engineering and Science Professors (AEESP) Research and Education
Conference is the flagship event of the organization for members to discuss
novel research and educational activities and to develop professional
competencies. The conference serves as a venue for exchange of information among
academics and practitioners, particularly relating to advancement of innovative
research and preparation of students for professional practice in environmental
engineering and science. This conference, which has the theme of "Advancing
Healthy Communities," is scheduled to be held on June 20-22, 2017, and will be
hosted on the campus of the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2017 AEESP meeting will be organized by a core council
composed of faculty members from the University of Michigan, the lead
institution, and five partnering universities (Michigan State University, Wayne
State University, Michigan Technological University, University of Toledo, and
University of Notre Dame). It is anticipated that 600 faculty, students, and
guests will attend the conference. As in previous AEESP meetings, topical
programming at the 2017 AEESP Research and Education Conference will address a
broad spectrum of environmental engineering and science themes, including
drinking water treatment; environmental microbiology for wastewater treatment;
management of aging water supply infrastructures; remediation of contaminated
soils and brownfields; community resilience to climate change; material and
energy recovery from waste streams; urban air quality; environmental education
in the developing world; integration of design into environmental engineering;
and ethics and risk communication on matters of public health. The conference
location and its theme of advancing healthy communities has particular relevance
in the recent aftermath of the drinking water crisis in Flint, Michigan. In
addition to technical programming themed on advances in water treatment
technologies and water supply infrastructure management, presentations
concerning ethics, education, and risk communication in relation to public
health will be a key component of the 2017 AESSP meeting. The AEESP meeting
offers a sizable cohort of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students
the opportunity to deliver oral and poster presentations on their research to
the environmental engineering and science academic community. Junior and
prospective faculty members attending the conference will benefit from workshops
on how to find a faculty position, apply for the NSF CAREER award, and achieve
success in their teaching and research activities. Scholarly advancements in
environmental research and education will be published in a special issue of the
journal Environmental Engineering Science. In summary, the 2017 AEESP Conference
will promote the broad dissemination of important research and education
achievements relating to the conference theme of "Advancing Healthy
Communities".