* 1719444
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Developing a Minor in Applied Mathematics at Savannah State University
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jonathan Lambright, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2022
* USD 399,972.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Savannah State University
(SSU) seeks to develop a new applied math minor and make curricular improvements
to upper level math courses that will strengthen the applied math focus. This
project is aimed at improving the quality of math teaching and learning in upper
level courses by offering the minor through an applied math, active learning
focus. By engaging and inspiring students, the minor will increase enrollment in
upper level math courses, and provide SSU STEM majors with the mathematical
problem-solving skills demanded in the increasingly data-driven 21st century job
market. The project is expected to strengthen the mathematical knowledge and
capabilities and increase retention, graduation, and entry into competitive STEM
jobs by minority applied math minors and other SSU
graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching project goal is to establish a
sustainable minor program in Applied Mathematics, and thereby increase
undergraduate STEM enrollment, retention, graduation and entry into STEM jobs
and graduate programs. The specific goals are to 1) increase interest and
enrollment in math fields, 2) strengthen math teaching and learning and develop
students' mathematical knowledge and problem solving capabilities, 3) strengthen
connections to STEM careers, and 4) strengthen pipelines from K-12 to college
math programs. The project will generate new knowledge and evidence on how an
applied math minor program which includes interdisciplinary problems and an
active learning approach will strengthen the mathematical problem solving skills
and competencies of underrepresented minority students and their qualifications
for competitive STEM jobs and graduate programs.