* 1719438
* Symmetries beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Michael Ratz, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 165,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Michael Ratz at the
University of California, Irvine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
aims at a better understanding of the fundamental constituents of matter. It
also aims to unravel the nature of the mysterious dark matter that makes up 80%
of the matter in the universe. The quest for the unification of all of the
fundamental forces and particles has triggered some of the most important
developments in physics. The aim of Professor Ratz's research is to make further
progress on the quest for unification. The PI will approach these longstanding
questions by using model-building techniques and by examining the experimental
consequences of these innovative models at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and
in underground experiments. As a result, research in this area advances the
national interest by promoting the progress of fundamental science. The broader
impacts of this research are to stimulate public interest in and appreciation
for upcoming results in particle physics. These efforts are complemented by
introducing undergraduate students to the frontiers of research in particle
physics through, e.g., freshman seminars. Moreover, the PI will engage in public
outreach in order to make this interesting field more accessible to the general
public. Particular emphasis will be given to effective science education in
undergraduate courses and promoting diversity in the graduate and undergraduate
physics program. In addition, the PI will contribute to the COSMOS summer course
for high-school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the PI will
study symmetries beyond the Standard Model of particle physics. These comprise,
apart from extra continuous gauged symmetries, discrete symmetries, which may
involve an outer automorphism of the Standard Model gauge group. The PI will
analyze the anomalies of such symmetries and explore their potential to solve
the flavor and CP puzzles of the Standard Model. The PI will also study the
extent to which such symmetries arise in potentially realistic string
compactifications.