* 1719263
* Belmont Forum-G8 Initiative Collaborative Research: XINGU - Integrating Land Use Planning and Water Governance in Amazonia
* GEO,RISE
* 09/23/2016,08/31/2017
* Linda Deegan, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 140,603.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 13-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum and the G8 countries Heads of Research Councils. The
Belmont Forum is a high level group of the world?s major and emerging funders of
global environmental change research and international science councils. It aims
to accelerate delivery of the international environmental research most urgently
needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing
international resources. The G8 Heads of Research Councils developed a funding
framework to support multilateral research projects that address global
challenges in ways that are beyond the capacity of national or bilateral
activities. Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This
approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support
excellent research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a
multinational approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in an inaugural call of the
International Opportunities Fund, the Belmont Forum and G8HORCs have provided
support for research projects that seek to deliver knowledge needed for action
to mitigate and adapt to detrimental environmental change and extreme hazardous
events that relate to either Freshwater Security or Coastal Vulnerability. This
award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
policy makers, regulators, NGOs, communities and industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research activities that will examine
issues surrounding freshwater security associated with the expansion of
intensive crop agriculture in tropical forests. Intensification of crop
agriculture is a global phenomenon that is rapidly shifting land use as
populations and incomes increase. These agricultural changes have important
implications for water use and quality, but land use changes are rarely
associated with changes in water governance and management. This project will
(1) identify how impacts from land conversion, cropland expansion and
agricultural intensification interact to affect regional evapotranspiration,
rainfall generation, river flooding, water quality and stream habitat and the
thresholds of change that will endanger agricultural production, livelihoods and
infrastructure, and (2) what mechanisms of governance and communication are best
suited to facilitate effective and efficient water management. Farmers,
ranchers, families, municipal officials and businesses will be engaged to assess
what mechanisms can influence water security assessments and manage tradeoffs.
This project will contribute toward an improved understanding of how shifts in
land use impacts water use and governance and how engagement and management can
impact freshwater sustainability in regions with rapidly changing land use.