* 1719477
* Cybersecurity Big Data and Analytics Sharing Platform
* EDU,DGE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 02/28/2022
* USD 180,000.00

Cybersecurity has become a significant issue that presents new challenges to
individuals, industry, and government. To help deal with complex cybersecurity
challenges, the international Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI)
community has published high-impact, Big Data driven cybersecurity research
since 2003. Despite the many novel advances in data-driven cybersecurity
research, there is no sharing platform that aggregates and provides data and
tools used and developed in cybersecurity research for the larger cybersecurity
community. The proposed project aims to fill this gap by developing the
Cybersecurity Big Data and Analytics Sharing Platform to encourage cybersecurity
researchers to share their data, tools, and analytical approaches. In addition,
the project will support two Security Big Data and Analytics Sharing Workshops
to engage the community in the platform development. Upon project completion,
the platform will be open for access by the broad cybersecurity research and
education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed data sharing platform
would enable the publication of high-impact, reproducible, and cutting edge
research to advance scientific discoveries. Such a platform would also enhance
the educational experience for cybersecurity students, specifically CyberCorps
SFS students as they prepare to enter the cybersecurity workforce. The proposed
project will provide value to both cybersecurity researchers and students by
providing data for cutting-edge research and enhanced educational experiences.
In addition, this project will also have significant value to government
agencies and other organizations interested in developing cyber threat
intelligence knowledge. The project team will consist of leading scholars in Big
Data Security.