* 1719376
* Mechanistic Insights Into Chloroplast FtsZ Assembly and Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Katherine Osteryoung, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 823,746.00

Plants possess specialized compartments called chloroplasts that allow them to
harvest light energy directly from the sun and convert it to chemical energy
through the process of photosynthesis. Photosynthesis produces the organic
compounds that comprise the base of the global food chain and are crucial for
agricultural production. As plant cells expand during leaf growth, their
chloroplast numbers increase dramatically through the process of division, which
is crucial for increasing photosynthetic capacity. Consistent with their
cyanobacterial origin, chloroplasts inherited several components of their
division machinery from the cell division machinery in their prokaryotic
ancestors. Foremost among these is a cytoskeletal protein called FtsZ. In both
bacteria and chloroplasts, FtsZ proteins assemble into polymers that form a
ring, called the "Z ring", at the center of the cell or organelle that
contributes to the constrictive force driving the division process. This project
seeks insight into how chloroplasts use these proteins in division and seeks a
better understanding of the differences between chloroplast and prokaryotic
division. Broader Impact activities will include participation in the Michigan
State University Girl Scout STEM Demo Day, which provides hands-on
demonstrations and activities to girls from across the state. Also, a post-doc
will be involved in updating and expanding the Wikipedia page on chloroplast
biology to help the general public better understand how chloroplasts
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas bacterial cell division requires only a
single type of FtsZ, chloroplast division requires two functionally distinct
types of FtsZ that copolymerize. Previous studies based largely on the FtsZ
proteins from a model plant species have led to the hypothesis that their
copolymerization enhances polymer rearrangements (dynamics) within the Z ring,
which is essential for Z-ring constriction. This project focuses on
understanding in greater mechanistic detail how FtsZ pairs cooperate not only in
plants, but also in algae, to carry out chloroplast division. Experimental
approaches will include analysis of the dynamics of Z rings reconstituted in
yeast by fluorescence imaging, a suite of in vitro assembly and biochemical
assays, computational modeling to better understand how FtsZ pairs interact in
polymers, and advanced microscopy techniques to investigate how the two FtsZs
are arranged in polymers. As copolymerization represents a novel and important
variation on Z-ring function unique to chloroplasts, study of FtsZ pairs will
contribute to broader understanding of the diversity of FtsZ-mediated division
systems.