* 1719342
* ICN-WEN: Collaborative Research: ICN-Enabled Secure Edge Networking with Augmented Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Satyajayant Misra, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Technological advances have moved society into an exciting era of mobile
computing. Our daily lives can be further enriched by a new generation of mobile
applications, such as augmented reality (AR) which broadens one's real-world
perception by harmonizing sound, image, video, and sensors from multiple sources
to aid comprehension and navigation. However, today's Internet operates with the
address-based TCP/IP protocol architecture developed 40 years ago, which greatly
limits the full promises of these new applications. Thus, current AR
implementations face challenges in performance, scalability and availability
upon disasters. This proposed research project (ICE-AR) aims to develop a new
wireless network architecture to address these limitations and provide pervasive
support for these emerging applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICE-AR project
team will apply and extend six years of research efforts on Named Data
Networking (NDN), a realization of the Information Centric Networking (ICN)
vision, to create this new architecture. The design emphasizes application-level
data naming, data-centric security and computing, asynchronous publishing and
consumption, and efficient use of local and proximate resources. The
architecture will unify latest advances in wireless communication with domain-
specific computing technologies to accelerate AR at the wireless edge and
deliver robust performance, with or without the pre-deployed infrastructure
support.