* 1719620
* Ubiquitous Doubling Algorithms for Nonlinear Matrix Equations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ren-Cang Li, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,624.00

The principal investigator's (PI's) research is aimed at the solution of
practical problems of optimal control theory from areas as diverse as vibration
analysis for high speed trains and quantum transport in nano research.
Underlying these applications are formulations that require the efficient and
accurate solution of important nonlinear matrix equations which critically
influence the overall performance and fidelity of the entire simulations. Past
experience has shown that practically relevant simulations requiring solutions
of nonlinear matrix equations are notoriously challenging to the point that
computed solutions may be completely erroneous. This project aims at changing
the status quo by developing a complete theory, devising innovative algorithms
to better reflect problem structures, and designing more robust implementations.
In addition to advancing research in these nonlinear matrix equations, the PI
will recruit and train graduate students in computational mathematics and
interdisciplinary studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the
understanding and solution techniques for high impact nonlinear matrix equations
in the context of mathematical theory, computational methods, and software. For
decades, computational scientists and engineers have been struggling to compute
trustworthy numerical solutions to some of these nonlinear matrix equations with
limited success. For example, the entries of the solution matrices to M-matrix
algebraic Riccati equations from Markov-modulated fluid flow theory represent
probabilities of events, and tiny entries indicate events that are rare but
still important, and thus need to be computed accurately. The eigenvalues from
vibration analysis of high speed trains vary widely in magnitude beyond the
ranges that the IEEE double precision can handle if not dealt with correctly.
The doubling algorithm may not converge at all on the unperturbed nonlinear
matrix equations for quantum transport in nano research. These difficulties are
often not caused by the large sizes of the problems but rather are more due to
their inherent mathematical properties. With the successful completion of this
project, a complete and coherent unifying framework of doubling algorithms,
along with the relevant theory, will be developed. A much deeper understanding
of doubling algorithms will be gained, and it is possible that important
applications will be identified where doubling algorithms can be utilized and
are faster than the current state-of-the-art methods. More significantly, the
theory developed will assure that the new algorithms will produce more
trustworthy accurate numerical results than is currently possible.