* 1719377
* Initiative in NanoBioengineering Undergraduate Research and Education for Minority Students (INBUREM)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Shree Singh, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2019
* USD 350,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support projects to design, implement, and assess strategies that can
lead to comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of students
receiving undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality of their preparation by strengthening
STEM education and research. The project at Alabama State University seeks to
strengthen the research, recruitment and retention activities in STEM
disciplines with emphasis in the areas of bioengineering and nanobiotechnology.
The overall goal is to significantly increase the preparedness of
underrepresented minority students at the University choosing career paths in
STEM majors, graduate programs, and workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities
that are part of this project are: academic year, as well as summer
undergraduate research experiences to include international research
experiences; opportunities for high school students to conduct research in the
summer; faculty and student development activities such as seminars,
instrumentation workshops, and workshops on innovative teaching practices;
presentations at scientific conferences; and activities to assist students in
the transition to graduate school. The activities and strategies are evidence-
based and what is learned through this project can serve as a model for other
institutions.