* 1719524
* RAPID Collaborative research: Topographic change and cascading hazards following the November 13th Mw7.8 Kaikoura (New Zealand) earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Michael Willis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 11/30/2019
* USD 6,166.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will examine the effects of the
November 13, 2016, series of earthquakes in the Kaikoura region of New Zealand
on faulting and landslide processes. The focus of the effort will be to develop
a digital elevation model and time series for this event and conduct field work
to evaluate the remote sensing products. The work will complement other urgent
response efforts underway in New Zealand following the earthquakes. It will
enhance international collaboration among scientists in the United States and
New Zealand and meaningfully involve students in the scientific research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 4D evolution of topography is critical for
understanding faulting and landslide processes. For major events that deform and
erode landscapes, such as earthquakes, we lack data at an event scale for
understanding such processes because of the prohibitive cost of repeat land and
airborne surveys. Existing high-resolution topographic surveys tend to be small
in geographic extent, and thus the chance of catching an area before an event is
rare and usually limited in scope. However, recent advances in high performance
computing coupled with stereo-satellite imagery collection create the
opportunity to provide regional scale data that can be processed for high-
resolution topography. Such surveys can potentially be repeated with modest
resources such that a topographic time series data can be created quickly and
relatively inexpensively. Per contracts with the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency and supercomputer centers, the PIs will gain access to the
existing stereo imagery and super computer processing time needed to immediately
develop and deliver a pre-event, high resolution digital elevation model to all
researchers working on this event. This work will contribute to the
understanding of landslide hazards after major earthquakes involving complex,
multi-fault source mechanisms, and will be readily exportable to the scientific
response of other earthquakes at other plate boundary settings.