* 1719626
* Lattice Gauge Theory at the Intensity Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Carleton DeTar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 306,100.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Carleton DeTar at the
University of Utah. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor deTar's research addresses
fundamental questions in high-energy and nuclear physics, and is closely related
--- indeed, even essential --- to major experimental programs in these fields.
The principal goal of this research is to discover evidence for new fundamental
physical processes and particles. This is done by comparing precise predictions
of theories of currently known physical processes and particles with the results
of precise experiments. The methods that Professor deTar and his collaborators
develop and their calculational products and software are used widely around the
world for related studies. In addition to maintaining US excellence in
fundamental science, this research supports US preeminence in computing
technology and manpower. Students and postdoctoral research associates working
on these projects receive highly marketable training in high-performance
computing and state-of-the-art statistical analysis of large data sets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, Professor deTar and his
collaborators are carrying out a broad research program in Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD), the theory of interacting quarks and gluons. They do this
using numerical calculations on high-performance computers. These numerical
calculations are done on a grid of space-time points (lattice). During the last
several years they have generated a library of gluon-configuration ensembles
with up, down, strange and charm quarks, using the highly improved staggered
quark (HISQ) action. These gluon configurations can be thought of as "snapshots"
of the QCD vacuum, and are the basis for a wide variety of calculations of
physical interest. These ensembles have significantly smaller lattice artifacts
than those they previously generated with the improved staggered (asqtad)
action. Moreover, these calculations have reached an important milestone by
generating, for the first time, configurations in which the four lightest quarks
are all included with masses at or very close to their physical values. For
these reasons the HISQ ensembles are enabling major improvements in the
calculation of a variety of physical quantities of importance in high-energy
physics, including the strong-interaction contributions to the magnetic moment
of the muon. Results of these Standard-Model predictions will be checked against
experimental measurements currently underway at Fermilab. Professor deTar and
his collaborators are also extending their studies of the leptonic decay
constants of the pi, K, D, Ds, B and Bs mesons, the semileptonic form factors of
D and B mesons, and the mixing of neutral B and Bs mesons with their
antiparticles. These calculations will enable them to significantly improve the
precision of their determinations of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix
elements V_us, V_ub, V_cd, V_cs, and V_cb, as well as the masses of the up,
down, strange, charm and bottom quarks. The calculations of the CKM matrix
elements will provide more stringent tests of our current theories of the
fundamental interactions of physics, while the determination of related hadronic
weak-interaction matrix elements can help constrain theories that have been
proposed to study physics that goes beyond our current theories.