* 1719140
* SBE-RCUK: Collaborative Research: The effects of mobility and physical activity on human postcranial skeletal variation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Kristian Carlson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 165,044.00

Modern humans have relatively lightly built skeletons compared to other primates
and earlier human populations, a condition which may predispose modern humans to
bone-related health risks. Reduced physical activity levels as well as dietary
changes, especially following the adoption of agriculture, may be responsible
for these reductions in human bone mass over the last 10,000 years. This
collaborative project will assess variation in bone structure in a large human
skeletal sample encompassing a diversity of regional populations and subsistence
strategies to evaluate the effects of physical activity levels, diet, and other
factors on the modern human skeleton. Investigating the human skeleton from past
and recent populations, as well as integrating studies of living athletes, will
effectively frame the extent of normal variation in modern humans. A better
understanding of skeletal variability will, in turn, produce insight into the
factors that contribute to contemporary bone health and related costly medical
conditions, such as osteopenia and osteoporosis. This project will provide
educational and training opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students,
including women and minorities, postdoctoral training for young professionals,
and educational enrichment opportunities for K-12 educators from rural and urban
school districts in Pennsylvania. The data collected and the educational modules
developed during the course of this project will be made available to other
researchers, educators, and the general public through online data repositories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study tests the hypothesis that trabecular and
cortical bone structure in limb elements reflects mobility and activity
differences among human populations, implicating an increasingly sedentary
lifestyle as the major factor driving the apparent decrease in skeletal mass in
recent humans. Recent work has suggested that in the past, highly mobile groups,
like hunter-gatherers, had significantly more robust skeletons compared to
sedentary agriculturalists and more recent contemporary populations. Reductions
in mobility and physical activity, which have purportedly coincided with the
adoption of agriculture and subsequent technological advances, have been argued
to be critical factors driving the reduction in skeletal mass in recent humans.
This study will characterize variation in both trabecular and cortical bone
across a large number of human populations and evaluate this range of variation
in relation to differences in physical activity, mobility, body size, diet, and
ancestry. The study design consists of two major components. Microcomputed
tomography scan data will be collected from a diverse skeletal sample of recent
humans to assess variation in trabecular and cortical bone structure in multiple
postcranial elements (humerus, femur, tibia, cervical vertebra). This skeletal
sample will include representatives of groups practicing various subsistence and
technological strategies such as foragers, horticulturalists, intensive
agriculturalists, and post-industrial populations drawn from multiple locations
globally. In addition, peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT) scan
data will be collected from living elite athletes and non-athlete controls to
assess the effects of lifelong intensive physical activity on skeletal mass.
Comparisons between the two components of the study will inform understanding of
activity- and behavior-related changes in human skeletal mass through time.