* 1719421
* RAPID: The Emergence and Evolution of Forced Migration Routes
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Nadia El-Shaarawi, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 31,479.00

With more than 65.3 million forced migrants worldwide, global displacement is at
an all-time high. Most of the displaced are located in states adjacent to their
countries of origin, primarily in the Middle East or Africa. One of the
characteristics of contemporary displacement is that these countries of first
asylum host the majority of refugees, who often live in limbo in camps or urban
centers for years, while richer states keep refugees and migrants at arms'
length through policies of deterrence and border control. However, from 2014
through 2016 more than one million migrants reached Europe via the Balkan land
route, breaching "Fortress Europe" in unprecedented fashion. This mass migration
has far reaching impacts for the stability of the European Union and the lives
of millions of refugees and migrants. Yet, almost no empirical research has been
conducted on the route, leaving open questions about how the route was forged
and the role of refugees themselves in its creation. These questions can only be
answered through ethnographic fieldwork while many of the key actors and sites
remain in place along the route. This research takes place in the context of the
largest global forced migration since World War II. Findings will be
disseminated to aid organizations that explore and manage the causes,
consequences, and complexities of mass migration. The research also fosters
international scientific cooperation, and will train undergraduate students in
methods of anthropological data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award supports fieldwork in Egypt,
Greece, Serbia, and Germany - countries of departure, transit, and destination -
to understand mobility along the Balkan route. The investigators, Drs. Nadia El-
Shaarawi and Maple Razsa of Colby College, have longstanding relationships with
migrants and refugees from the Middle East, as well as networks along the route,
which will allow them to gain access to sites that might otherwise be
clandestine and inaccessible. Through participant observation and interviews at
sites that have been crucial to recent migrant mobility, sites where migrants
and humanitarian workers come together, the researchers will study the forms of
negotiation and struggle that made the route possible. Further, they will
investigate how migrants experience and manage efforts to restrict their
movement. A focus on the route itself, and the ways that refugees and migrants
sustained mobility within networks along the route, will provide an empirical
alternative to analyses of refugees as victims as well as a methodological
tendency to study refugees in place. Such an approach will shed light on how
migrant mobility itself is organized, sustained, and curtailed. While the
ongoing crisis is unique in scale, an understanding of its social complexity can
inform our knowledge of other, similar processes of migration and displacement
in the U.S. and worldwide. With the number of refugees only increasing globally,
displacement remains a topic of important social and political concern.