* 1719480
* CAREER: The Effect of Bubbles on Magma Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/31/2016,06/30/2023
* Christian Huber, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 313,627.00

Volcanoes have exerted a fascination since the dawn of civilization. Eruptions,
besides their obvious associated hazards, are one of the rare expressions of the
dynamics of the Earth over timescales that are easy to comprehend from our
standpoint. Over the last decades, our community has recognized the importance
of exsolved volatiles (gas bubbles) on the chemical and physical evolution of
magmas in the shallow crust and on eruption dynamics. The complexity of volcanic
processes and our inability to observe directly how magmas evolve prior and
during volcanic eruptions has seriously limited our ability to predict the
timing and behavior of volcanic eruptions. With this project, we propose the
development of new numerical methods, complemented with fluid dynamics
experiments to provide a quantitative understanding of how the exsolution of
gases affects the physical properties of magmas, their chemistry (and the
composition of gases released to the atmosphere) and ultimately how bubbles
behave collectively and affect the behavior of magmas erupting at the Earth
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magmas are multiphase systems composed of a very
viscous ambient fluid (silicate melt), crystals and sometimes complemented by
exsolved (immiscible) gas bubbles. In order to predict how magmas evolve before
and during eruptions, we need to develop dynamic models that allow us to
accurately represent the interplay between these three phases under various
conditions. In this project, we plan to study first the exsolution and growth of
water-rich bubbles to model their effect on chemical differentiation, i.e. how
secondary gas phases such as sulfur species and CO2 partition into growing
bubbles. The amount of sulfur incorporated into bubbles before an eruption is
significant to quantify the impact of eruptions on climate (sulfur is a potent
aerosol that affects the radiative balance in the atmosphere). The chemistry of
the exsolved gas phase and its participation in a future eruption depend on the
efficiency of phase separation in magmas and the possible accumulation of gas
bubbles in parts of the reservoir that are more likely to erupt (lower
viscosity). Our second task is to study the physics of phase separation, bubble-
crystals-melt, more specifically to understand how the magma motion is impeded
or facilitated by the presence of discrete bubbles and crystals. Finally, once
the rheology of multiphase magmas is better constrained, we plan to use these
results and study how buoyant gas bubbles migrate in zoned magma reservoirs. The
question we aim to answer is whether bubbles are prone to accumulate in regions
of low or high crystal content and how this accumulation affects the chemistry
of the gas in the bubbles and the eruptive behavior of the
magma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed research will have broad
implications for physical volcanology, petrology, geochemistry and fluid
dynamics. It will provide quantitative constraints on the state of magmas stored
in shallow crustal reservoirs and also provide a better account of the effect of
bubbles on magmas as they ascend to the surface during eruptions. Predictive
models for the exsolution of sulfur in magmatic systems can also provide clues
as to the climate impact of pre-historical large explosive eruptions (e.g. Toba,
Cerro Galan). The goal of the proposed research is to provide quantitative tools
and constitutive relations that will be widely available to interpret existing
datasets (geochemistry of magmas, rheological experiments on magmas) and
transfer this new knowledge to models of magma dynamics. Additionally, the
development of new numerical methods to study multiphase fluid dynamics will
impact the Computational Fluid Dynamics community and other fields in science
and engineering, where particle suspensions or bubble emulsions are important
(e.g. effect of fluid dynamics on biology, food processing?)&lt;br/&gt;