* 1719797
* MRSEC: UW Molecular Engineering Materials Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2023
* USD 16,000,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The University of Washington Molecular Engineering
Materials Center (UW MEM-C) addresses fundamental problems in materials research
that push the frontiers of science, accelerate the development of future
advanced technologies, and address challenges of broad national and societal
importance. MEM-C's research activities stress innovation in the design,
discovery, and application of complex electronic and photonic inorganic
materials with low dimensionality. MEM-C also spearheads education, training,
and outreach programs to prepare tomorrow's leaders in science and technology,
with signature programs focusing on promotion of (re)entry of veterans into
science/technology/engineering/mathematics (STEM) career tracks, and early
recruitment/mentorship of students to STEM from underrepresented/underserved
regional high schools. Additional activities include REU/RET/REM programs,
regional K-20 outreach, regional partnerships for public engagement, and
interdisciplinary curriculum development. MEM-C further strengthens ties between
UW and industrial, international, and National Laboratory partners through
sponsored internships and collaborations. MEM-C shared facilities provide
lasting infrastructure that promotes the activities of the Center as well as of
the broader campus and regional materials science
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: MEM-C's research involves
two interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs): IRG-1: Defects in Nanostructures
addresses the scientific challenge of engineering unprecedented physical
properties into inorganic nanostructures by controlling defect formation and
doping, and exploits these emergent properties to develop new technologies
ranging from laser cooling to solar concentration; IRG-2: Layered Quantum
Materials creates and studies new forms of quantum matter in atomically layered
materials, emphasizing phase transitions in these materials, with potentially
disruptive impact on energy and information technologies. Both IRGs integrate
materials innovations with theory/computation at the interface of materials
science, chemistry, physics, and engineering to identify and explore
fundamentally new physical phenomena and to advance these scientific frontiers
toward new applications. A competitive seed program supports high-risk high-
reward projects in emerging areas. These activities are developing the materials
underpinnings of future advanced technologies and simultaneously providing
interdisciplinary education and training of the nation's future leaders in
science and technology. Participants in the Center include 15 senior
investigators, 5 postdoctoral associates, and 14 graduate students from 5
departments and 1 National Laboratory.