* 1719668
* BMCC Pre-TI
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Michael Parish, Bay Mills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 01/31/2018
* USD 51,142.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, allowing the institution's faculty and
administrators to design and develop a comprehensive plan for improving and
expanding STEM instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bay Mills Community College
(BMCC) serves the Bay Mills Indian Community in Michigan's Upper Peninsula. This
project will determine the best use of their current infrastructure in advanced
manufacturing technology to create sustainable STEM programs that can further
support regional economic development and student learning. The Principal
Investigators will deliver a comprehensive roadmap for subsequent implementation
of both a certification and associate level degree program offering in STEM
related fields through activities that include: 1) identifying community,
regional and national workforce needs in strength areas at the college; 2)
assessing existing related courses and programs at other institutions; 3)
completing a state analysis at BMCC; 4) conducting secondary- and high-school
level workshops about STEM careers in order to gauge interest and awareness; and
5) connecting needs to BMCC's courses and programs to identify areas and
necessary resources for development.