* 1719450
* Targeted Infusion Project: Strengthening the Undergraduate STEM Curriculum at Fisk University through the Infusion of Computational-Biological content in Pre-Calculus
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sanjukta Hota, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2021
* USD 399,849.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Fisk University seeks to
improve the undergraduate STEM curriculum and help the University achieve its
aspiration of developing a Bioinformatics/Biomathematics or Quantitative and
Computational Biology (QCB) major. The project's proposed curriculum innovation
activities will serve as a testing ground for exploring the impact of teaching
on student learning, retention in quantitative biology/mathematics/or computer
science as majors, and selection of career pathways. This project will help to
strengthen the research and learning culture and infrastructure at the
University as it moves towards expanding into degree-granting biomathematics and
bioinformatics programs. The project's activities are expected to increase
interest in STEM fields, increase retention and progression in STEM disciplines,
and will serve as a possible replicable model for other institutions that share
a similar mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the program is to
enhance and strengthen the existing undergraduate curriculum for STEM majors by
introducing computational and data-enabled active learning in mathematics,
biology and computer science, integrated with a faculty-mentored summer research
program. To achieve this goal, the following activities are proposed: develop
and implement a bio-pre-calculus course in order to provide biology students a
better understanding of the applications of algebraic and trigonometric
fundamentals in biological problems; offer short (one credit) courses to teach
programming languages--Python, R, Linux, and Galaxy--often used for biological
data processing and data analysis; offer a summer research program to a selected
pool of 6 rising sophomores, juniors or seniors with biology, mathematics or
computer science major, to develop competence in research; and offer
computational and bio-mathematical research seminars and colloquia featuring
speakers from departments and programs across campus, plus invited guests from
industry and other universities to emphasize the use of computing to solve
complex biological problems and develop new insight. This combination of
activities will provide a solid interdisciplinary link between mathematics,
computer science and biology; foster quantitative and discovery based learning
on the topics of life sciences; stimulate students' research interests by
enhancing their programming skill; and increase student participation in
classrooms through data-enabled- and case-study-oriented active learning.