* 1719043
* Integrated Framework for Detection and Mitigation of GPS Spoofing Attacks in Smart Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2022
* David Akopian, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2022
* USD 399,934.00

The Global Positioning System is one of the nation's most critical
infrastructures, which provides precise timing and location to a host of systems
and applications. Examples include air, sea, and land transportation,
telecommunications, financial transactions, real-time industrial control
systems, and most importantly, the electrical power grid. Specifically, reliable
operation of the future electrical power grids depends on the availability of
grid measurements with precise timing that is enabled by the Global Positioning
System's time-synchronization technology. Although this system is very reliable,
it is vulnerable to malicious spoofing cyber-attacks that disrupt the time
synchronization of measurements. This consequently misleads the seamless
operation of the infrastructures relying on it. For example, these attacks have
ramifications on the electrical power grid, including power outages with dire
socio-economic implications. The theme of this project is the real-time
detection and mitigation of such attacks on the Global Positioning System with
applications in power grids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spoofing attacks manifest
themselves at different physical layers including the signals aggregated by the
Global Positioning System receiver, the time and location computed by the
receiver, and eventually the voltage and current phasor measurements collected
from Phasor Measurement Units in the electrical grid. Novel, rigorous, and
comprehensive models of the spoofing effects on the Global Positioning System
receiver as well as the power grid operation are put forth. Leveraging the novel
models, this research additionally furnishes advanced methods to detect the
attacks and ultimately protect the grid from their harmful effects.
Specifically, online spoofing detection schemes are developed using sparsity-
based optimization formulations. These schemes are able to detect and isolate
unnatural changes in the received satellite signals and the associated time and
location solutions. Based on a novel measurement model that directly relates the
spoofing attack with the electrical network state, dynamic algorithms are
developed to maintain an accurate state estimate of the power grid, while
seamlessly restoring grid stability in the presence of attacks.