* 1719425
* Targeted Infusion Project: Engagement, Retention and Innovation in Physics Instruction
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Joseph Dodoo, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2022
* USD 399,940.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate
programs and/or careers. The project at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore
seeks to enhance undergraduate physics education by implementing innovative, yet
evidence-based strategies and activities to teach physics. The project includes
a strong plan for formative and summative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has the goal to improve student engagement in physics classrooms by
introducing peer-to-peer instruction, by synchronization between labs and
lectures, by using a non-traditional approach as an engagement tool through
novel instructional materials, and by integrating the materials to clicker
questions for real-time, in-class feedback and assessment of learning outcomes.
The project establishes a faculty and graduate teaching assistants training
program in active learning methods in group settings; implements active learning
techniques in selected physics courses; creates a pool of culturally and
scientifically relevant clicker questions to enhance both engagement and
critical thinking; and measures the effects of implementation and challenges as
they arise. This project will serve as a case study on how to implement
evidence-based teaching methods in the setting of this institution, which can
then serve as a model at other institutions of similar mission and size.