* 1719329
* Implementation Grant: Pi-STEM E3 (Pathways into STEM Careers, Enrichment, Engagement, and Empowerment)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Bruce Crawford, Lawson State Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,934,824.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research.
The project at Lawson State Community College seeks to build on previous
successful efforts to increase participation of African-American students in
STEM disciplines. The goal of this project is to significantly improve student
success rates in the community college's STEM programs by creating critical
thinkers, increasing STEM literacy, and educating the next generation of STEM
professionals. A significant broader impact is the collaboration between the
community college and its middle school and high school
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
increase the number of underrepresented minorities and women in STEM career
paths by focusing on creating a year-round STEM Enrichment Institute and
academic enhancement program for eighth graders and high school students;
implementing a college bridge program for incoming freshman and graduating high
school seniors; and providing research, mentoring, and academic development
opportunities for STEM students, improving persistence and efficacy. The project
will employ activities and strategies that are evidence-based, but will be
studied for effectiveness in the setting of this two-year institution. The
project will be advised and evaluated for effectiveness by internal and external
advisory boards and by a team of evaluators. This project provides a model for
how community colleges can take a more direct, purposeful role in impacting the
potential employment pool of STEM professionals.