* 1719273
* Phenomenology of Electroweak Symmetry Breaking, Supersymmetry, and the Frontiers of the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Stephen Martin, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Stephen P. Martin at
Northern Illinois University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
our knowledge of how the basic building blocks of nature interact. This includes
enhanced understanding of the known fundamental subatomic particles, including
the Higgs boson discovered in 2012. Martin will also study theories that go
beyond the known fundamental sub-atomic particles, including a possibility known
as supersymmetry. The key prediction of supersymmetry is that for each of the
known fundamental particle types, there must be a "partner" with very similar
properties but a much larger mass. Martin will work on strategies for
discovering these new particles in experiments including the Large Hadron
Collider and proposed future colliders, and will do the same for theories that
provide alternatives to supersymmetry. As a result, support for this proposal
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical
law. Martin will also mentor students at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels on research methods, participate in the education and training of high-
school teachers, and interact directly with pre-college students through judging
at local and regional science fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the
proposed research will study the equations that relate the underlying parameters
of the Standard Model and the quantities measured at colliders. This will be
accomplished by performing relevant calculations in a more accurate and detailed
approximation than ever before. These calculations, together with more accurate
data on the Higgs boson that will be obtained by the Large Hadron Collider, will
allow us to quantitatively understand the dynamics of the Higgs field and test
the consistency of the minimal Standard Model of particle physics. Martin will
study and improve formulas relating the masses of the Higgs boson and other
particles to the Higgs self-interaction strength and its interactions with other
particles. Martin will also continue to study supersymmetry, which now is
significantly constrained, but certainly not ruled out, by Large Hadron Collider
data. Martin will work on strategies for maximizing the experimental reach of
the Large Hadron Collider for new particles, by investigating novel signatures
and areas of parameter space where discovery or exclusion might be particularly
difficult or subtle. Martin will develop more accurate calculations and
theoretical tools that will aid in the interpretation and understanding of a
future discovery of supersymmetry or new stronger limits on supersymmetry, by
relating the masses and interactions of the new particles to the parameters of
the underlying theory. This research will affect the interpretation of
experiments at the CERN LHC proton-proton collider as well as a variety of dark
matter detection experiments. These experiments are major science
infrastructures, and employ many researchers and students at all levels in
several different science and engineering fields.