* 1719728
* EAGER: Optical Measurement and Analysis of Dynamic Large Deformations of Mechanical Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Massimo Ruzzene, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2019
* USD 204,314.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will perform a
fundamental experimental and numerical study to elucidate properties such as
wave directionality, strain localization and failure load paths in
metamaterials. Structural lattices provide the framework for the design of
mechanical metamaterials with the ability to guide, steer and attenuate
mechanical waves, which is relevant to applications such as vibration isolation,
noise absorption, and stress wave mitigation. These properties are key to the
design of novel mechanical metamaterials for wave management and impact
protection. Successful achievement of the project objectives will open numerous
possibilities for the characterization of a broad class of engineered materials
as well as of porous, naturally occurring, or bio-inspired architected
materials. The findings of the project will impact design methodologies for
energy absorbing structures for body armor design, vehicle protection, and
protective layers for helmets for transportation, sport and military use. Thus,
the project supports fundamental investigations that will benefit research
devoted to the mitigation of the effect of head injuries and concussions, or the
effect of blasts. In addition, part of the project findings will be directly
transferred to an educational module for an undergraduate laboratory course that
will expose students to state-of-the-art mechanical characterization
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic behavior of structural lattices
undergoing large deformations will be investigated through novel full-field
measurement techniques based on digital image correlation, along with the
numerical analysis of wave properties, dynamic instabilities and collapse
mechanisms. Currently available digital image correlation techniques are not
suitable for the estimation of displacements and strains in structures that are
highly porous, i.e. with volume of voids significantly exceeding the volume
occupied by material. Furthermore, these techniques are limited in their ability
to track large motion during dynamic events. The project will address these
challenges through the formulation of image tracking procedures that exploit the
connectivity of lattices, and of a Lagrangian framework for motion tracking that
takes inspiration from particle image velocimetry used in experimental fluid
dynamics. The formulation and implementation of the experimental technique will
enable the study of wave motion and, most notably, of the onset of
instabilities, non-uniform deformations and potentially collapse. Experimental
measurements will inform and validate numerical models that will then be used to
estimate directions of wave motion, strain localizations and instabilities.