* 1719645
* 2017 Superconductivity: Novel Trends in Superconductivity of Correlated Electrons GRC
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Andrey Chubukov, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

Abstracts are a public record of active and expired awards and are an important
source of information on NSF activities. The purpose of the Abstract is to
describe the project and justify the expenditure of Federal funds. Abstracts
must not contain inappropriate or confidential information, and because they are
available to such a wide audience, high standards of quality must be maintained
in preparing them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF award abstract has two parts,
which should appear in the following order: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Part 1: A
nontechnical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance. This description also serves as a public
justification for NSF funding by articulating how the project serves the
national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure
the national defense. This part of the abstract should describe the fundamental
issues the project seeks to address, as well as other potential benefits, such
as how the project advances the field, supports education and diversity, or
benefits society. This part should be understandable by a broad audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Part 2: A technical description of the project that
states its goals and scope, the methods and approaches to be used, and its
potential contribution. In many cases, the technical project description may be
a modified version of the project summary that is submitted with the proposal.
However, the technical description should reflect any changes in the project's
goals made after the review process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon award of a
proposal, the Abstract is available in the Award Search application and via
FastLane. &lt;br/&gt;-----------------------------------------------------------
--------------------- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop brings together
researchers to discuss current topics and trends in superconductivity of
correlated electrons. The Gordon Research Conference series is a world-
recognized series of meetings devoted to promoting interactions of scientists
and students and enabling vigorous discussions of current topics. This event
focuses on supporting junior participants, particularly from under-represented
groups, and includes 13 female speakers. Participants are gathering to discuss
the new high-quality experimental results on photoemission, X-ray scattering,
neutron scattering, resistivity and Hall conductivity, NMR and other
experimental techniques, as well as recent progress made by theory.