* 1719218
* Acquisition of an Automated Laser Diffraction Particle Size Analyzer at the University of Massachusetts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Jonathan Woodruff, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 89,810.00

This grant supports acquisition of a laser diffraction particle size analyzer
with automated sample preparation and introduction devices. The instrument will
support faculty and student research at the University of Massachusetts Amherst
that requires determination of fine grained particle size distributions in
sediments and soils. Grain size analysis is a fundamental tool supporting
research in sedimentology, natural hazards, paleoclimatology, geomorphology, and
hydrology. Studies of sediment transport in rivers and estuaries during extreme
events, Arctic paleoclimate investigations, and fault zone material mechanical
properties will be supported by the acquisition. Students will be trained in
instrumental procedures and the instrument will serve regional institutions in
New England. The acquisition will also support faculty outreach efforts to
engage regional K-12 and community college students in societally relevant
paleoenvironmental research. This support is congruent with NSF's mission of
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity
and welfare given the relevance of targeted research aimed at understanding
records of historical hurricanes affecting the U.S. Northeast as recorded in the
terrestrial and marine sedimentary records, studies of Earth's climate dynamics
as recorded in lake sediments and the impact of the acquisition on training the
next generation scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant
uncertainty remains regarding the fundamental mechanisms of fluid and sediment
transport during extreme flooding. To fill this knowledge gap, the sedimentology
lab at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and colleagues at Virginia Tech
are currently using patterns in deposition from historical floods to validate
and inform numerical simulations of sediment dynamics under extreme flows. Grain
size distribution of sediment?s in back barrier marshes and ponds can vary by 3
orders of magnitude, from coarse beach-derived sand and gravel at the coast to
fine-grained mud drapes at their landward extents. Mapping spatial trends in
these deposits assist in understanding the physics of sediment transport during
extreme flood events. The laser particle size analyzer will also be used to
identify coarse-grained storm deposits embedded within fine-grained lake and
lagoon sediments to further extend our knowledge of pre-historic hurricane
events and therefore better understand the probability of hurricane hazards. The
particle size analyzer will also aid in studies of high latitude glacial history
by examining the paleorecords of lake sediment grain size as a proxy of glacial
advance and retreat.