* 1719245
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Ammonia on the Chemical and Physical Properties of Atmospheric Secondary Organic Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Ann Marie Carlton, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 357,192.00

This project will investigate the effects of ammonia on the chemical and
physical properties of small particles in the atmosphere. It will also look at
the effects of ammonia on brown carbon in the atmosphere. The approach will
combine ambient measurements, 3-D chemical transport modeling, and the analysis
of past field campaign data. This work will provide important insight into the
sources and formation processes of secondary organic aerosol, critical for a
better understanding of both air quality and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the proposal are to: (1) Characterize the effects of NH3 on the
concentration and reversible/irreversible nature of aqueous SOA (aqSOA); (2)
Characterize the effect of NH3 on atmospheric BrC formation; and (3) Determine
the spatial and temporal scales of the NH3 impacts on aqSOA and BrC formation.
The two processes that will be evaluated include aqueous reactions that are
either catalyzed by or directly involve NH4 and represent a significant source
of highly oxidized, lower-volatility SOA, and the reaction of NH4 with organic
compounds and the production of SOA that may be light-
absorbing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ambient measurements will be made at an urban
site in the eastern U.S. that is heavily influenced by biogenic VOC emissions,
mobile sources, and regional NH3 emissions from agriculture. Modeling studies,
using WRF-CMAQ, will provide an analysis of temporal and spatial variability in
the NH3 effects on SOA and BrC formation and the impacts on air quality and
climate.