* 1719501
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of Active and Problem-Based Learning for Teaching and Research in the Context of Transportation Disruptive Technologies
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Charles Pierce, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2023
* USD 399,975.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Benedict College seeks to enhance undergraduate
education by infusing active and problem-based learning strategies into computer
science, engineering, mathematics, and physics courses. The activities and
strategies are evidence-based and a strong plan for formative and summative
evaluation is part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cohort of Benedict
College science and engineering faculty members will incorporate the
Environments for Fostering Effective Critical Thinking (EFFECT) model in their
teaching and guidance of student research. EFFECT focuses on modular inquiry-
based course content to develop critical thinking skills and collaborative
teamwork skills. EFFECT was developed by University of South Carolina faculty
members, two of whom are involved in this project. It is anticipated that
applying the EFFECT model with a thematic focus on transportation disruptive
technologies in both teaching and research will increase student interest,
learning, retention, and research capacity. The three specific objectives are
to: develop autonomous vehicles learning laboratories for teaching and research;
build capacity for active and problem-based learning in the classroom; and
integrate the EFFECT model in undergraduate research experiences.