* 1719061
* CSR: Small: Architectural Support for Programmable Memory Metadata
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mattan Erez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,994.00

All computers heavily rely on large and growing memory capacity to handle
increasingly diverse, challenging, and data-intensive computation. In order to
utilize memory effectively and efficiently, provide high performance, and
guarantee security and privacy, computer systems associate memory metadata with
all information stored in memory. This metadata stores system-managed
information about the data rather than application data directly and is vital
for correctness and performance. Storing, accessing, and updating metadata
presents unique tradeoff opportunities between metadata cost and performance
overheads and the benefits metadata can provide. Conventional approaches have
been to couple metadata management with the management of memory itself (in the
form of virtual memory) and have evolved very slowly over time. However, this
approach is facing increasing difficulties as computer memory systems evolve to
be larger, more heterogeneous, and organized in deeper hierarchies. Such
revolutionary memory systems require an equally revolutionary architecture for
managing and accessing metadata. This project is researching and exploring such
a metadata architecture. This research is sorely needed as both academia and
industry are continually finding new uses for metadata but are often left with
poor metadata mechanisms that are at the wrong granularity, have too high an
overhead on performance, and are too complex to implement. Therefore, the wrong
tradeoffs are often made between performance, security, safety, and reliability.
The results of this research will directly lead to secure, reliable, performant,
and efficient computer systems that provide strong privacy guarantees, which are
all crucial to the computing systems both scientists and society in general have
come to rely on. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to decouple metadata
management from data memory management (virtual memory) while exposing metadata
management mechanism architecturally to alleviate many of the above limitations.
This metadata architecture will be programmable from within the microarchiture
and also by system software and provide new levels of flexibility and
capabilities. Specifically, the research answers questions on how to: (1)
decouple general memory metadata from system-critical translation and
protection; (2) coordinate metadata across multiple storage/access mechanisms
with different tradeoffs in overhead and granularity; (3) construct expressive
yet efficient interfaces for memory metadata; and (4) provide the tools needed
by researchers and industry to analyze memory management ideas.