* 1719506
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Investigating the Impact of Collaborative Project-Based Learning on the Self-Efficacy of Minority STEM Students
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Guy-Alain Amoussou, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Bowie State University will study the impact of collaborative project-based
learning on the self-efficacy of minority freshmen enrolled in STEM courses and
examine the underlying instructional system using a participatory strategy and
socio-constructivist theories. The project is designed also to enhance the
educational research skills of STEM faculty through their engagement in action
research. The intervention incorporates small in-class collaborative projects to
inspire students' interest in learning new theory and to train students in the
design process. The researchers will leverage the Robotics Clinics learning
environment at Bowie State to understand why the intervention is effective and
to generalize the innovative teaching practice to the broader STEM education
community, particularly minority serving institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers propose to investigate two research questions in two phases. The
research questions are what are the learning characteristics of minority
freshmen in STEM, and how do various features in collaborative learning and
group dynamics influence the development of efficacy. In the first phase, the
investigators will collect and analyze survey data of students enrolled in the
Robotics Clinic freshman seminar courses using a social constructivist
framework. They will then conduct a learner and contextual analysis to study the
influences of learner characteristics and group differences. In the second
phase, the investigators will use the results of the first phase to design and
test the effectiveness of the evidence-based instructional system in fostering
self-efficacy. The researchers will assess the impact of the project on faculty
through surveys, focus groups, and self-reported anecdotes. The project is
expected to produce a measure to evaluate the developmental impacts of the
collaborative learning strategy on learning outcomes, to articulate an effective
instructional system that integrates community inquiry, and to indirectly
enhance the training of STEM faculty in educational research.