* 1719877
* Theoretical Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* G. Peter Lepage, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,800,000.00

This proposal funds the research activities of Professors Csaba Csaki, Yuval
Grossman, Peter Lepage, Liam McAllister, and Maxim Perelstein at Cornell
University.

High-energy physics studies the most fundamental building blocks of matter and
their interactions. There are several different ways in which to try to answer
the biggest puzzles this field is currently facing. By colliding elementary
particles at the highest energies to date, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is
expected to yield new clues on the interactions of elementary particles at the
shortest distances. By extremely precise measurements of the cosmic microwave
background (CMB) radiation, the properties of the Universe and the type of
matter and energy dominating it at early times can be studied. Finally, powerful
computer simulations can be used to study the properties of the strong
interactions. Pursuing all of these directions, the Cornell Particle Theory
group will advance the national interest by promoting the advancement of science
in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of
new physical law. In his research, Prof. Csaki will develop new models that can
explain the origin of mass ("composite Higgs models") and can be tested at the
LHC. The research of Prof. Grossman will focus on the heavier versions of the
fundamental particles making up matter (the charm and the bottom quarks) as well
as on neutrinos, particles that are created in beta decays. Prof. Perelstein
will investigate new methods by which new particles could be discovered at the
LHC, as well as new models for the type of matter (the so-called "dark matter")
that surrounds ordinary visible matter, but interacts very weakly with it. Prof.
McAllister will try to characterize the physical laws of the very early Universe
by using results from string theory, which is the best candidate for
understanding the behavior of the gravitational force at high energies. Finally,
Prof. Lepage will use powerful computer simulations and state-of-the-art
techniques to obtain precision results for strongly-interacting matter. This
project will also have significant broader impacts. The Cornell particle theory
group will train graduate students and involve postdocs in their research, and
thereby provide critical training for junior physicists beginning research in
this field. They will also give public lectures on their research results, as
well as regular lectures to local high-school students. More technically, Prof.
Csaki will investigate new approaches to the hierarchy problem, will examine
novel types of Higgs sectors and composite Higgs models, and will study possible
experimental tests of vacuum energy, as well as the effects of monopoles in
supersymmetric theories. Prof. Grossman will explore the physics of the
intensity frontier, including charm and beauty physics, CP violation, and
neutrino physics. Prof. Perelstein will investigate physics questions that can
be addressed with the precision Higgs program at the LHC and future colliders,
such as the nature of the electroweak phase transition. He will also continue to
provide theoretical interpretation of the LHC data, and explore novel models of
dark matter. Prof. Lepage, as a co-founder of the HPQCD lattice QCD
collaboration, will continue to develop and deploy new techniques for extracting
important physics from nonperturbative QCD, with a strong focus on QCD
backgrounds that must be analyzed to isolate new physics in heavy-quark physics
and very high-precision quantities such as the magnetic moment of the muon.
Prof. McAllister will investigate string theory and early-universe cosmology. He
will characterize quantum-gravity constraints on inflation, explore new axion
inflation scenarios in string theory, develop tools to compute effective
theories in compactifications on Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces, and study the vacuum
structure of string theory via random matrix theory.