* 1719361
* EAGER:  A Investigation of Social Relationships among Arctic Alaska's Manual Tradesmen
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sine Anahita, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2020
* USD 182,415.00

This project is a sociological investigation of how social relationships form
among individuals through friendship and how friendship can be affected by
gender, demography, remote geography, social-cultural histories, economics, and
the natural environment. PI Sine Anahita is proposing to use research methods
that although standard in other fields for decades, e.g., anthropology, science
and technology studies, social psychology, etc, are in less frequent use among
sociologists. The primary method the PI is proposing is a more qualitative
approach to visual analysis of archival films, photographs, and audiovisual
recordings of interviews with manual tradesmen. The PI was inspired to propose
this project when she examined the Jasper Wyman, collection at the Alaska State
Museum. Wyman was a photographer and gold prospector who documented gold
prospecting along a remote Arctic river basin during the winter of 1898-99. His
photographs visually narrated the work and personal life experiences of men
engaged in this labor under extreme Arctic environmental conditions. This led
the PI to consider how the social relationships men form through their labor
have changed over the last 125 years. The PI will examine materials held in
public archives and private collections ranging from the 19th century Alaska
gold mining period through contemporary photos and interviews of tradesmen. The
project is unique in its analysis of visual data and interviews with Alaskan
male tradesmen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs choice to examine tradesmen's
friendships comes not only from her access to an unprecedented archive of 19th
century photographs but also from the fact that employment in the trades in
Alaska has been dominated by men. Although less so today, men still make up 63%
of the population on the North Slope of Alaska, where jobs are primarily in the
oil field trades. In addition, at a ratio of 109 men to 100 women, Alaska has
the highest gender imbalance in the United States, the second highest is Wyoming
at 104. Although these ratios have changed considerably from the 19th century,
it supports the PIs choice to focus on men and how their work relationships are
not only affected by social and environmental systems but how they have changed
over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the rich visual data from 19th
century through contemporary Alaskan times, the researcher is proposing to focus
on men's social relationships with other men. The PI states her case, "The vast
majority of men who have worked in Alaska are engaged in manual trades such as
heavy equipment operator in the oil and gas fields, construction of the oil
pipeline, prospecting and mining gold, and commercial fishing." A key question
that guides the research is how does the history of Alaska, its demographic
makeup, its geography, its remoteness, and its climate affect tradesmen's social
relationships?