* 1719692
* Stability of Complex Phases in Diblock Copolymer Melts
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2021
* USD 439,944.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research and education on how polymers, long chain-like molecules, organize
themselves into 3D structures more complex than packed spherical balls. AB
diblock polymers are formed by chemically bonding together two distinct polymer
chains end-to-end. At sufficiently low temperatures, a mixture of polymers A and
B will separate into two distinct phases, much the same as the way oil and water
separate into two layers when salad dressing sits in the refrigerator. Such
macroscopic phase separation is not possible for a melt of diblock polymers;
owing to the chemical bond between the two blocks, the furthest the two blocks
can separate is the length of the polymer chain. As a result, diblock polymer
melts undergo microphase separation into ordered structures with nanometer
length scales set by the size of the blocks. The PIs will investigate the
microphase separation that occurs for the case where the diblock polymer is
compositionally asymmetric, that is when the volume fraction of A is small, and
conformationally asymmetric, i.e. where the elasticity of the A block and the B
block differ. The compositional asymmetry leads to a system where spheres of A
form inside a continuous matrix of B. For decades, it was assumed that the
stable ordered state of sphere-forming, microphase separated diblock polymers
was a body-centered cubic structure, a type of close-packed structure analogous
to that seen in stacks of cannon balls or oranges. Recently, experiments and
theory have demonstrated that conformationally asymmetric diblock polymers can
also form considerably more complicated packings known as Frank-Kasper and Laves
phases. These phases were first seen in metallic alloys, where the atoms have
different sizes, and the corresponding phases in diblock polymers involve the
packing of spherical particles of different sizes formed by the spontaneous
self-assembly of the polymers as they are cooled. This project will determine
whether simplified theories based on the geometry of these packings can explain
their origin in diblock polymers. Subsequent work will explore the role of the
exchange of polymers between different particles, aiming to explain experimental
results showing that thermal processing can produce different particle packings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a connection between the
formation of these complex phases in diblock polymers and their emergence in the
different context of metallic alloys. Additional broader impacts will emerge
from the development of computational tools required to study this problem and
their release to the community at large. Graduate students and undergraduate
students will receive advance training in polymer physics and, more broadly,
materials science through their participation in the research activities of this
project. The results will be communicated to the general public through a
collated collection of images of complex phases on a dedicated website. These
complex phases possess an aesthetic beauty, embodied by the well-known Penrose
tiling. The image collection will not only include images of these complex
phases generated by the project, but an explanation of their origins in the
context of block polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports computational and theoretical research and education aiming to
advance understanding of the stability of complex phase formation in sphere-
forming diblock polymers. The research in this project consists of two parts. In
the first part, the PIs will assess the ability of geometric theories such as
sphericity and the diblock foam model to predict the relative stability of
Frank-Kasper and Laves phases in diblock polymers. The results of these
calculations will be compared to the predictions from field-theoretical models
for diblock polymers. In the second part of the project, the PIs will use
dissipative particle dynamics simulations to determine the effect of chain
exchange on the transitions between different complex phases during thermal
processing of block polymer melts. The field-theoretic results will be included
as part of the "Broadly Accessible Self-Consistent Field Theory" website, which
includes software for performing these calculations and solved examples emerging
from research projects using the software. These computational results will be
combined with data-processing tools to produce slices through various planes,
which will provide the image collection for the public outreach component of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.