* 1719520
* Targeted Infusion Project: Promoting Environmental Education in Urban Social-Ecological Resilience
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Vernon Morris, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 424,147.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Howard University (HU)
seeks to support the academic enhancement of the new Environmental
Studies/Science (ES/S) curriculum by developing the Interdisciplinary
Environmental Studies major through innovation in pedagogy. The Environmental
Studies program at HU is an interdisciplinary major designed to provide students
with a strong academic core program in Environmental Sciences/Studies (ES/S)
courses across disciplines, in addition to engaging students in practical
learning experiences with local and global communities. This project will
emphasize urban social-ecological (USE) resilience, which will be realized
through co-curricular activities in curriculum courses. The major project
activity is to provide practical learning experiences for undergraduate majors
in the form of environmental education, outreach, and research opportunities.
The program will advance the community outreach component through collaboration
with local magnet high schools and external partnerships with local
stakeholders. This project has the potential to be a model for increasing the
number of minority students that are highly prepared academically to pursue STEM
degree programs and ES/S careers while fulfilling HU's commitment to service
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed activities are to 1)
increase enrollment in the ES/S major by 50% per year over the next three years
of the program's offering from the fall 2016 enrollment baseline, and retain
students through the proposed program, 2) enhance students' research knowledge
of and skills in integrated ecological and social systems as well as provide
them with transferable skills outside of the core academic curriculum, including
how to conduct independent research and communicate research findings, and 3)
implement and sustain a rigorous, high quality, social justice-oriented
interdisciplinary ES/S curriculum. The long term goal of the project is to
increase student recruitment in STEM fields by 1) increasing students' interest,
learning, and entrance in the field of Environmental Sciences and Studies, 2)
increasing the number of persons of color in environmental leadership, and 3)
sustaining external partnerships through the integrated research model and
continued student and faculty participation. The proposed research model will
establish core research and community partnerships that will be sustained beyond
the duration of the project and serve as a basis for future inquiry-based
teaching or independent research projects.