* 1719175
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Robust and Scalable Search of Binary Code and Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Heng Yin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 508,756.00

The problem of binary code and data search concerns how to glean valuable
information from binary code and binary data in an accurate, scalable and robust
fashion. This concern is central to many security problems, including
vulnerability scanning, code plagiarism detection, software lineage, malware
classification, memory forensics, virtual machine introspection, malicious
document detection, etc. Although this problem is not new and a great deal of
solutions have been proposed, no solutions can achieve the requirements of
accuracy, scalability and robustness simultaneously. There are bottlenecks for
binary code and data search due to the search schemes: pair-wise comparison for
binary code search does not scale, and rule-based binary data search is too
rigid and thus not robust against changes caused by different platform versions
and malicious manipulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work takes a
novel approach to the problem of binary code and data search, one that mimics
how the human brain recognizes interesting objects from an enormous amount of
visual information. There are two research thrusts: 1) scalable cross-platform
binary code search, which aims to quickly identify semantically equivalent or
similar code from a large binary code base in different architectures, by
automatically learning high-level features from binary code via clustering and
deep learning; and 2) adaptive, efficient and robust binary data analysis, which
aims to accurately identify objects from binary data such as memory dumps and
documents, by constructing deep neural network models. Because binary code and
data search are foundational for many security applications, advances to these
foundations can push the boundary for all the security applications built on
top. Moreover, successful application of deep learning onto binary code and data
search will revolutionize how we solve many security problems in general and
stimulate more research in the direction of security by deep learning.