* 1719200
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Exocube 2 - A Cubesat to Measure In-situ the Global Distribution of Light Species Densities in the Exosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Susan Nossal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 12/31/2017
* USD 3,000.00

A small satellite with a miniature mass spectrometer (referred to as INMS) as
the centerpiece instrument and including all telemetry, communication and
attitude control systems has been designed, the instrumental parts fabricated,
and what remains is the integration of these parts required to achieve delivery
by the spring of 2017. The purpose of this CUBESAT satellite mission is to
provide in-situ densities of atmospheric species near 500 km, on a global scale.
This satellite, named "EXOCUBE 2", follows directly on the "EXOCUBE" mission
that had a similar scientific scope. EXOCUBE suffered communication problems due
to an antenna deployment system failure, and one attitude control system gravity
boom also failed. Nevertheless, the key science package, the neutral and ion
mass spectrometer, did perform as expected and a small amount of data retrieved
indicated the efficacy of that instrument, which flew for the first time, on
EXOCUBE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rationale justifying a RAPID proposal for
EXOCUBE 2 is that this satellite mission is manifested to fly on the NASA
Educational Launch of Nanosat (ELaNa) launch queue in the fall of 2017.
Achieving this date would require the ExoCube-2 satellite delivery to take place
within the spring of 2017. The proposed work would rapid assemble and integrate
the mass spectrometer and satellite bus to meet this demanding one-year
schedule. The very short development time and minimal cost is made possible by
the legacy experience and materials left over from the previous flight of the
EXOCUBE satellite that unfortunately failed owing to the failure of the
deployment of the telemetry transmitting antenna.