* 1719991
* Sub-systems and Correlations in Cosmology and Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Sarah Shandera, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 210,000.00

This grant funds the research activities of Professor Sarah Shandera at The
Pennsylvania State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By observing cosmological
phenomena, physicists study the fundamental forces (including gravity) across
many orders of magnitude in energy scale. In this way, and thanks to
complementarity with terrestrial collider experiments, numerous successes in our
understanding of the universe have been achieved. Unfortunately, the most
puzzling cosmological phenomena are those that we cannot easily explore with
colliders, including dark energy and the physics of the Big Bang era. The
fundamental energy scales involved in those cases make laboratory tests
impossible for the foreseeable future. As part of her research activities,
Professor Shandera will develop a framework for robust inference of the
underlying physical laws that correctly accounts for the types of uncertainty
inherent in, but not unique to, cosmology. Together with her graduate students,
she will study theories of the very early universe where unobservable physics
may add uncertainty to the model. She will study both classical and quantum
aspects of the problem. These studies will advance the national interest by
contributing to our understanding and discovery of physical law at a fundamental
level. Professor Shandera will involve her graduate students in communicating
methods and results from the study of the universe to the public through
workshops for middle- and high-school students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, Professor Shandera will study systems
in cosmology and particle physics where only a subset of stochastic or quantum-
mechanical degrees of freedom are observationally accessible, and where that
subsystem is coupled to unobserved modes. She will (1) explore how cosmic
variance from coupling sub-Hubble modes to super-Hubble modes can affect
inference about the inflationary era from upcoming observations of the
polarization of the cosmic microwave background and large-scale structure
surveys; (2) examine the quantum correlations in systems with long-short mode
coupling and effective theories for short-wavelength modes with the long-
wavelength modes traced out; and (3) use known issues and results from studies
of multi-field inflation to explore effective theories for other quantum
subsystems where the relevant unobserved modes need not be high-energy modes.