* 1719325
* EAGER: Antibacterial clay effects on pathogenic biofilms
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Lynda Williams, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2020
* USD 240,784.00

Recent research by the investigator on clays that kill human pathogens,
including antibiotic resistant strains like methicillin resistant S. aureus
(MRSA), has documented their common characteristics. Worldwide, only 5-10 % of
clays studied to date are antibacterial when hydrated and tested in vitro. Most
antibacterial clays are from hydrothermally altered volcanics, where
volcanogenic fluids produce minerals containing reduced metals. Ferruginous
illite-smectite (I-S) is the most common clay mineral, although kaolins dominate
some samples. Antibacterial clay mineral assemblages may also contain non-clay
reduced Fe-minerals (e.g., pyrite) that oxidize, causing damage to cell
membranes and intracellular proteins. The key is that the clay mineral
assemblage buffers the hydration water to pH and Eh conditions that release
metals critical to the antibacterial process, allowing interaction with the
bacteria. Antibacterial clays also exchange structural ions with the bacterial
membrane that weaken bacterial defenses. This research will take this new
understanding of the antibacterial process, to the next level by testing their
effect on biofilms. Infectious diseases in humans commonly form biofilms, which
are communities of bacteria more resistant to antibiotics than the "free
floating" bacterial suspensions tested. The effectiveness of antibacterial clay
on biofilms is an important step in supporting the costly testing of the
bactericidal effect in animal trials. If antibacterial clay is effective against
biofilms, in vivo testing may lead to design of new treatments for antibiotic
resistant bacteria, with potential applications in wound dressings, medical
implants (joint replacements, catheters), animal feed stocks, agricultural
pathogens, and production of antibacterial building materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this research is to document the
effect of an antibacterial clay previously tested against a broad spectrum of
planktonic human pathogens, on biofilms most common to infectious diseases. In
collaboration with infectious disease researchers at the Mayo Clinic (Rochester,
MN), the investigator will develop protocols for the application of clays to
biofilms and evaluate conditions that lead to, or limit, their antibacterial
activity. Clinical isolates of common and antibiotic resistant bacterial strains
will be tested. The investigator has demonstrated that antibacterial clays
release metals (Aluminum, Iron) that act together to damage cell membranes and
intracellular proteins so they will monitor the interaction of these metals with
the biofilms. Standard methods for testing antibiotics must be modified for
testing natural clay because the minerals, while releasing metals, are not
completely dissolved and therefore will affect spectroscopic evaluations of
bacterial viability. Furthermore, the investigator found that metal speciation
in various growth media affect results by limiting metal reactivity with
bacteria. Therefore, healthy biofilms grown on Teflon disks will be incubated
with clay suspensions and cultures will be evaluated for viability by serial
dilution and plate counting. If successful, this project will bridge the gap
between mineralogy and medicine promoting applications of clay or its
derivatives to antibiotic resistant infections. This will enhance development of
medical protocols for evaluating minerals that improve human health. The
ultimate benefit to society will be to establish an economical and safe natural
mineral cure for antibiotic-resistant infections. Proof of the antibacterial
activity and safety for applications in wound care may lead to an economic use
of clays to treat wounds, or to development of new medicines that incorporate
similar antibacterial properties.