* 1719130
* PFI:BIC - Unobtrusive Neurotechnology and Immersive Human-Computer Interface for Enhanced Learning
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Yu Chi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The increasing prevalence of learning disorders, attention deficits, and
lackluster appetite for reading across all walks of life, and particularly among
school-age children, poses severe problems to humanity and, in the long run,
burdens social and economic development. This Partnership for Innovation
Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) collaborative project tackles the
impending threats to humanity of illiteracy and faltering education heads-on by
creating a new smart-service human-computer interface (HCI) neurotechnology
platform as a highly effective, user-friendly, and fun-to-use tool aiding
learning and stimulating cognitive development at home and in the classroom. The
immersive HCI neurotechnology will allow directly measuring progress at the
cognitive level and providing real-time feedback to guide the user in learning
to read more effectively. The project is highly Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) intensive both in its activities and in the targeted
benefits of the developed technology, which extends directly to learning science
and mathematics by probing cognitive performance of children while they solve
puzzles. The development of unobtrusive neurotechnology further addresses a
critical need for practical integrated and modular brain-computer interface
(BCI) solutions in HCI promoting widespread consumer and clinical use in the
marketplace. The partnership provides opportunities for students to gain
practical experience in innovation in the marketplace through internships with
the industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim is to develop and
leverage new HCI technology as a learning coach and personal cognitive
development assistant that facilitates learning to read and acquiring other
critical skills in cognitive development. The immersive yet unobtrusive HCI
technology testbed will comprise a dry-electrode electroencephalography (EEG)
BCI, a tablet with touchscreen and integrated camera, and a suite of signal
processing algorithms running in the cloud, for monitoring brain and gaze
activity in children learning to read, and providing real-time neurofeedback on
progress in cognitive performance to promote enhanced learning. The partnership
will transition scientific advances of a previous NSF-sponsored UCSD project
(NSF EFRI-M3C, ENG-1137279) in studying the distributed dynamics of human motor
control, to development of neurofeedback training paradigms for learning
enhancement, and to practical deployment on the unobtrusive immersive testbed
implemented using Cognionics dry-electrode EEG wireless BCI neurotechnology and
Syntrogi real-time cloud-based signal processing software pipelines. The
potential for human empowerment by the technology will be demonstrated by
evaluating effectiveness in enhancing learning capabilities and cognitive
performance in simulated classroom settings and other targeted learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution for the project is
University of California San Diego (UCSD), with investigators from the Institute
for Neural Computation and Department of Bioengineering. The industrial partners
in the effort are Syntrogi Inc. (dba Qusp, small business, San Diego CA) and
Cognionics, Inc. (small business, San Diego, CA). The project also engages
broader context partners Drs. Andrea Chiba and Leanne Chukoskie from the UCSD
Temporal Dynamics of Learning Center, Dr. Barbara Moss from San Diego State
University Department of Psychology, and Dr. Zewelanji N. Serpell from Virginia
Commonwealth University Department of Psychology, in the human case studies and
the assessment of the developed HCI technology in diverse learning environments.