* 1719062
* NeTS: Small: VC-VANET: A Sustainable Vehicle-Crowd Based Vehicular Ad Hoc Network Supporting Mobile Cloudlet Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Xiaoyan Hong, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 515,201.00

The development of new and innovative methods for smart transportation is a
critical need of the nation as vehicles continue to evolve. Not long from now,
we will see more autonomous vehicles and connected vehicles on the road systems
in each state. It is predicted that by 2020 there will be approximately 250
million connected vehicles on the road. Such a vehicular environment, with
communication capabilities from the moving vehicles and the transportation
systems, presents an extremely large and complex mobile networking scenario
where multiple communication technologies are available. The goal of this
research is to investigate a vehicle-crowd centered, networked system that has
the capability to support high-demand mobile edge computing applications. The
benefits could range from more prompt and accurate data inputs and result
outputs, to being an alternative for infrastructure-based systems. The
applications could include: intelligent transportation system applications,
transportation related compute-hungry, time-critical situation-aware
applications, and visualizations. Results of this effort will be disseminated to
multiple disciplines, and be used to develop education and training materials
for both graduate and undergraduate students as well as provide research
opportunity for traditionally under-represented groups and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance the knowledge
about the interdependent relationships between the physical vehicle network and
the transportation operation for supporting high-demand applications. This
project envisions the capability to support these applications through
harvesting the computing and storage resources by collaborations among grouped
vehicles which are knitted together via the vehicular networking protocols. Such
a network architecture is hierarchical as these groups of connected vehicles are
an additional layer on top of vehicle ad hoc networks and vehicle delay tolerant
networks of individual vehicles. The unique emphasis of this research will be
finding the vehicle-crowd system properties relating to signal control among
other factors, and developing adaptive vehicle-crowd schemes in reacting to
adverse conditions using data collected from local city transportation systems.
This project focuses on three main research tasks: (1) Investigate the
properties of an individual vehicle-crowd, namely, the dynamic patterns of its
occurrence at a given location in the time domain, and the latency when recovery
is desired. (2) Investigate the spatial and temporal properties relating to
multiple vehicle-crowds, and how the occurrences coordinate. (3) Investigate
prediction methods to help sustain the vehicle-crowds.