* 1719918
* Development and Deployment of a Novel Peroxy Radical Detector
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ezra Wood, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 205,759.00

This project is focused on the development and testing of a new instrument for
measuring atmospheric concentrations of peroxy radicals in the atmosphere. The
new method will use a novel acetaldehyde/nitric oxide chemical amplification
approach to greatly improve upon the traditional chemical amplification
technique that uses carbon monoxide (CO) for measuring peroxy radicals. A
prototype version of the instrument has been developed and successfully tested
it in the laboratory at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Peroxy
radicals are important because they react with nitric oxide in the atmosphere to
form ozone, a potent greenhouse gas and an air pollutant with adverse health and
ecological impacts on humans and plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acetaldehyde-
based amplification factor is predicted to be relatively stable and is not
expected to vary significantly with relative humidity, as does the CO factor.
The method also will enable the peroxy radicals to be speciated due to
differences in wall loss rates resulting from the addition of a sampling
scrubber made of a material that is much more reactive to the hydroperoxy
radical (HO2) than to RO2 (peroxy radical where R is an organic substituent).
Several candidate materials have been identified and will be thoroughly
investigated in the project. Prior to field-testing, the instrument will be
tested for interferences by peroxyacetyl nitrate, nitrate radical, and other
possible interferents and calibrated using multiple calibration sources to
provide confidence that the measurements are not compromised by systematic
errors associated with any particular calibration method.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A preliminary field test will be conducted in outdoor air
in Amherst over a period of a week or more, with periodic automated standard
additions of nitrogen dioxide and HO2. Deployments of the new instrument will
take place during the summers of 2015 to 2017 at forest sites that with
different environmental conditions, such as differences in nitrogen oxide
concentrations and/or types of emissions of biogenic volatile organic
hydrocarbons. During these deployments, several other scientific teams will
bring their instruments to participate in an intercomparison of peroxy radical
measurement methods. This project addresses key knowledge gaps relevant to
climate change and air pollution science.