* 1719800
* Workshop on Electromagnetic Effects in Materials Synthesis: Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 5-6 June 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* B. Reeja Jayan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2019
* USD 9,845.00

Several materials of technological importance require high temperature
processing over long durations and thus demand a large cost and energy
footprint. Electromagnetic waves such as microwave radiation and lasers can
lower both temperatures and times involved in processing various types of
materials, ranging from cooking food, making pharmaceutical drugs and 3D printed
plastic parts to applications in precision surgery. What is common to all these
examples is the idea that the electromagnetic fields absorbed within a material
may not be immediately converted to heat, but can instead promote other forms of
chemical or physical reactions. This grant provides funding to organize an
inaugural two-day workshop to foster collaboration between the research
communities that use electromagnetic fields (in particular microwave radiation
and lasers) for making materials. This workshop will generate discussions and
cross-pollinate ideas between members of both communities addressing
longstanding scientific challenges in using electromagnetic fields for materials
synthesis/processing. From an industrial standpoint, technological advances in
processing advanced materials using electromagnetic fields can have a smaller
energy footprint compared to conventional synthesis and as such will have a
profound impact on society. These materials will additionally find use in
diverse areas like sustainable infrastructure, transportation, clean energy,
water management, and healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will
foster collaborations between the research communities that use electromagnetic
fields, particularly microwave radiation and lasers for materials synthesis. A
grand challenge common to both communities is that the fundamental mechanisms
behind far-from-equilibrium, non-thermal chemical and phase transformations
under electromagnetic excitation remain largely unknown. For example, the low
temperature crystallization and sintering of ceramics by both microwave
radiation and lasers (e.g., pulsed laser annealing) has been reported and are
potential non-thermal effects of significant industrial importance, as
conventional synthetic routes even under the same thermal profile cannot
reproduce the results. Accordingly, specific focus during the invited talks and
break-out discussion sessions will be placed on examining (1) theoretical
models, (2) experimental tools, (3) in-situ and in-operando characterization
techniques, and (4) computational methods to identify and prove the existence of
far-from-equilibrium effects under electromagnetic fields and apply them for
rational design of materials. The continuing goal will be to establish a
multidisciplinary community spanning experimental and theoretical/computational
research groups by organizing regular meetings, initiating collaborations, and
conceiving transformative research proposals that will lead to answers to the
longstanding questions in the field.