* 1719622
* RAPID: Testing the erosion signature of coseismic landslides using cosmogenic catchment wide erosion rates - a case study of the 2016 Kaikoura Earthquake, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Alison Duvall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2019
* USD 30,128.00

The 14 November 2016 M 7.8 Kaikoura Earthquake in New Zealand triggered
thousands of landslides, blocked major highways and destroyed rail system
infrastructure, leaving 1000 residents and tourists trapped in the seaside town
of Kaikoura. This event and the investigator's previous research and sampling in
the region presents a rare opportunity to study erosion associated with
widespread landslides that occur at the same time as major earthquakes. This
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will examine the erosion associated with
these landslides using modern geological techniques. It will enhance
international collaboration between the US and New Zealand and involve three
graduate students in the scientific research process. The project is led by an
early career female investigator.

This project will address the following questions of relevance to the
geomorphology and geochronology communities: 1) What effect does coseismic
landsliding have on detrital cosmogenic radionuclide (CRN) derived basin wide
erosion rates? and 2) What is the contribution of periodic but widespread
coseismic landslides to erosional mass flux in tectonically active mountain
belts such as the Kaikoura Ranges? The principal investigator and her team will
address these questions by doing repeat detrital 10Be CRN measurements in six
drainages shaken by the earthquake. These samples will be used to examine basin-
wide erosion rates following extensive coseismic landsliding. Landsliding is
predicted to complicate detrital CRN measurements of basin wide erosion rates.
This study will circumvent this complication by constraining erosion rates
before (with previously collected samples) and directly following a large
earthquake (to be sampled this January 2017).