* 1719336
* ICN-WEN: Collaborative Research: Light-Speed Networking (LSN): Refactoring the Wireless Network Stack to Dramatically Reduce Information Response Time
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,283,999.00

A key hurdle for next-generation mobile and wireless applications such as
autonomous vehicle safety, tactile Internet, virtual/augmented reality,
industrial robotics, and tele-surgery is ultra-low information response time
(IRT), since these applications continue to see significant improvement in user-
perceived experience all the way down to an IRT as low as a millisecond.
Unfortunately, today's Internet protocol stack, despite the rather ambitious
projections of emerging wireless communications standards, is unable to achieve
a 1 millisecond common-case IRT in wireless environments. A fundamental
bottleneck for reducing IRT is propagation delays limited by the speed of light
as well as a variety of factors across the protocol stack. This project is
investigating the design, implementation, and evaluation of a "light-speed
networking" (LSN) architecture seeking to dramatically reduce IRT in wireless
edge networks by incorporating an information-centric approach holistically
across the different layers of the network protocol stack. This project will
also develop novel curricula and dissemination materials aimed at education a
new generation of workforce in information-aware networking principles are going
to be the foundation of future communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
LSN project will enable the network to automatically migrate a remote service
endpoint close to the end-user, for example, on to a nano-cloud on a virtualized
base station, thereby cutting down propagation delays limited by the speed of
light. LSN combines this capability with several other novel ideas including
information-value-awareness: enabling different layers to leverage application-
level knowledge about the value and semantics of the data; private information
retrieval: enabling users to access information without revealing to the network
what they are accessing; radio polymorphism: enabling intelligent use of
different radios based on information value; access-point-centric security and
privacy enhancements; etc. LSN builds upon key ideas from recent next-generation
Internet architecture projects including MobilityFirst and XIA.