* 1719318
* Targeted Infusion Project: Establishment of an Undergraduate Peer-Mentor Project-Based Program in STEM at Texas Southern University
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* John Sapp, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 460,399.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Texas
Southern University (TSU) seeks to establish an Undergraduate Peer-Mentoring
Program (UPMP) that will improve outcomes for first-year STEM students. The
proposed program will incorporate a peer-based mentoring program and combine
translational research experiences utilizing STEM-based resources. This program
has the potential to serve as a national model for improving retention in STEM
subjects, increase graduation rates, and enhance the number and academic
preparedness of students who go on to graduate school and the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the program is to improve
the retention and academic preparedness of underrepresented undergraduate
students working toward degrees in STEM fields. The specific objectives are to
increase the number of individuals from underrepresented groups that graduate
with STEM degrees; improve retention rates, including among groups traditionally
underrepresented, in STEM majors during the first two years of undergraduate
education; and enhance academic preparedness of STEM students for graduate
school and/or workforce. The Undergraduate Peer-Mentoring Program (UPMP) has two
components consisting of an educational arm (ARMa) and an experimental research
arm (ARMb), which emphasizes foundational subject matter within core STEM
disciplines including physics, chemistry, biology, and mathematics. The project
will be based on a foundation of active learning practices using trained
undergraduate mentors in structured sessions for freshmen and upperclassmen STEM
students using core STEM courses. In addition to peer-mentoring, undergraduates
will also be exposed to faculty-mentored research experiences. It is anticipated
that this program will enhance the quality of STEM education at TSU and could be
expanded both at TSU and implemented at other universities.