* 1719139
* CCF-BSF: CIF: Small: Distributed Information Retrieval: Private, Reliable, and Efficient
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Alexander Vardy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The digital age is predicated on information being ubiquitous. The ability to
access relevant data stored on remote servers "in the cloud" has become an
indispensable resource in everyday lives. Numerous online services let users
query public datasets for data items such as map directions, stock quotes, and
flight prices, to name a few. Digital content providers also rely on user
queries to identify the content desired by the user. Unfortunately, such queries
have the potential to reveal highly-sensitive information *about the users*,
thereby compromising their privacy. For example, institutional investors
querying a stock-market database for the value of certain stocks may prefer not
to reveal their interest in these stocks since it could influence their price.
As another example, most people are deeply uncomfortable with exposing their
media consumption diet to a centralized server that can be targeted by hacking
or subpoena. It can be convincingly argued that access to such media consumption
profiles can reveal the person's sexual orientation, political leanings, and
cultural affiliations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A great deal of research has been
devoted to methods that guarantee the security and integrity of *the data*. Much
less work, however, has been devoted to protecting the privacy of *the user*.
Efficient and reliable retrieval of information from distributed databases, with
information-theoretic guarantees of user privacy, is the focus of this project.
The relevant area of research is known as private information retrieval. While
most of the existing results in this area are theoretical, a major goal in this
project is to bridge the gap between the theory of private information retrieval
and the practice of distributed storage. As such, potential outcomes of this
investigation may extend beyond the scope of academic research, contributing to
new technologies and products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Private information
retrieval (PIR), conceived in the seminal papers of Chor, Goldreich,
Kushilevitz, and Sudan over 20 years ago, has been traditionally studied in
theoretical computer science and cryptography, with emphasis on the complexity
of the communication between the user and the servers that store the database.
While major breakthroughs have been achieved in this area over the years, the
prevailing paradigm has always been that of replicating the database on several
non-communicating servers. Such replication leads to a significant storage
overhead, which is undesirable. Moreover, motivated by advances in coding for
distributed storage, it was recently recognized that if database replication is
replaced by *database coding*, the full power of coding-theoretic methods can be
brought to bear on the problem. While extremely promising, this line of research
is still in its infancy. The goal of this project is to follow-up on the
database coding idea, and follow it through to its ultimate potential. In
pursuit of this goal, the following questions are
addressed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) What is the information-theoretic capacity
of PIR? That is, what is the maximum amount of information that can be privately
retrieved per downloaded bit, under various scenarios?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2)
What is the optimal storage overhead of PIR? Can we achieve both privacy and
efficient communication (on the download and upload) without replicating the
stored data even once?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) How can both privacy and
download efficiency be maintained in the presence of impediments such as
malicious or colluding servers, unsynchronized data, and/or communication
errors?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Codes for distributed storage systems tolerate
and repair node failures while making the data available to several users at
once. How can we combine PIR protocols with such
coding?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(5) What is the best possible tradeoff between the
various desirable PIR features, such as download efficiency, storage overhead,
and resilience to errors/collusions/node-failures?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is a natural outgrowth of the research recently carried out by the PIs
and others in this area. Prior related work will provide a springboard for rapid
progress toward the ambitious research objectives of this project. Knowledge,
techniques, and qualitative insights gained through this investigation are
expected to contribute to the foundations of the field, and to help bridge the
gap between the theory of PIR and the practice of distributed storage.