* 1719235
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: EM and Power Side-Channel Attack Immunity through High-Efficiency Hardware Obfuscations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Shreyas Sen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

In the increasingly digitally connected world, data security and privacy have
emerged as key challenges, from a personal to a national level. Encryption is at
the heart of securing data and when mathematically secure encryption primitives
are implemented in physical hardware, they exhibit vulnerability to smart
attackers due to unintentional leakage of physical signals during encryption
process. This research is exploring new ways to modeling the fundamental cause
of such leakages in electromagnetic and power signatures and developing
efficient hardware obfuscations and countermeasures to improve security of
future systems. Both the PIs are actively involved in both undergraduate and
graduate research, and will disseminate the findings through publicly accessible
models, involving and training undergraduate/graduate students to increase
awareness of the security vulnerabilities, possible countermeasures and best
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Side Channel Attacks (SCA) utilize
unintentional physical leakage signals during encryption process such as Power
(i.e., current at the power pin), electromagnetic (EM) radiation, acoustic etc.
to steal secret keys. This project is investigating EM and Power SCA on Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES) engines, including the origin of EM SCA, and exploring
efficient circuit, architecture and hardware level suppression and obfuscation
techniques which can provide robustness against possible attacks. If successful,
this cross-disciplinary project spanning crypto-algorithm, circuit design and EM
analysis will lay the foundations of EM side channel security in mobile
platforms and IoT nodes.