* 1719366
* ICN-WEN: Collaborative Research: SPLICE: Secure Predictive Low-Latency Information Centric Edge for Next Generation Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Patrick Crowley, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The fifth generation of wireless communication promises to provide Gigabits per
second data transfer rates and communication delays of less than a millisecond.
Significant challenges must be overcome in designing a system architecture such
that data intensive and/or latency sensitive applications can obtain the
information that they need for peak performance. Information-Centric Networking
(ICN) has the potential to enable wireless efficiencies that are critical to
support the strict guarantees desired by new applications such as virtual and
augmented reality (VR/AR) or the control of swarms of unmanned autonomous
vehicles (UAVs). The goal of this project is to design, develop and demonstrate
SPLICE, a Secure Predictive Low-Latency Information-Centric Edge wireless
network that will be able to provide information guarantees to these emerging
applications. The project will also contribute to workforce development by means
of curriculum development in this domain and recruitment of students from under-
represented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is anchored
in an ICN implementation called Named Data Networking (NDN), which will be able
to effectively tie together application demands and wireless links. The research
is organized into three inter-dependent thrusts: (i) Applications for an
Information-Centric Wireless Edge: This thrust will define the performance
criteria and determine the architecture of the focus application of the project:
VR/AR. It will exploit multiple dimensions of commonality between instances of
such applications through fast content caching and retrieval, and multicast
services. (ii) ICN for the Wireless Edge: explore how information exchange via
caching and markets would be accomplished, and how to design secure and privacy-
preserving data transfer methods. A key novelty is the use of proactive secure
caching that learns the value of applications and ensures they are cached ahead
of demand. (iii) Wireless Communication for Information-Centric Networks: employ
multicasting capabilities of wireless communication while simultaneously
achieving low-delay guarantees and low-complexity feedback mechanisms, via a mix
of coding, caching and scheduling techniques.