* 1719550
* Physics Virus of Assembly and Maturation: energetics and dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2021
* Roya Zandi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education at the interface of materials research and
biology and is aimed to advance understanding of how RNA viruses assemble. They
infect bacteria, plants, and animals among many other hosts, and with all
degrees of severity. All viruses, from the simplest to the most complicated, are
built from a protein shell called the capsid which protects the genetic
materials (RNA or DNA) they contain. The focus of this project is on single
stranded RNA viruses that under many circumstances readily assemble from
solutions containing capsid proteins and genome molecules. Due to advances in
experimental techniques that probe living and inanimate matter at the nanoscale,
the number of experiments investigating the physical basis of self-assembly and
maturation of viral particles are soaring. This research project involves
applying the methods of elasticity theory, and statistical and polymer physics
to develop a physical model to explain experiments related to the formation of
different viruses. The PI will engage three related projects. The first is to
understand the factors that contribute to the efficient assembly and stability
of spherical viral particles. The PI will study how the shape of RNA or to be
mathematically precise, RNA topology, affects the size, shape and stability of
viral shells and how the capsid structure and charge density in turn influences
the structure of the encapsulated RNA. The second project involves analyzing the
structure of immature human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) shell built from
protein subunits, packed with local hexagonal shape and surrounded by a lipid
bilayer. An intriguing feature of the immature HIV-1 is the presence of small
and large gaps, covering about 30% of the surface of the enclosing membrane. The
origin of the gaps is not well understood. The PI will explore what physical
properties of protein subunits give rise to the structures similar to the
immature HIV shell. Finally, the last project is devoted to the process of
maturation of the spherical immature HIV particles, which involves cleavage of
HIV immature building blocks by a set of chemical reactions leading to the
assembly of the intriguing HIV conical capsid. Through the understanding of the
interplay of RNA shape and the way viral capsid structure emerges, this project
will advance understanding of the process of self-assembly which shapes much of
the biomolecular world as well as biomaterials and polymer-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the physical factors that
influence the formation of virus particles is currently finding applications in
nanotechnology, actuators, drug delivery and gene therapy and can play a vital
role in the development of new anti-viral therapies. Furthermore, this project
will contribute to the education of undergraduate and graduate students, and
particularly to the training of the next generation of soft condensed matter,
polymer, and biological physicists in a multidisciplinary environment. The PI
will also organize an outreach program for young women middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education at the interface of material science, soft condensed matter
physics and biology. This project involves the extension of recent progress in
the statistical theory of soft matter to the physics of viruses, which
corresponds to the long-standing charge over-compensation problem in the physics
of polyelectrolytes, the controversies about the impact of annealing and
pseudoknots on the adsorption of RNA to the oppositely charged wall, and the
structure of macromolecules under confinement. The research is focused on the
statistical mechanics of viral self-assembly, both in equilibrium and far from
equilibrium. The self-assembly and maturation of virus particles will be studied
through developing new computational and theoretical models. The self-consistent
field theory of polyelectrolytes needs to be extended to consider self-
interaction of RNA while confined in a viral shell. Of particular interest is
how the free energy of viral particles is influenced by the topology of RNA
while interacting with the positively charged N-terminal domain of capsid
proteins. The PI and her group will investigate the impact of the thermodynamic
parameters on the size and geometry of the assembly products with the aim to
explain the phenomena of co-existence and polymorphism observed in many virus
assembly experiments. The PI combines the equilibrium statistical theory and
classical nucleation theory to study how kinetic barriers influence the final
structure of capsids. In view of complexity of the physics, in additional to
analytical calculations, the PI will perform a series of both Monte Carlo and
Brownian dynamics computer simulations to explore both the equilibrium and
kinetic aspects of viral self-assembly and maturation. The important questions
to be addressed are: What physical considerations govern the maturation of HIV
particles? and What determines the ratio of different assembled structures from
a solution of capsid proteins and genome molecules? The PI and her team will
invetigate the impact of changes in the mechanical properties of coat proteins
after protease cleavage, resulting in the transformation of the immature HIV to
the mature conical capsid.