* 1719747
* EAGER: Confining biofouling using sticky stripes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Jessica Schiffman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Ultrafiltration membranes are the state of the art for water treatment. With
time, however, bacteria colonize on the surface of the ultrafiltration membranes
in a process known as biofouling. Biofouling decreases the transport of purified
water across the membrane, requires expensive and time consuming methods to
remove the accumulated bacteria, and ultimately, increase the costs, energy
consumption of the water purification process, and shortens the lifetime of the
membrane. Current strategies to prevent biofouling include use of designer
materials that prevent fouling, either via use of new polymers or incorporation
of biocides into the existing membrane material. These existing strategies lead
to materials that are either expensive, unstable, and/or have decreased
performance relative to the precursor membrane. The research will provide
evidence that materials chemistry can immobilize a nanomaterial onto a porous
antifouling polymer ultrafiltration membrane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores synthesis of a novel membrane hierarchical structure, which utilizes a
hydrophilic polymer to increase the flux of pure water across the membrane by
confining the hydrophilic polymer layer to an ultrathin upper layer, without
blocking pores. Secondly, sacrificial antifouling strips with biocidal
properties will be electronspun onto this layer to localize fouling and
antimicrobial properties to certain regions of the membrane. In this one year
project, the PI will demonstrate that the antifouling fibers will adhere to the
ultrathin hydrophilic layer, to alleviate concerns of the high risk nature of
the concept. The first method to be explore for deposition of the fibers is
electrospinning, while contingency plans include additive manufacturing and 3D
printing.