* 1719446
* CAREER: Salt marsh restorations: a structured experiment for learning and teaching about salt marshes, microbial diversity, and ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Jennifer Bowen, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2021
* USD 598,139.00

Salt marshes have received a great deal of attention recently because they
provide a number of essential ecosystem services, including carbon sequestration
and nitrogen removal. Strong interest in marshes as carbon sinks is likely to
spur new programs to offset carbon emissions by restoring degraded wetlands,
raising a host of questions concerning whether marsh restorations can
successfully rehabilitate other ecosystem functions. A key ecosystem functions
of salt marshes is their ability to remove biologically available nitrogen
through a microbial process known as denitrification. Biologically available
nitrogen is entering coastal ecosystems at increasing rates as a result of human
activities such as application of fertilizers and combustion of fossil fuels.
When this nitrogen makes its way to coastal waters it can result in a host of
negative environmental effects associated with eutrophication, including
increasing areas of low oxygen water known as coastal dead zones. The microbes
living in salt marshes are able to remove portions of this excess biologically
available nitrogen by converting it back to nitrogen gas, suggesting a benefit
of salt marsh restoration, however, more information is needed regarding how
these microbes may respond to environmental changes associated with restoration.
This study will provide new insight on how restoration of a New England salt
marsh will alter the capacity of the marsh to remove biologically available
nitrogen and will increase understanding of the physiology of the microbes that
underlie this critical biogeochemical pathway through a combination of in situ
rate measurements, environmental metagenomics, and whole genome sequencing.

The results of this research will provide important new information to
restoration practitioners on the conditions that are mostly likely to
successfully restore the denitrification capacity of degraded salt marshes so
that they reach parity with undisturbed marshes. This work will also enhance
scientific infrastructure and knowledge transfer through two mechanisms. First,
it will train one early career female scientist, a postdoctoral scholar, and two
graduate students. Second, research on the denitrification capacity of salt
marshes will be incorporated into a First Year Seminar for undergraduate
students at the University of Massachusetts Boston, the only public university
in the city, which serves a large minority and first generation college student
population. This seminar program is designed to increase retention of at risk
biology majors by engaging them in research experiences in the early days of
their college career. Through collaborations with the Massachusetts Department
of Ecological Restoration, the students will meet with stakeholders, design and
carry out research in recently restored marshes in the greater Boston area, and
report their findings back to the stakeholders. This community-engaged
scholarship provides a unique mechanism to disseminate information to
stakeholders and it engages students in the scientific process in a way that
promotes accountability, generates higher quality outcomes and excites them
about the field of ecology.