* 1719298
* Support for Students, Postdoctoral Fellows, and Young Investigators For The Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) Conference; Waimea, Hawaii; January 3-7, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2017
* Yingxiao Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The theme of the 2017 Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) conference in
Waimea, Hawaii, January 3-7, 2017, will be "A Gateway toward the Future:Imaging
and Reprogramming of the Cell". The need for this conference lies in the unique
opportunity to bring these investigators together in one room for the first time
to exchange ideas and brainstorm new strategies for moving the field of
molecular and cellular engineering, mechanobiology and biomechanics for
therapeutic applications forward. The CMBE field is experiencing exponential
growth. A new international journal of Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering was
launched in 2008. The first BMES-CMBE conference was launched in 2013. The
meeting has been held annually since then. Building upon these successes, the
2017 Conference will bring together leaders in the field of biology, medicine,
and engineering to address pressing topics in CMBE research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to support travel
awards for students, postdoc fellows, and young independent investigators
(Rising Stars) for the 2017 Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE)
Conference. The purpose of this meeting is to foster interdisciplinary
interaction and to capitalize on the rapidly expanding scientific developments
in several cutting-edge fields: molecular engineering, genomic editing,
molecular imaging and manipulation in live cells. The main outcome of the
meeting will be new strategies for the integrated application of these different
technologies toward immuno-engineering and stem cell engineering under the
context of mechanical microenvironment for therapeutics. There are two specific
aims of this meeting: (1) Delineate the current status of different fields of
molecular engineering, genomic editing, molecular imaging and actuation,
mechanobiology and biomechanics, and immune and stem cell engineering; (2)
Foster the free exchange of information across regions around the Pacific Rim in
order to jointly push forward the boundaries of engineering and science in CMBE
by leveraging the strength from different regions. We believe that this
conference is the first of its kind and will create a gateway for the next
generation of bioengineers and will be a vehicle toward future development in
the midst of an amazing convergence of multiple cutting-edge areas in
engineering technology, physical and mechanical sciences, and biomedical
applications.