* 1719686
* RUI:  Emergent Spacetime in Matrix Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Vatche Sahakian, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Vatche Sahakian at Harvey
Mudd College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the great unsolved problems in modern
physics is the fusing of two of the pillars of modern physics, namely quantum
mechanics (the physics of the very small) and general relativity (the physics of
gravity). Thus far, the best candidate theory for accomplishing this fusion is
string theory. Professor Sahakian's research explores several key areas in
string theory and quantum gravity. It investigates the idea that our awareness
of space may be only an "emergent" perception which arises from the unique ways
in which quantum mechanics spreads (or "entangles") information across different
objects. This new rethinking of the nature of spacetime has recently shown great
promise and may be key to addressing the longstanding problems in this field.
This project also explores some of the unique properties of black holes. Black
holes are extreme objects that test the limits of validity of our physical laws
and hence are the ideal playgrounds for understanding quantum gravity. This
project therefore advances the national interest by promoting the progress of
science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. An extensive undergraduate research program
is also a key part of the proposed project, including a course-development
component for an undergraduate course on modern topics in theoretical physics.
Such a course will help to provide undergraduate physics students with solid
foundations for graduate school. The PI will also continue preparing an
undergraduate textbook on classical field theory, a subject which forms one of
the cornerstones of physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Sahakian will study the emergence of spacetime from quantum entanglement. This
will be done primarily within the context of Matrix theory, a non-perturbative
formulation of M-theory and hence of quantum gravity. Professor Sahakian will
test these ideas of emergent spacetime within the setting of black-hole physics,
attempting to unravel the nature of the black-hole horizon where recent work
suggests the possible breakdown of spacetime geometry, even at long distances.
It is also hoped that this research will lead to a better understanding of
black-hole evaporation and the details of entanglement evolution in the process
of transferring information from the interior of a black hole to the outside.