* 1719532
* The wake of Hurricane Matthew: Vulnerability, resilience, and migration
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Meredith Welch-Devine, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 54,922.00

The research funded by this Rapid Response Research Grant supports the
collection of data on post-disaster relocation decision-making. In coming years,
the frequency and intensity of coastal flooding are anticipated to increase
because of rising sea levels and amplified storm severity. While there have been
numerous studies of decision-making around temporary evacuation, surprisingly
little is known about how people decide whether and when to leave permanently.
Ephemeral data collect by this project will be used to understand the factors
that affect how people make migration decisions. Findings from this research
will be of use to city and regional planners and local and state governments as
they prepare for the outcomes of future disasters. Therefore, a University of
Georgia team composed of architect Brian Orland and anthropologist Meredith
Welch-Devine will take advantage of the recent occurrence of Hurricane Mathew to
learn more about how extreme events affect relocation intentions. The
researchers will focus their investigation on the Georgia coast. Hurricane
Matthew's impact on the Georgia coastline offers an unusual opportunity to
investigate how residents experienced the storm and how that experience affected
thinking about future migration. The storm passed the Georgia coast at low-tide
so the resulting surge was particularly revealing of where the future impacts of
projected sea level rise and future storms would likely occur. Residents now
understand who will be impacted and how severely by future storm events. Because
most residents eventually were able to return their homes, they comprise an
ideal population from which to collect baseline data for longitudinal research.
The researchers will survey coastal residents about their beliefs and attitudes
toward climate change, sea-level rise, storm events, and emergency preparedness.
The survey data will be complemented by in-depth interviews with a sub-sample of
residents stratified by social and economic status. The data will also be used
as a baseline for future post-storm research in the area, as well as by social
scientists seeking to improve theories of what factors most affect people's
relocation choices after extreme events.