* 1719208
* Acquisition of an EBSD system for phase and crystallographic orientation mapping of earth and planetary materials
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Kenneth Vecchio, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 119,731.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) at the University of California at San
Diego will acquire an electron backscatter diffraction detector that will be
coupled to a new Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. The resulting,
cutting-edge instrument will be housed at UC San Diego's Materials Research
Center which provides full technical support and priority access for SIO
researchers. The instrument is central to the PIs research into processes that
couple deformation microstructures and geochemistry. The additional capabilities
will also benefit several other SIO geoscience researchers as well as be
generally available to UCSD researchers. It is expected to promote
interdisciplinary collaborations among geoscientists and planetary scientists as
well as benefitting materials scientist. The new instrument will also be the
focus of a course that prepares students in the materials characterization that
is essential for success in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enable Scripps Institution of Oceanography to acquire EBSD
(electron backscatter diffraction) instrumentation, which will be coupled with a
brand new, state-of-the-art field emission SEM (scanning electron microscope).
EBSD is an integral component of the PI's research on 1) the coupled geochemical
and rheological evolution of lower crust and 2) understanding the pressure-
temperature-time history of subduction zone crust and mantle. In addition, the
EBSD will be utilized by several other SIO and UC San Diego researchers for
applications ranging from NSF-funded studies of the surficial environment to
planetary deep interiors. Courses on materials characterization will use the
cutting edge instrument as a focal point for hands-on learning and important
technical training and skill sets that prepare students to be competitive in
academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;