* 1719396
* Mechanically-Mediated Spin Entanglement in Diamond
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Fundamental aspects of quantum mechanics, such as the superposition and
entanglement of quantum states, can, in principle, be exploited to solve
computational problems that are impractical or impossible to solve with
conventional, classical computers. Realizing this goal remains technically
challenging, however, because these quantum traits are delicate and sensitive to
noise and interactions with the environment, therefore requiring precise control
of the interactions between the individual qubits which store quantum
information. This project will attempt to use acoustic waves in a nano-
mechanical resonator to mediate interactions between two qubits in a solid-state
system. Acoustic waves propagate much more slowly than light, and they cannot
propagate in a vacuum. As a result, acoustic waves can be conveniently confined
and guided in a solid. In this way, these mechanical waves offer advantages over
photonics-based platforms by enabling on-chip communication between qubits. The
near-term goal of this program is to generate quantum entanglement between two
qubits via mechanically-mediated interactions. The long-term goal is to develop
a mechanics-based platform for implementation of a solid-state quantum computer.
This project will promote education and human resources by providing excellent
training to graduate and undergraduate students in areas of both scientific and
technological importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to demonstrate
mechanically-mediated spin entanglement in a spin-mechanical system,
establishing a mechanics-based solid-state platform for quantum computing. The
research efforts will be carried out with a diamond nanomechanical resonator in
which two electron spins couple to a common mechanical mode. This experimental
platform exploits the strong excited-state strain coupling of nitrogen vacancy
(NV) centers for spin-mechanical coupling, but circumvents decoherence of the
excited states through optically-controlled adiabatic evolution of the ground
spin states. Coherent coupling between a single NV center and a single phonon
will be investigated. This will be followed by the study of coherent coupling
between two NV centers through the exchange of single phonons. The successful
implementation of these efforts should then enable the pursuit of mechanically-
mediated entanglement between two NV centers. The Sorensen-Molmer entanglement
scheme, which is relatively robust against thermal mechanical motion, will be
used for the generation of a maximally-entangled spin state.