* 1719277
* IceCube Upgrade: An IceCube Extension for Precision Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2026
* Dawn Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* William Wester
* 04/30/2026
* USD 21,391,279.00

Embedded deep in the ice cap at the South Pole, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
(ICNO) is the world's unique, largest, and most sensitive high energy neutrino
telescope. It is a one-billion-ton detector that uses the deep Antarctic ice as
a medium to detect high energy atmospheric and astrophysical neutrinos. Most of
the neutrinos observed by IceCube exhibit energies in the range expected for
atmospheric neutrinos that originate from decays of elementary particles
produced in extensive air showers by cosmic rays coming from nearby sectors of
the Milky Way Galaxy. While these can be used to measure the fundamental
properties of neutrinos, astrophysical neutrinos at higher energies are key
probes of the high-energy phenomena in the Universe. Because of their unique
properties, neutrinos pass almost freely through even dense volumes of space and
are not deflected by galactic or extra-galactic magnetic fields and traverse the
photon-filled universe unhindered. Thus, neutrinos provide direct information
about the dynamics and interiors of the powerful cosmic objects that may be the
origins of high energy cosmic rays: supernovae, black holes, pulsars, active
galactic nuclei and other extreme extragalactic phenomena. This award will fund
the deployment of seven additional strings of photon sensors in the deep, clear
Antarctic ice at the bottom center of IceCube, forming the IceCube Gen2 Phase 1
extension ("Phase 1"). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of a deep-ice
drill presents several opportunities to enhance the existing IceCube
infrastructure for research and education. Deep ice drills will also allow for
the possibility of deploying next-generation optical sensor technology
prototypes within the existing IceCube operations framework at the U.S.
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, presenting new opportunities for training a
new cohort of international students and young scientists throughout the
instrumentation development, production, and field deployment. The combination
of astrophysics and the extreme polar climate attracts wide popular
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new strings will use multi-PMT Digital
Optical Modules (mDOMs), providing better directionality and more than double
the photocathode area per module, at lower cost per unit area, than traditional
IceCube DOMs. The mDOMs will be tightly integrated into the existing IceCube
data acquisition framework, at marginal added long-term maintenance and
operations expense. The new instrumentation will dramatically boost IceCube's
performance at the 5 GeV energy scale, yielding over an order of magnitude more
statistics than current samples, and enabling IceCube to perform the world's
best measurement of tau neutrino appearance and the world's most stringent test
of unitarity in the tau sector of the PMNS (Pontecorvo-Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata)
matrix. This matrix describes all known neutrino oscillation behavior, and
deviations from unitarity would be evidence for new physics. The strings will
feature new calibration devices that would allow to better model the optical
properties of the ice, reducing systematic uncertainties in the tau neutrino
appearance measurement and enhancing IceCube's already strong contribution to
multimessenger astrophysics via improved reconstruction of the direction of high
energy cascade events for searches of point sources and enhanced identification
of PeV-scale tau neutrinos. High energy tau neutrinos are essentially guaranteed
to be astrophysical in origin, and they are a unique probe of neutrino
oscillation physics over ultra-long baselines, providing powerful
complementarity with Phase 1's atmospheric tau neutrino appearance measurement
at lower energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.