* 1719316
* Quantitative modeling of nucleic acid-protein interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Ralf Bundschuh, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2020
* USD 335,787.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award that supports theoretical
research and education towards developing models for the interactions within
nucleic acid and protein complexes. All living organisms use three main classes
of biomolecules as their building blocks, nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), proteins,
and lipids. Like Lego® pieces, these building blocks can be combined in myriads
of different ways to give rise to all the complexities of living organisms.
However, the rules by which these building blocks fit together (interact) are
not well understood. The goal of this project is to develop mathematical models
that describe the interactions of two of these building blocks, namely nucleic
acids and proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such mathematical models offer two
advantages: i) They allow a better understanding of how living organisms work,
ultimately improving our ability to correct instances when they do not work,
i.e., diseases. ii) They allow these natural molecules to be assembled in new
ways in engineered systems to provide completely new functionality. In
developing these models, the research team works closely with collaborators
performing experiments on real systems to test and improve the models. To be
specific and to address both of the goals presented above, one subproject
focuses on how the interactions between the nucleic acid RNA and proteins guide
the formation of the outer shell of viruses in infected cells, while the other
subproject focuses on dynamic human-engineered DNA nanostructures called DNA
origami that one day could form the basis of nanorobots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the development of models that will improve understanding of
diseases and enable novel engineering applications, the project will also train
the next generation of researchers at the interface between life and physical
sciences through their involvement in research, coursework, and seminars. This
is important since Biology and Medicine on one side, and Physics, Mathematics,
and Engineering on the other side traditionally use rather different languages
and approaches; addressing the complex problems in Biology and Medicine today
needs the more mathematical approaches that quantitative fields offer, and thus
"bilingual" scientists who understand and speak the language of both are
urgently needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry Division contribute funds to
this award that supports theoretical research and education towards developing
models for the interactions within nucleic acid and protein complexes. In a
cell, proteins, RNA and DNA interact with each other in a highly controlled
fashion. The ability to reproducibly form specific complexes from these
molecules also enables their use in creating man-made nanoscale devices. In this
project, quantitative models of the interactions within such complexes will be
developed. Quantitative models are crucial for understanding biological
functions of biomolecular complexes, for interpreting experiments on such
biomolecular complexes, and for designing novel complexes. All activities are
performed in close collaboration with experimentalists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work in this project is divided into two main threads,
one addressing interactions in natural biomolecular complexes and one addressing
engineering man-made biomolecular complexes. The focus of the first subproject
is on describing the interaction of double-stranded RNA binding proteins with
RNA. Since these proteins are specific to double-stranded RNA, their binding to
a given RNA molecule depends on the intramolecular interactions of the RNA
molecule. One of the main goals of the project is the development of a model
that can predict for arbitrary RNA molecules how strongly and at which locations
a double-stranded RNA binding protein will bind. This will build upon the
research team's previous experience and will result in a complete modeling
framework for both of the common classes of RNA binding proteins. One important
application of such a model is understanding the mechanism by which specific
interactions between coat proteins and single-stranded RNA genome guide the
assembly of the viral shell in certain RNA viruses. The other thread of the
project focuses on developing models of dynamic DNA origami structures including
those that incorporate functional mechanical elements, such as nucleosomes or
RNA molecules. Such structures can be used to provide information on their
immediate environment, perform functions such as drug delivery, and provide
insight into the mechanical properties of biomolecules attached to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the development of models that will
improve understanding of diseases and enable novel engineering applications, the
project will also train the next generation of researchers at the interface
between life and physical sciences through their involvement in research,
coursework, and seminars. This is important since Biology and Medicine on one
side, and Physics, Mathematics, and Engineering on the other side traditionally
use rather different languages and approaches; addressing the complex problems
in Biology and Medicine today needs the more mathematical approaches that
quantitative fields offer, and thus "bilingual" scientists who understand and
speak the language of both are urgently needed.