* 1719257
* RAPID: Engineering Research Center History
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 194,750.00

The Engineering Research Centers (ERC) Program of the National Science
Foundation (NSF) is a premier example of successful government funding, serving
as one of the flagship research programs over the past 30 years. It is unique in
its size, scope, and impact on the culture of academic research and has
demonstrated significant successes. Although the program is still vibrant and
vigorous, many of the individuals involved in the origination and early
development of the program and its centers are retired and/or rapidly becoming
unavailable. Therefore, the goal of this RAPID project is to compile and
document a detailed history of the ERC Program from the standpoint of lessons
learned, best practices, achievements, successes and pitfalls, and the evolution
of management policies to date. It will draw on multiple resources, including:
archived documents, input from key participants in the ERC program (both inside
and outside NSF), and the personal experience of the program's managerial team
members. The project's PI and co-PI have been instrumentally involved with the
program for a large portion of its existence, serving in the roles of the
program's developer and leader (Preston) and as the communications specialist
(Lewis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a permanent record for
faculty, students, industry, and practitioners regarding the management of
university center programs. The history will have significantly broad impact in
the U.S. and around the world, since the material will be organized in such a
way as to be accessible to audiences ranging from engineering faculty and
students to academic administrators and government officials, in addition to
industry executives and research managers. The effort will result in a wiki-
like, e-book in the form of a PDF document with a narrative spine and branching
links to addition resource documents, such as: interview summaries, graphics,
videos, and websites. The history will be made available and actively marketed
to a large variety of academic researchers and administrators, as well as
government and industry executives and program managers around the world. It
will serve as a living resource to guide future participants in
multidisciplinary research center programs to achieve maximum success and help
strengthen the Nation's economic competitiveness.