* 1719193
* 2017 Environmental Nanotechnology Gordon Research Conference and Seminar: A Platform for Cutting Edge Research in Nanotechnology Applications and Implications
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Leanne Gilbertson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,400.00

#1719193 &lt;br/&gt;2017 Environmental Nanotechnology Gordon Research Conference
and Seminar: A Platform for Cutting Edge Research in Nanotechnology Applications
and Implications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thee 2017 Environmental Nanotechnology
Gordon Research Conference (GRC), The Next Generation of Nanotechnology:
Materials, Applications, and Implications, and the associated Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS), Product Innovations and Novel Methodologies in Environmental
Nanotechnology, which will be held, in conjunction, June 18-23 in Stowe, VT. The
conference brings together leading scientists and engineers from across the
globe in academia, industry and government who are motivated to advance
nanotechnologies in a way that is safe for human health and the environment.
Increasingly commercial, industrial and environmental products and processes are
using nano-enabled systems. Nanotechnology offers tremendous opportunities to
improve human health, product performance, energy and food production
efficiency, and environmental protection. Benefitting from such opportunities
must be accompanied by knowledge and policy that protects the environment. This
fourth GRC builds on a successful conference history, and will challenge
speakers and participants to consider the horizon of these emerging innovations
and implications of environmental nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC
has a tremendous success and track record of facilitating meetings that are in
depth, intense scientific discussions involving scientific leaders in their
disciplines and communities. This Environmental Nanotechnology GRC will focus on
emerging topics, including i) applications of nanomaterials in food and
agriculture, ii) translational issues and design opportunities in manufacturing,
and iii) question the why, why not and how of nano-enabled products as well as
recurring themes at the heart of the field, including engaging the public and
nano-bio-phenomena and processes. This will be the second Environmental
Nanotechnology GRS, which is organized by and for early career scientists and
engineers. Graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and a group of invited
mentors will come together to contribute to engaging technical research sessions
and a mentorship panel. This year, sessions include, i) Nanotechnology: Novel
Applications and Advantages to Current Alternatives, ii) The Yin and Yang of
Nano-initiated Biological Inactivation, and iii) Novel Methodologies for
Evaluating Environmental Impact-Benefit Tradeoffs of Nanotechnology. The
mentorship component will include editors of leading journals in the field to
discuss and provide guidance on publishing success.