* 1719690
* Physics at the Frontier: Collider and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Doreen Wackeroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Wackeroth, Kinney, and
Stojkovic at the State University of New York, University at Buffalo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to make important
progress in providing answers to key open questions at the frontiers of particle
physics, cosmology and gravity research, and in doing so to go significantly
beyond the current state of the art in the field. New particle accelerators such
as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and envisioned successors are probing new
physics at the energy frontier and are capable of providing answers to important
questions about the structure and history of the universe. On the other hand,
cosmology provides a unique laboratory in which to study questions in physics
inaccessible to traditional particle physics methods, and forms a valuable
complement to accelerators. Our current understanding of the fundamental
problems about the origin, evolution and future of our universe is still in its
infancy, and a synthesis of many independent lines of evidence will be necessary
to point the way to explanations. This project reflects that synergy, and
promises to make significant progress in connecting high-precision cosmological
and accelerator data to fundamental questions such as the origin and evolution
of the universe, the unification of gravitation with quantum mechanics, the role
of the vacuum in the structure of space and time. As a result, research in these
areas advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one
of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new
physical laws. In addition, this project will involve graduate students and
postdocs, and thereby provide critical training for junior physicists beginning
research in this field. The PIs will also continue presenting the latest
scientific results to the public at large in the form of public talks and
various outreach activities. Kinney will also continue organizing Science and
Art Cabaret --- a unique mix of cutting-edge science and technology with art,
music, poetry, and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Wackeroth
will concentrate on improving predictions for key SM measurements at the LHC by
calculating higher-order QCD and electroweak corrections and implementing them
in publicly available Monte Carlo event generators for realistic simulations.
The comparison of experimental data with these improved predictions will probe
the Standard Model with unprecedented precision and provide increased
sensitivity to signals of new physics. The main thrust of Kinney's planned
research for the next several years is to make quantitative connections between
new observational Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) data and detailed properties
of the early universe in order to address fundamental questions such as: What is
the energy scale of cosmological inflation? What is the form of the leading-
order operator in the inflationary potential? Is the inflationary Lagrangian
consistent with a simple canonical field theory? Is there evidence for quantum
gravity effects, for example a Planck-scale cutoff in quantum modes? Can we
explain CMB anomalies, such as the hemispherical asymmetry observed by Planck?
Are there viable alternatives to inflation? What properties do they have?
Finally, Stojkovic will focus on LHC physics, in particular on further
development of a comprehensive LHC event generator BlackMax which is extensively
used by the ATLAS and CMS collaborations in search for exotic physics.