* 1719671
* RAPID:  Lidar and Sonar Surveys of a Dune Reinforced with Geotextile Sand Containers Impacted by Tropical Storm Hermine
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Stephen Licht, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 62,009.00

The devastating effects of Hurricane Sandy in 2012 on the northeast United
States highlighted the need to improve the ability of coastal communities to
quickly respond and rebound from natural hazards. There is a trend towards
implementing "soft" engineering solutions such as dunes reinforced with
Geotextile Sand Containers (GSC) to improve resiliency rather than traditional
hardened structures like stone revetments. These have the potential to protect
communities from smaller storm events (e.g. 25-year storms) while at the same
time providing flexibility in design considering the uncertainty regarding rates
of sea level rise and storm frequency. "Soft" engineering solutions may also be
less disruptive to the natural morphology of barrier beach systems than hardened
structures. However, there is still considerable uncertainty regarding the
mechanisms that affect the stability of reinforced dunes under wave attack. The
objective of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is to collect
perishable data to assess the stability and performance of a 1000 m section of a
dune reinforced with GSCs in Montauk, NY that was impacted by Tropical Storm
Hermine in September 2016. The reinforced dune was constructed in March 2016,
and Tropical Storm Hermine resulted in complete erosion of the protective berm,
exposure of the GSC core, and movement of the lower level of GSCs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A detailed 3-D digital elevation model of both the eroded
beach (topography) as well as the near-shore bathymetry will be constructed.
This will be accomplished through two surveys: an aerial LIDAR survey using an
Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) and a combined ship-mounted LIDAR and
interferometric sonar system. These data will provide a detailed case study of
the effects of wave action on a dune reinforced with GSCs. This will allow for
the application of findings from numerical and wave flume studies to an actual
field case at a scale not reproducible in the laboratory. It is hypothesized
that current stability equations are unconservative in that they underpredict
the hydraulic stability of geotextile containers associated with reduced scale
experiments. Analysis of this case study will also improve our understanding of
whether reinforced dunes perform as "soft" coastal structures and do not
significantly modify the natural morphology of the shoreline.