* 1719201
* Small Business Programs, Innovation, and Growth: Estimating Policy Effects Using Comprehensive Firm-Level Panel Data
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* John Earle, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 544,624.00

This project investigates the growth of start-ups and young firms, which are
generally believed to be the most important job-creators, and evaluates the
probability of becoming a high-growth productivity leader in an industry. The
project provides direct measures of innovation and research and development
(R&amp;D), firm-level labor and total factor productivity, the dispersion of
firm productivity and performance, the growth of high- vs. low-productivity
entrants and incumbents, and exit rates of under-performing firms. With a
specific focus on the Small Business Administration (SBA) 7(a) and 504 loan
facilities, the analysis provides evidence on the importance of financial
constraints, and the degree to which they may be attenuated by major government
programs. The results will shed light not only on direct program impacts but
also consider the indirect effects on productivity-enhancing reallocation of
resources. In particular the central issue as to whether the policy intervention
promotes growth of productive but financially constrained businesses, or instead
sustains low-productivity firms that should release their resources to superior
uses. The results have policy implications for the growth, innovation, and
productivity of the U.S. economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project relies on
new concepts, methods, and data for estimating the effects of financial access
and small business programs. Conceptually, the project draws on models of firm
dynamics to analyze innovation as the result of experimentation by entrants and
incumbents, thus as part of the creative destruction process. A fundamental
insight is that the full distribution of outcomes is useful for revealing
innovation, as experimentation raises dispersion and selection raises skewness.
The empirical methods include a credible identification strategy based on panel-
matching and instrumental variables capturing geographic variation in SBA loan
access. Estimation includes not only average treatment effects for productivity
and innovation measures but also other moments of the outcome distribution:
overall dispersion and skewness, performance at top percentiles, and allocation
and selection effects that work through growth and exit at different points in
the distribution. The methods provide an original way to assess the impact of a
government intervention on productivity-enhancing reallocation. The data work
links SBA administrative data with Census Bureau universal data on all U.S.
employers. Variables from the Business Register, Census of Manufacturers, and
Annual Survey of Manufacturers are added to measure productivity. Linking to the
new Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs permits direct measurement of innovation and
R&amp;D effort. The conceptual approach, identification strategy, methods of
analysis, and data development of this project should have positive
externalities for other research including the evaluation of other programs in
the U.S. and around the world.