* 1719262
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Investigating the Integration of Mathematics into Biology by Reciprocal Course Content Exchange
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Qingxia Li, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 06/30/2022
* USD 309,687.00

Fisk University and Tennessee State University are using the Intrusive Learning
Community approach to test a theoretical model of factors that influence
students to switch from STEM to non-STEM disciplines. Researchers propose to use
the Performance Pyramid to develop measures that examine the effectiveness of
two interventions - a combined section of college algebra and general biology
that infuses math into the science curriculum and a learning community to
complete mathematics projects related to biology facilitated by undergraduate
peer mentors called Peer Partnership Learning (PPL) leaders. The objectives of
the learning community are to promote interdisciplinary thinking and problem
solving, decrease student mathematics anxiety, encourage students to pursue STEM
coursework, and increase student self-efficacy and persistence in STEM. The PPL
leaders in the learning community will form supportive networks and enhance
learning and personal development of student participants. The proposed study is
expected to provide important insights to guide STEM education and increase the
pipeline of African American students who pursue STEM graduate education and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use a quasi-experimental non-
equivalent control group design to test a multi-faceted hypothesis. The
hypothesis states that students who participate in the PPL leaders-focused
learning community will demonstrate greater knowledge and skills in their STEM
courses; that the conceptual elements of the performance pyramid can be
quantified; that PPLs will endorse more performance pyramid support systems;
that students will evaluate the learning community positively; and that
participants will show higher show higher STEM retention and persistence.
Conversely, researchers postulate that the number of STEM students who switch to
non-STEM disciplines will be reduced among participants in the small learning
communities, and the level of math anxiety will significantly decrease upon
completion of the integrated course. The researchers will develop the course
materials for intrusive learning and the survey to measure the support system in
the Performance Pyramid model. They will use a combination of multivariate
analyses of variance, Poisson regressions, structural equation modeling,
Pearson's correlations, and descriptive statistics to analyze the research data.
They also intend to organize a faculty development workshop to encourage more
STEM faculty to integrate learning communities in teaching.