* 1719654
* Collaborative Research: The Function and Mechanism of Male Relationships In A Primate System
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Rebecca Lewis, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 227,322.00

Models of social relationships help to explain how and why social groups form,
are maintained, and vary across primate species. These models typically focus on
the number of males present in a social group and whether males are cooperative
or competitive with each other. This project investigates the social behavior,
demography, hormones, and genealogy of a wild primate species to understand the
causes and consequences of male social relationships. The project will support
conservation efforts by contributing valuable knowledge about an endangered
primate in a poorly understood habitat and exemplifying to local residents the
economic value of conservation. The research will support a new generation of
scientists and conservation professionals via employment and training
opportunities. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in data
collection and analysis, gaining hands-on research experience in the US and
abroad, building their research toolkits, and honing their critical thinking
skills. Additionally, the project will increase diversity in biological
anthropology by creating mentoring opportunities for minority and first
generation undergraduates. Notably, by including a high school teacher in the
research, the project will improve K-12 scientific curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent data from a greater diversity of
species has led researchers to question aspects of standard primate behavior
models. Although models of male social relationships have sought to incorporate
the social diversity that is present among males, these models continue to
struggle to explain why numerous primate populations exhibit both single-male
and multi-male social groups, and to predict when these variable grouping
patterns occur. Moreover, while male influences are incorporated into models of
female social relationships, models of male social relationships often treat
females as inert resources and rarely account for female influences. Verreaux's
sifaka in Madagascar provides an excellent opportunity to investigate
explanations of male association and bonding because the species is renowned for
both the variable presence of multi-male groups and female dominance over males.
This project will examine behavioral, demographic, genetic, health, hormone, and
body size data from multiple social groups over multiple years using the latest
analytical tools to test new and existing hypotheses, and to inform and develop
a model of sifaka societies that accounts for dynamic long-term patterns. It
will explore multiple new suggestions for how current models can be modified,
including (1) a more expansive and nuanced model that moves beyond a simple
cooperation-competition dichotomy, (2) a role for females in influencing male
association patterns and social relationships, and (3) a shift from viewing the
number of males in a group as stable for a species to a new emphasis on variable
and dynamic grouping patterns.