* 1719675
* Collaborative Research:  The physiology and ecology of widespread 'stress tolerant' coral endosymbionts: coral 'saviors' or opportunistic invaders?
* BIO,IOS
* 10/31/2016,03/31/2017
* Dustin Kemp, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2017
* USD 33,672.00

Ocean warming is affecting life on our planet in many ways. High temperature can
disrupt the endosymbioses between dinoflagellate algae (Symbiodinium spp.) and
reef-building corals (i.e. coral bleaching), thereby risking the global loss of
a critical marine ecosystem. The physiological, ecological and evolutionary
responses of coral-dinoflagellate symbioses to environmental stress brought on
by global climate change are complex. The spread of certain types of symbiotic
algae may increase the thermal stress tolerance among corals and help them
persist in warmer oceans, but perhaps not without trade-offs to the health of
the coral. The dinoflagellate tentatively named Symbiodinium trenchi has become
increasingly more common in numerous corals throughout the Caribbean, but is
often at low-abundance relative to other symbionts. While S. trenchi can
increase in abundance during and after warming, it is often displaced by other
symbionts following a return to normal conditions. Genetic evidence indicates
that S. trenchi recently invaded and/or expanded in the Caribbean and has
developed associations with many corals that seem to be poorly optimized, or
mal-adapted, relative to the symbioses it maintains with corals in the Indo-
Pacific. This project will investigate the symbiosis ecology and physiology of
S. trenchi in corals from the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Bleaching experiments
will examine the effects of increased temperature on transfer of carbon from the
algae to the host coral (via stable isotopic tagging), as well as photosynthesis
and growth among colonies harboring S. trenchi compared to colonies harboring
other Symbiodinium spp. The potential for symbiont community shifts as well as
altered long-term colony growth based on bleaching severity and recovery time
will be investigated. A reciprocal transplant study will examine the competitive
interaction and stability of symbionts among Pacific corals. These studies will
test if the continued spread of S. trenchi will affect coral growth in the
Caribbean and whether it might behave similarly in the Indo-Pacific if
environmental conditions worsen. The results from this project have the
potential to supply transformative information regarding how (or if) a widely
distributed symbiotic algal species may influence the resilience of reef-
building corals and their potential to survive projected increases in ocean
warming due to climate change. In addition to training one postdoctoral scholar
and several graduate students, this project will enhance scientific discovery
and participation of underrepresented groups via several outreach efforts with
the Palau National Aquarium, Palau International Coral Reef Center, and local
schools. Educational units in marine symbioses and science will be developed
with several local high school teachers and students, and unique research
opportunities will be provided to students at the Palau Community College.
Likewise, a new educational display addressing how global climate may impact
coral reefs, and describing the current research to better understand the
physiology of coral-algal symbioses, will be developed and presented at the
University of Delaware open house "Coast Day." The display will be donated
subsequently to the Palau Aquarium for future use.

This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of International and Integrative
Activities.