* 1719275
* Student Activities Support at 2017 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM)
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Jiliang Tang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2019
* USD 33,424.00

This award provides travel support graduate students from U.S.-based
institutions to attend the 2017 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
(SDM 2017) and the associated Doctoral Student Forum. SDM 2017 will be held in
Houston, TX April 27 -29, 2017. SDM conferences are organized by the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) in cooperation with the American
Statistical Association and provide a premier venue for researchers who are
addressing problems in data mining to present their work in a peer-reviewed
forum. It is widely attended by researchers and practitioners in the field.
Participation in premier research conferences in data mining is an integral
component of the training of Ph.D. students in data mining. The SDM 2017 Ph.D.
Student Forum is aimed at providing an opportunity for Ph.D. candidates to
present their work and receive constructive feedback and mentoring from
established researchers in data mining. Such feedback and mentoring is expected
to improve the quality of the students' thesis research. The supported students
will be able to present their posters, attend technical sessions, plenary talks,
panels, tutorials and workshops. They will interact with peers who share similar
interests from other universities, as well as hundreds of leading researchers in
data mining from around the world. This experience will be important and
formative in shaping of students' research endeavors. The student travel support
will help broaden the participation of women and members of under-represented
groups within the Data Mining research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of the SIAM International Conference on Data Mining is to advance the
mathematics of data mining, to highlight the importance and benefits of the
application of data mining, and to identify and explore the connections between
data mining and other applied sciences. Data mining is playing an increasingly
important role in many emerging data-rich sciences and application domains, such
as healthcare informatics, bioinformatics, computational biology, link analysis,
counterterrorism and security, and big data analysis. The peer-reviewed papers
will be accessible on SDM Conference web site
(http://www.siam.org/meetings/sdm17) and published by SIAM
(http://epubs.siam.org).