* 1719546
* Implementation Project: Science Community of Active Learners to Enhance Achievement and Retention
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Desmond Stephens, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 2,097,556.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research.
The project at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) seeks to
build on previous successful efforts to increase participation of African-
American students in STEM disciplines. The goal of the project is to
significantly improve student success rates in the STEM programs in the College
of Science and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the
objectives to improve the academic preparedness of freshman STEM students so
they are better equipped for the rigor of major courses, graduate school, and
the global marketplace; and to increase retention and graduation rates of STEM
majors. The following activities and strategies are designed in support of
meeting the objectives: improving students' preparedness in mathematics early in
the academic career; ensuring that students develop sound foundational knowledge
in core disciplines; helping students develop positive attitudes about their
ability to learn; placing students in effective learning environments; providing
students with sufficient academic support resources throughout their academic
career; and developing and enhancing critical thinking skills. These project
strategies are evidence-based, but will be studied for effectiveness in the
setting of this university. The project will be advised and evaluated for
effectiveness by internal and external advisory boards and by a team of
evaluators. The project at Florida A&amp;M University can serve as a model for
the sustainable transformation of the undergraduate STEM curriculum to
incorporate evidence-based strategies and practices in STEM education for
minority serving institutions.