* 1719854
* Efficient, Adaptive, and Convergent Numerical Methods for Phase Field Equations with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Steven Wise, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This project focuses on the design and application of efficient computational
algorithms for approximating the solutions to models describing various physical
phenomena, including multi-phase fluid flow, tissue growth, phase
transformations, and polymer processing. The investigator will study models that
apply to applications that include optimizing organic photovoltaic devices for
energy conversion; predicting cancerous tumor growth; simulating complex
biological flows involving sub-cellular structures like endoplasmic reticulum;
and designing durable semiconductor and energy storage materials. As a central
pillar of this project, he will continue to develop his software package, BSAM,
based on the efficient algorithms developed in the research. This software
package, which is, and will always be, freely available and open source, is
designed to solve a broad spectrum of nonlinear, multi-physics partial
differential equations, in two and three dimensions. This tool is ultimately
useful for researchers from many disciplines and provides the capability to
efficiently simulate complex phenomena, without the need to reinvent algorithms
or redesign code. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will examine
high-order, highly nonlinear partial differential equations through focus on
three specific project goals. These include the design and rigorous numerical
analysis of high-order energy stable numerical schemes, the design and analysis
of algorithms and software for efficient two and three-dimensional time-space
adaptive modeling and simulation, and the design and rigorous analysis of novel,
nearly-optimally complex preconditioned nonlinear solvers.  The models under
examination in the project describe a number of physical processes, including
solidification; grain boundary dynamics; crack propagation; tumor growth; two-
phase polymer flows; organic photovoltaic processing; and complex biological
flows involving lipid bilayers. Because the equations under study are coupled
systems of highly nonlinear, high-order partial differential equations, the
analysis of their solutions and the design of efficient and reliable numerical
methods that give rise to convergent approximations is a non-trivial task. The
principal investigator will design unconditionally energy stable, second and
third-order-in-time approximations and aims to rigorously prove that the schemes
are optimally convergent. He will implement optimally or nearly-optimally
efficient solvers that take advantage of the variational/convexity structure of
the proposed schemes, producing sophisticated numerical software.