* 1719638
* Collaborative Research: Using Surface Information for Quantitative Modeling of the Subsurface
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Holly Michael, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 282,371.00

Surface connections, such as those among channels in river networks, are
important for understanding the development and evolution of landscapes, such as
densely populated coastal river deltas. Connections in the subsurface are
critical in understanding groundwater flow and solute transport. Preferential
flowpaths, in fact, can quickly deliver contaminants to water supply wells, a
particularly important problem in densely populated coastal areas. Establishing
a quantitative link between surface and subsurface patterns will greatly advance
our capability to predict the movement of contaminants in groundwater, thus
improving access to clean water and limiting pollution and health risks. We
propose to investigate quantitatively how the dynamics of surface networks
create subsurface networks, and thus determine how surface information can be
used to predict properties of the subsurface. This will enable us to better
predict sustainability and manage water resources in densely populated deltas
such as the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta, where high concentrations of arsenic are
widespread in the groundwater of the upper delta, and salinity problems are
pervasive in the lower delta. The models and data analysis tools developed as
part of this project will be released as open source and we will collaborate
with Bangladeshi institutions to disseminate our findings. &lt;br/&gt;Our
driving hypothesis is that the 3D subsurface structure can be predicted by
combining information on (i) the modern surface network snapshot, (ii) the
surface network kinematics (i.e., its temporal evolution), and (iii)
accommodation and net sedimentation. We further hypothesize that (iv) the nature
of the surface-to-subsurface translation exerts a major influence on structural
connectivity and solute transport through the resulting aquifer system. Our goal
is to develop new methods to translate surface channel networks to obtain
quantitative models of subsurface architecture and flow and transport processes.
We will perform this analysis with a combination of experimental, numerical
modeling, and observational approaches and we will verify our findings by
collecting lithologic and geochemical data in the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta. Our
findings will provide critical information about the predictability of
subsurface structure given the surface channel network and its kinematics, and
will allow quantification of the factors influencing this predictability. The
proposed work will also further the development of quantitative metrics of
connectivity of surface networks and subsurface 3D structures and flowpaths, and
improve our ability to model the subsurface structure of large deltaic systems
where spatial heterogeneity and large spatial extent prevent full
characterization via field observations. By extending this structural
understanding to dynamic solute transport behavior, the proposed research will
enhance the predictability of contaminant migration in highly heterogeneous
systems. &lt;br/&gt;