* 1719642
* Exploring the Scalar Sector
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Patrick Draper, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 05/31/2019
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Patrick Draper at the
University of Massachusetts-Amherst.

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the highest-energy particle collider and the
most advanced scientific instrument in high-energy physics (HEP). The US HEP
community occupies a leadership role in experiments at the LHC, driving
fundamental research at the energy frontier. In the next several years,
physicists will use the LHC and other complementary experiments to search for
new particles, forces, and laws of nature. This broad program advances the
national interest by spearheading progress in basic science. In his research,
Professor Draper studies the properties and experimental signatures of new
physical phenomena connected with the Higgs boson, a long-sought particle
discovered in a landmark achievement during an earlier run of the LHC. By
mapping out the signatures and deeper implications of new physics connected with
the Higgs boson, the research program directly contributes to the exploration of
pressing questions in fundamental physics. This research is also well-suited to
the involvement of advanced undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs. By
engaging younger scientists at a range of levels, the program contributes to the
broader impact of rigorously training future scientific leaders and the broader
STEM workforce.

More technically, Professor Draper will study the phenomenology and implications
of extended scalar or Higgs sectors. He will study anomalous sigma models, in
which new light states associated with the spontaneous breaking of new global
symmetries mix with pseudoscalar mesons, leading to novel signatures at the LHC.
He will also explore the question of what can be inferred from the discovery of
new scalars about the structure of electroweak symmetry breaking and underlying
mechanisms of electroweak naturalness. He will study, for example, how the
discovery of a second Higgs doublet or singlet would point to the scale of
supersymmetry breaking, and how discrete symmetries might control the pattern of
symmetry breaking with additional Higgs states. He also will continue his
studies of connections between the electroweak hierarchy problem and the strong
CP problem, using, for example, the phenomenology of composite scalar sectors to
describe new ways in which high-energy colliders can probe solutions to the
strong-CP problem.