* 1719547
* PPO: Platforms for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR) Project Office
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Joseph Kochan, US Ignite, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Murat Torlak
* 02/29/2024
* USD 12,165,815.00

Innovations in wireless communication networks and applications relying on them
have now become vital components driving the nation's economic growth and
productivity. Sustaining the rapid growth in these technologies is essential to
maintaining the nation's leadership and economic competitiveness. In July 2016,
the National Science Foundation announced a multi-year effort, called Platforms
for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR), aimed at creating a set of city-scale
testbeds to promote research in advanced wireless communication and networking
technologies over the next decade. In this effort, the NSF was joined by a
Consortium of companies with commercial interests in the wireless technologies
resulting from this investment. PAWR will enable experimental exploration of
robust new wireless devices, communication techniques, networks, systems, and
services that will revolutionize the nation's wireless ecosystem, thereby
enhancing broadband connectivity, leveraging the emerging Internet of Things
(IoT), and sustaining US leadership and economic competitiveness for decades to
come. PAWR will also enable rapid commercialization of promising technologies,
bringing jobs and economic vitality. Researchers will have access to realistic,
city-scale testbeds for testing new wireless theories and concepts, while a
whole new generation of participating graduate students will emerge with hands-
on practical training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to support the design,
development, deployment, and operations of the advanced wireless research
platforms, the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) is funding this award, which will
support the work of a PAWR Project Office (PPO). Working closely with the
wireless research community, the PPO will assume responsibility for design,
development, and deployment of a set of advanced wireless research platforms.
Upon successful completion of the design of advanced wireless research
platforms, the PPO will proceed to the development and deployment phases with
funding provided by NSF as well as the Industry Consortium. The PPO will
professionally establish and manage the advanced Research Platforms needed to
unleash American innovation, drive economic development, and help extend US
global leadership in the wireless industry. The PPO will work closely with the
wireless research community in all aspects of the design, development,
deployment, and operations of PAWR. A PAWR Steering Council (PSC), comprising
research leaders in wireless networking technologies and a subset of the
Industry Consortium, will represent the community's research interests in PAWR.
The PSC will be chartered and supported by the PPO, with the goal of obtaining
advice on all aspects of the deployment and operations of the advanced wireless
research platforms.