* 1719907
* Simulation of the Wave-Matter Interactions at Extreme Scales
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Songting Luo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 124,934.00

This project is devoted to providing reliable models and the state-of-the-art
numerical methods for studying the wave-matter interactions at extreme scales as
in geometrical optics, kinetic models, and nano optics, with practical
applications arising from astrophysics, geosciences, plasma physics, fusion
energy sciences, biology, semiconductor technology, material sciences, nano-
technology and nano-sciences. For example, the geophysical exploration
processes, the wave-plasma interactions in fusion energy sciences, and the
fabrication of nano-motors for solar energy conversion. The proposed models and
numerical methods are based on knowledge of geometrical optics, physical optics,
kinetic theories, nano optics, computational chemistry and scientific computing.
Interdisciplinary collaborations will be pursued to extend the practical
applications of the proposed methods. The project also involves the integration
of research and education in computational mathematics. Graduate and
undergraduate students, and members from underrepresented groups will be
encouraged to participate in the project to enhance their knowledge and
research. The proposed project will further the training and education of
students and encourage them to pursue future career in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM).

In the project, reliable models and efficient numerical methods will be proposed
to simulate the wave-matter interactions at extreme scales: (I) If the size of
the matter is much greater than the wavelength, the interactions are equivalent
to high frequency wave propagation in inhomogeneous media. The PI will develop
asymptotic methods that combine integral representations of the waves and
asymptotic high frequency theories (notably geometrical optics). (II) If the
size of the matter decreases to meso or micro scale, kinetic models are
popularly applied for modeling the interactions. The PI will develop asymptotic
methods that utilize the Hopf-Cole transformation of the 6-D probabilistic
distribution function. (III) If the size of the matter keeps decreasing to nano
or atomic scale, the motion of the matter must be determined quantum
mechanically while the wave propagation is determined. The PI will use semi-
classical theories as the building block to develop numerically trackable semi-
classical models and efficient multi-scale methods. The core ideas consist of
the following: For (I), integral representations with Green's functions will
serve as the mechanism for wave propagation, geometrical optics approximations
will provide the information of Green's functions, and fast multi-level
algorithms will be designed to evaluate the oscillatory integrals efficiently
with optimal complexities. For (II), the phase function of the Hopf-Cole
transformation of the probabilistic distribution function will be approximated
as a power series expansion with the expansion terms determined through
solutions of equations formulated in 3-D spatial space, and high-order schemes
can be designed to solve such equations efficiently. For (III), the wave
propagation will be determined classically through Maxwell's equations,
Ehrenfest molecular dynamics and time-dependent current density functional
theory will be applied to resolve the difficulty of dealing with many-body
Schrodinger equations for the matter, and the models will be solvable by well-
designed multi-scale solvers.