* 1719498
* ACE Implementation Project: Data Science and Analytics Advancing STEM Education at North Carolina A&amp;T State University
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Seong-Tae Kim, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 3,188,850.00

Achieving Competitive Excellence Implementation Projects in the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide
support to design, implement, study and assess comprehensive institutional
efforts to increase the numbers of students and the quality of their preparation
by strengthening science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
education and research. This project at North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University seeks to develop and implement an innovative data
science and analytics education and research program to train the next
generation of undergraduate students to confront the challenges in computational
and data-enabled science. The project will be accompanied by an educational
research study which will study the impact of faculty development and structures
of support through communities of practice on faculty at the HBCU. The project
is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
objectives of the project are: to create an integrated education and research
training environment; to increase faculty competitiveness in research and
scholarship and prepare student readiness for graduate studies and professional
careers in data science and analytics; to prepare globally competitive students;
to facilitate and support faculty scholarly inquiries in research, teaching and
learning; and to reach out to and collaborate with other institutions. The
program will develop a data science and analytics certificate program, a
statistical computing laboratory, and an analytical consulting center to broaden
the participation and enhance preparation of students as well as support
education and health analytics research development and outreach. The project
will facilitate faculty research growth by contributing to professional
development in research and by promoting collaborative research opportunities.
Research and study abroad experiences through partnerships with two Chinese
research universities will expose students to the data science research
communities in China. Faculty engagement in scholarly inquiries in education
analytics and development through a fellowship program, semi-annual education
research symposia, workshops and research retreats will transform pedagogy and
institutional teaching and learning. The program has the potential to be a
replicable model in undergraduate data science and analytics education, research
and training for other similar institutions.