* 1719027
* CHS:  Small: Socially-Aware Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Monica Nicolescu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2022
* USD 548,000.00

The promise of robots to serve in assistive capacities for care and cooperation
is invaluable. Socially assistive robots have the potential to make a positive
impact on people in need of physical therapy, children in need of educational
intervention, children with developmental disorders, and patients post-stroke.
However, socially inappropriate behavior can harm the long-term adoption of
these assistive platforms. In particular, while typically understood only as
getting from point A to point B, robot movement can constitute communication
without any use of words, and even when not intended. This can have serious
ramifications for the success of a social interaction between one or more people
and a robot. A robot in a long-term interaction (say in a hospital, school, or
home setting) may have dozens or even hundreds of navigation destinations every
day; sometimes, the "optimal" navigation behavior may not match the socially
appropriate course of action. Socially inappropriate navigation behavior has
been attributed as a major impediment to the long-term adoption of assistive
robots in hospital settings. To address that problem, this project will develop
a socially-aware navigation planner for autonomous robots that mimics the social
conventions of human-human interactions, and will thereby advance the
applications of autonomous robot technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model-based
navigation planning for social appropriateness will involve observing the
activities and intentions of people in social proximity to a robot and/or other
people, and then selecting robot trajectories that are both spatially and
socially optimal. This work will then build upon that foundation by expanding
the library of spatial communication that a robot can understand and communicate
in an autonomous fashion. The research will incorporate high-level features,
such as intent recognition, into the model development along with low-level
features, such as interpersonal distance, to create models of complex behavior
considering both the spatial scene and the inferred intention of the actors in
that scene. The Pareto Concavity Elimination Transformation (PaCcET) multi-
objective optimization framework will be utilized to develop socially
appropriate navigation behavior policies. The developed planner will be
validated on several types of robot platforms.