* 1719307
* Support for Student Participation in the 2017 ACM Intelligent User Interfaces Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Wai-Tat Fu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,020.00

This is funding to provide financial support for approximately 20 graduate
students (all from U. S. universities and working towards either their Master's
degree or a Doctorate) to attend the 2017 International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2017), to be held March 13-16 in Limassol,
Cypress, about 10 of them as participants in a special Student Consortium
(workshop), and the rest as presenters in the main conference and/or as
attendees at the conference for general training purposes. Sponsored by ACM, the
annual IUI conferences represent the growing interest in next-generation
intelligent interactive user interfaces. Attracting 200-300 attendees, they are
the premier forum where researchers from academia and industry worldwide who
work at the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and Artificial
Intelligence (AI) come together to exchange insights and to present outstanding
research and applications whose goal is to make the computerized world a more
amenable place. Unlike traditional AI the focus is not so much on making the
computer smart all by itself, but rather on making the interaction between
computers and people smarter; unlike traditional HCI, there is a focus on
solutions that involve large amounts of knowledge and emerging technologies such
as natural language understanding, brain computer interfaces, and gesture
recognition. To this end, IUI encourages contributions not only from computer
science but also from related fields such as psychology, behavioral science,
cognitive science, computer graphics, design, the arts, etc. IUI 2017 will be
the 22nd conference in the series; more information about the conference is
available online at http://iui.acm.org/2017. This funding will enable attendance
at the IUI conference by students who might otherwise be unable to do so for
financial reasons. It will enhance the educational experience of funded
participants, by bringing them into contact with leading researchers in the
field and by exposing them to the lively discussion during the course of the
conference that often leads to opportunities for career advancement. The quality
of the conference itself will be enhanced as well, thanks to a broadening of the
base of institutions represented and increased diversity of participants. The
rich exchange of ideas at IUI has previously proven to be a valuable source of
ideas for future research, as well as leading to collaborative efforts; this
funding will extend the opportunities for collaboration and provide intellectual
stimulus to programs that have previously sent few or no representatives to this
conference. The organizing committee has undertaken to proactively recruit
student participants from schools that have not traditionally been well
represented in the IUI community. Women and students who are members of
underrepresented groups will be particularly encouraged to participate. To
further assure diversity, no more than two students will be accepted from any
given institution.

The IUI 2017 Student Consortium will build on the success of previous such
events. The heart of the Consortium will be a full-day workshop on March 13 in
parallel with the conference workshops and the day before the start of the
technical program. Student trainees will be afforded exposure to their new
research community by giving a 20-30 presentation on their work and receiving
feedback from peers and a panel of senior researchers. A group lunch and dinner
will encourage social interaction among the student cohort and informal personal
interaction with the mentors. The students' work will also be featured during
the main conference in a poster session, where they will gain additional
experience explaining their work to others in the field.