* 1719289
* Student Support: NIST-ASTM-NSF-ASME Workshop & Competition on Formalizing Manufacturing Processes for Structured Sustainability Assessments; Los Angeles, California; June 4-8,
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Alexander Brodsky, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This award is for the partial support for the NIST-ASTM-NSF-ASME workshop and
competition on Formalizing Manufacturing Processes for Sustainability
Assessment. The workshop will be hosted by the ASME 2017 Manufacturing Science
and Engineering Conference, which will be held at the University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, June 4-8, 2017. The funding will partially
support the attendance of US scientists, postdoctoral researchers, and graduate
students. Participating students will be selected following a competition on
modeling of manufacturing processes for system level sustainability assessment.
The workshop and competition will inform the manufacturing community of the ASTM
E60 Subcommittee on Sustainable Manufacturing, provide an opportunity for
practitioners to put the standards into practice when modeling processes of
interest, and provide a source of candidate models to populate the repository
that will be developed by NIST and its partners for the use of the manufacturing
community.

This award will partially support the participation of junior participants,
including graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, early career faculty members,
and, especially, women and under-represented minority students and faculty. The
workshop focuses on modeling of manufacturing processes for system level
sustainability assessment. All manufacturing processes, whether batch,
continuous, or discrete event type, and all size scales, nano- to macro-
manufacturing, will be considered. Models can span from traditional scale down
to nanoscale processes and be based on mechanical, electrical, chemical,
biochemical, and bio technologies. Since sustainability is a balance of
competing objectives, including cost, time and environmental considerations,
many different types of process performance metrics may be considered. It is
anticipated that the workshop and associated modeling competition will advance
the field of advanced manufacturing and its relationship to sustainability to a
significant extent.