* 1719640
* Collaborative Research: Overcoming Order Reduction and Stability Restrictions in High-Order Time-Stepping
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Benjamin Seibold, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 176,562.00

This project develops new computational approaches that remedy fundamental
accuracy shortcomings of existing time-stepping methods, and increase their
stability and robustness. A wide variety of practical applications, including
fluid flows, quantum physics, heat and neutron transport, materials science, and
many complex multi-physics problems, require the numerical simulation of models
that involve a time evolution. This time evolution must be performed in a way
that the high accuracy of modern computational methods is retained. This project
addresses fundamental challenges that arise in this context, and delivers
superior numerical methods that could replace existing time-stepping schemes
currently used in computational science and engineering practice. This project
provides a multi-institution collaboration, including two early-career
researchers, and it involves the training of a PhD student.

The research in this project addresses two aspects in high-order time-stepping:
order reduction in Runge-Kutta methods; and unconditionally stable ImEx linear
multistep methods. A specific focus lies on time-stepping for partial
differential equations. For those, order reduction can be associated with
numerical boundary layers, caused by multi-stage time-stepping schemes. Based on
this geometric understanding of the phenomenon, remedies for order reduction are
developed. This includes the concept of weak stage order, as well as modified
boundary conditions. An alternative avenue to avoid order reduction is provided
by multistep methods. The key challenge here is their rather restrictive
stability behavior. Based on a new stability theory for ImEx multistep methods,
this project develops novel schemes that can, for certain problems, achieve
unconditional stability. The new schemes can be included into many existing
computational codes via a simple modification of the time-stepping coefficients,
thus enabling practitioners to select the time step based solely on accuracy
considerations.