* 1719511
* TARGETED INFUSION PROJECT: Providing Opportunities to Minority Students in STEM (PrOMiSS)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Shirley Chao, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2022
* USD 395,801.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects, supports the development,
implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for
improving the preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that
they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at
Fayetteville State University (FSU) seeks to improve the forensic curriculum and
research infrastructure through this project, called "Providing Opportunities to
Minority Students in STEM (PrOMiSS)." This project will provide students with
hands-on training on state-of-the-art equipment that will improve their
evidence-based learning abilities in forensic sub-disciplines. These students
will be better prepared for employment in the forensic laboratory and/or other
STEM field jobs. Success of this model can then be disseminated to other higher
learning institutions, particularly minority-serving institutions. Successful
implementation of the program goals holds potential for strengthening the
social, economic, and intellectual fabric of the southeastern region of North
Carolina and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall intent of PrOMiSS is to
improve the forensic curriculum and research infrastructure at FSU. The specific
goals are to enrich the forensic curriculum; strengthen forensic laboratories'
infrastructure; increase passing rates in STEM courses; maintain specialized
Forensic Science Education Programs Accreditation Commission (FEPAC)
accreditation; improve students' problem solving ability and critical thinking
skills by involving them in STEM research; and improve students' attitude
towards STEM education. In achieving its goals, PrOMiSS's impact will increase
recruitment and retention, graduation rates, the number of underrepresented
minority students in forensic disciplines and other STEM fields, and improve the
preparation of students for graduate school. The project's greatest impact will
be a reduction in the need for post-employment job training for new hires, while
increasing the numbers of trained professionals who will contribute to national
and global security.