* 1719610
* IUPS 2017 Travel Award Program (International Union of Physiological Sciences) Rio de Janiero, Brazil, August 2017
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Martin Frank, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This project provides travel support for US scientists to participate in the
38th International Congress of Physiological Sciences in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
August 1-5, 2017. The meeting is organized by the International Union of
Physiological Sciences (IUPS) and the travel awards will be administered by the
American Physiological Society (APS). The meeting assembles approximately 3,000
of the top comparative animal physiologists in the world, including many
established scientists from the United States. The travel awards will be given
to qualified scientists interested in comparative organismal physiology, and
special emphasis will be given to early career investigators (within 15 years of
receiving their doctoral degree) and to women and under-represented minority
scientists. The project therefore broadens the participation of young scientists
with an emphasis on women and under-represented minorities; exposes new
investigators and students to cutting edge research designed to understand
physiological processes and traits; and provides unique opportunities for the
development of international collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Union of Physiological
Sciences (IUPS) will hold the 38th International Congress of Physiological
Sciences in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, August 1-5, 2017. The American Physiological
Society (APS) has administered a travel grant program to assist U.S. scientists
engaged in physiological research and its applications to attend Congresses
every four years since the IUPS Congress was held in Buenos Aires in 1959.
Special emphasis will be given to investigators within 15 years of receiving
their doctoral degree and to women and under-represented minority scientists.
Travel awards resulting from this proposal will be directed to individuals
working in the research areas supported by the NSF Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems. An internal program committee developed the scientific
program for the 38th Congress with representatives from the host society,
Brazilian Society of Physiology, and the IUPS. The program is organized around a
number of IUPS Commissions. Traditionally, the one most relevant to NSF is
associated with the Commission Comparative Physiology: Evolution, Adaptation
&amp; Environment. The specific aims of this proposal include: 1) to promote
widespread participation of young scientists with an emphasis on women and
under-represented minorities, through a travel award program; 2) to engage new
investigators and students in pursuing research designed to understand
physiological processes and traits; and, 3) to provide opportunities for the
development of collaborative interactions with scientists from the United States
and those working outside of the United States.