* 1719464
* Upgrade of Carbonate Preparation System, Stable Isotope Laboratory, University of Massachusetts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Stephen Burns, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 97,430.00

This award will be used to purchase scientific equipment for the Stable Isotope
Laboratory in the Department of Geosciences, University of Massachusetts. The
equipment, a GasBench II, will allow rapid, automated analyses of the oxygen and
carbon stable isotope ratios of a variety of geologic material. The equipment
will primarily support paleoclimate research focused on better understanding
changes in tropical hydrology over the past several glacial cycles.
Reconstructing past climate variability is critical to placing the amplitude of
recent climate change into a broader, geological context; to understanding the
response of future climate to the rise in global mean temperature; and providing
information used to evaluate how accurately global circulation models simulate
climate under different boundary conditions and on timescales beyond the
instrumental record. This project will facilitate research seeks to better
understand the causes of tropical hydrologic variability in regions that
experiences severe drought and flooding on inter-annual time scales, with
important repercussions for local societies. The equipment will also play an
important educational role, supporting undergraduate research projects at Smith
College, Mt Holyoke College, Hamshire College and Amherst College though the
Five College Geology Consortium. Smith College and Mt. Holyoke College are two
of the premier women's colleges in the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation to be purchased will support continued investigations in
tropical paleoclimatology in the Yucatan region of Mexico and in Madagascar.
Long, high-resolution well-dated paleoclimate records from the Yucatan are
crucial to compare hydrologic change to with the complex history of ancient
human populations in the region (Maya and pre-Maya), to better understand
changes in tropical climate regimes that correlate with but may not be caused by
precipitation related to the Inter-tropical Convergence Zone, and to quantify
rates of hydrological change in tropical North America on time scales from
annual to orbital. Studies of changes in tropical hydrology in Madagascar will
provide important new data from the Southern Hemisphere tropics and thereby help
establish the timing of changes in the Indian Monsoon in the Southern vs
Northern Hemispheres on orbital and millennial timescales. They will also help
determine what drives interannual variability in rainfall and its relationship
to the Indian Ocean Zonal Mode.