* 1719549
* Novel Numerical Approaches for Structured Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Yangyang Xu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 96,000.00

The data sets involved in many modern applications are extremely large, and are
often collected at distributed locations and continuously with the progression
of time. Common examples are data sets associated with searches on the Internet,
social networks, information technology, healthcare, biology, finance, and
engineering. Analyzing and learning from these massive data sets imposes great
challenges on computation, data storage, and data transfer. On the other hand,
high performance computers are now readily available. This project aims to
develop novel computational methods to enable high performance computing for
questions involving extremely large data sets. The approaches address several
computational challenges that emerge from applications across data sciences and
engineering. Undergraduate and graduate students are involved in the project.

This project is focused on designing novel computational algorithms and
analyzing their theoretical behaviors for solving structured optimization
problems that involve huge data sets and are parameterized by large numbers of
variables. Both the defining objective functions and the optimal solutions
exhibit particular structures, including convexity, smoothness, and multi-
linearity for the former, and sparsity, low-rank, and orthogonality for the
latter. This research aims to take advantage of this structure in designing
efficient computational methods. The project includes several research
directions, from variable splitting for handling complicated regularizers, to
adaptive asynchronous parallel computing and analysis of convergence rates.
Stochastic approximations will be used for dealing with problems involving
stream data, and novel numerical approaches will be used to solve non-linearly
constrained problems via primal-dual updates. Problems with multi-array
structure will also be investigated. The research aims to significantly speed up
existing algorithms both theoretically and practically, lead to new theoretical
results of existing algorithms that currently lack convergence analysis, and
give rise to novel algorithms for computing solutions to complicated problems
that are currently not efficiently solvable.