* 1719283
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role Of Frontiers In The Spatial Organization Of Traditional Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Elizabeth Arkush, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 28,287.00

Dr. Elizabeth Arkush, Co-P.I. Patrick Mullins, will use National Science
Foundation support to expand understandings of the evolution of political power
in frontier zones. Frontiers are universally important in representing the
spatial limits of modern and ancient states but can change considerably over
time: from ambiguous and permeable to rigidly controlled and divisive. But how
may political power on frontiers evolve over time and what factors may lead to
different outcomes? Focusing on frontier conflict through defensive
architecture, this study contributes to understandings of the long-term
consequences of fortifications and border walls along political frontiers.
Additionally, a landscape perspective highlights the importance of certain
natural (i.e. mineral deposits, water sources, farmland) and human-made (i.e.
canals, trade routes, population centers) features in determining where
political power may be expressed or contested on the landscape. By shedding
light on long-term causes and consequences of frontier political involvement and
conflict, this project resonates well with some particular challenges faced by
many modern states, like the US, in border maintenance and military action. The
results and data from this project will be available in the Comparative
Archaeological Database for open-access use by the broader scientific community
and will be a key part of a larger regional digitization initiative called the
Moche Valley Ancient Settlement Database. Finally, following a collaborative
research program, this project will train Peruvian and American students in
several new archaeological techniques (i.e. aerial drone mapping) while actively
integrating local people with the practice of archaeological research during
several workshops and public presentations of the survey
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through archaeological survey of the Upper Moche
Valley frontier in northern Peru, this project compares the frontiers of two
sequential polities, the Southern Moche State (AD 200-900) and the Chimu Empire
(AD 900-1470), in order to understand how political power may evolve in frontier
landscapes. Although the Chimu arguably rose from the ashes of the Moche in the
lower valley, the Southern Moche State was an earlier "first-generation" polity
with far more indirect methods of rule than the centralized and expansive Chimu.
As their eastern frontier, the Upper Moche Valley was attractive to both
polities, crucially providing canal intakes and an exchange corridor with the
metal-rich highlands. Meanwhile, a plethora of prehistoric forts and defensively
located or walled towns in the region point towards it being a highly contested
frontier. But how did the Moche and Chimu frontiers differ in this region? And
how did the involvement of these states in the frontier evolve over time? This
project will address these questions by highlighting the interacting roles of
(1) the qualities of a state itself, (2) the intensity and organization of
frontier conflict, and (3) the use of natural and human-made landscape features.
Project methodology integrates traditional full-coverage survey and controlled
surface collection with cutting-edge aerial imagery and 3-D site models attained
through quad-copter drone mapping. Combined into a geographic database these
data will be used to reconstruct regional settlement, political boundaries, and
defensive networks to understand the evolution of the Upper Moche frontier.