* 1719473
* Improving Minority Participation and Completion through Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (IMPACTS)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Eric Buckles, Dillard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support for projects to design, implement, and assess strategies that
can lead to comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of
students receiving undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality of their preparation by strengthening
STEM education and research. The one-year project at Dillard University seeks to
establish the foundation for building STEM student success. The overall goal is
to significantly increase the number of underrepresented minority students who
complete STEM majors and enter into the STEM workforce or continue in a graduate
program in a STEM field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives and activities are
designed for reforming the curriculum and for recruiting and retaining STEM
students. These activities include course redesign to align freshman year
courses in mathematics and the sciences, a STEM Saturday Institute for high
school students and their science teachers, and a summer bridge program for
entering freshmen. Upper level STEM majors are involved in the project as
mentors, tutors and facilitators. The activities and strategies are evidence-
based and what is learned through this project can serve as a model for other
small liberal arts institutions.