* 1719567
* Collaborative Research: Low Cost, High Performance Ultrathin GaAs Solar Cells for Terrestrial Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Minjoo Lee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2019
* USD 213,490.00

Abstract: Low Cost, High Performance Ultrathin Gallium Arsenide Solar Cells for
Terrestrial Photovoltaics

Nontechnical: Despite their impressive performance reaching near the theoretical
limit, the practical application of gallium arsenide solar cells in on-earth
applications remains a formidable challenge largely due to the excessively high
cost of growing device-quality epitaxial materials. The research outlined in
this proposal aims to address the future energy demand of global society by
developing a practical solution that can balance the high performance of gallium
arsenide solar cells with their production cost, and therefore enable their
large-scale deployment in terrestrial photovoltaics. The highly
multidisciplinary themes of the proposed research will be intimately integrated
with comprehensive teaching and outreach efforts. PI Yoon will work with the
Center for Engineering Diversity at the University of Southern California to
establish laboratory internship opportunities for educationally-disadvantaged
middle and high school students in the inner city of Los Angeles. Co-PI Lee will
partner with Yale Science Outreach on two particular programs: Science on
Saturdays for families and the general public and the Pathways to Science
program for middle and high school students. Training both undergraduate and
graduate student researchers will be a primary educational goal, where the PIs
will continue to support and encourage broadening participation of female
students and students from underrepresented groups.

Technical: The goal of this collaborative research is to demonstrate high
performance, cost-competitive GaAs solar cells for their large-scale deployment
in terrestrial photovoltaics. To achieve this goal, we will develop novel
strategies of materials growth and device fabrication exploiting (1) an
ultrathin device platform that enables efficient use of expensive source
materials, (2) multilayer epitaxial growth that can significantly reduce the
cost of epitaxial materials, (3) bifacial nanophotonic light manipulation that
can enhance the absorption, (4) high yield printing techniques that permits
large-area distribution over low cost substrates. Specifically, Task 1 will
explore the growth of multiple device stacks of ultrathin GaAs solar cells in
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) targeting uniform materials properties and device
performance of multilayer-grown epitaxial stacks. Task 2 will seek to establish
fundamental understanding and optimization of the epitaxial design for ultrathin
GaAs solar cells to enhance the carrier collection and maximize the
effectiveness of light trapping. Task 3 will focus on developing integrated
schemes of bifacial photon management for light trapping and photon recycling.
Successful completion of the proposed research will lead to the development of
high performance, economically viable GaAs solar cells for terrestrial
applications and also strengthen fundamental understanding of: materials
behaviors and dopant diffusion in MBE-grown multilayer epitaxial assemblies;
optimized layer structures of ultrathin GaAs solar cells for the most efficient
photovoltaic energy conversion; multifunctional optical designs for maximized
light absorption in the optically thin absorber.