* 1719914
* Global QCD Analysis and Precision Electroweak Physics in High Energy Collider Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Chien-Peng Yuan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor C.-P. Yuan at the Michigan
State University (MSU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to
our understanding of the fundamental nature of the physical universe --- the
particles that comprise the universe and their interactions --- as revealed
through sophisticated experiments in high-energy physics. Our current
understanding of this physics is embodied within the so-called Standard Model
(SM). Protons, neutrons, and all other strongly-interacting particles are
composed of fundamental particles called partons (quarks and gluons), and
interactions between these partons are described by the theory of Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). The proposed research involves the interplay between QCD
theory and experimental data from many experiments, including recent experiments
at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). This global analysis of data is
necessary in order to deepen our understanding of QCD, and to determine the
distributions of the partons in the proton. In particular, by understanding
these distributions, it is possible to start with interactions of protons with
protons (which are the interactions that actually occur at the LHC) and
determine the underlying quark-quark, quark-gluon and gluon-gluon interactions.
This is essential for determining the underlying physics of the process ---
indeed, such information was necessary for extracting the signal for the
recently-discovered Higgs boson from collider data. Support for this project is
therefore in the national interest because it furthers the development of
fundamental science in the United States and enables the extraction of important
data from collider experiments in which substantial national investments have
already been made. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts since it will involve the training of students and postdoctoral fellows
in theoretical high-energy physics both at Michigan State University and at
summer schools held by the Coordinated Theoretical and Experimental QCD (CTEQ)
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this research will focus
on the development of CTEQ-TEA Parton Distribution Functions, earlier versions
of which have already have been essential for the interpretation of data from
the world's leading high-energy collider facilities such as Fermilab (Batavia,
IL), RHIC (Brookhaven, NY), DESY (Hamburg, Germany), and CERN (Geneva,
Switzerland). The proposed research will also continue to refine world-leading
contributions to lepton-hadron and hadron-hadron collider phenomenology.
Complementary to the research on QCD, the group will also study the Electroweak
(EW) sector of the Standard Model (SM), which is extremely successful in
explaining and predicting experimental data spanning a range in energy from the
atomic scale to the Z boson, Higgs boson and top-quark masses. Measurements of
the production of W's, Z's, top-quark pairs, single top quarks and Higgs bosons
at the LHC, including both inclusive rates and relevant kinematical
distributions, will provide major new input into our understanding of parton
distributions during the next few years. At the same time, refinements of the
parton distributions are necessary for progress in the EW sector, both for
testing the SM at greater precision and for probing the effects of new physics
at high-energy colliders.