* 1719246
* Rapid Access Ice Drill (RAID) Science Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Jeffrey Severinghaus, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 42,000.00

Title: Rapid Access Ice Drill (RAID) Science Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will support members of the
Geological, Glaciological, and Earth Science communities for a two-day workshop
in order to develop a long-term plan for science deployment of the Rapid Access
Ice Drill (RAID) platform and create a planning document that defines the
science community?s anticipated use of the facility. The workshop will ensure
broad participation by including researchers from many different scientific
fields both within and outside of the Antarctic community. The workshop will
&lt;br/&gt;Include early-career researchers and members of underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Rapid Access Ice Drill (RAID) was designed to quickly penetrate Antarctic ice
sheets in order to create borehole observatories and take cores in deep ice, the
glacial bed, and bedrock below. The Rapid Access Ice Drill is a sled-mounted
mobile drilling system that will make multiple long, narrow (3.5 inch diameter)
boreholes in ice sheets of Antarctica. The Rapid Access Ice Drill (RAID) enabled
research will include 1) a better understanding of the climate feedbacks
internal to the Earth System that drove ice ages to switch from a 41-kyr
periodicity to the irregular 110-kyr periodicity seen today, 2) constraints on
future sea level rise from the heat flow and bed material property information
obtained, 3) creation of a new interdisciplinary style of Antarctic "Subglacial
System Science" that fosters across-discipline synergies, and 4) entrainment of
young researchers in polar science via the excitement of discovery of the
largely unknown ice sheet interior. The RAID Science Planning Workshop will
provide a venue to: 1) bring diverse scientists together to explore science
questions and approaches; 2) define science goals to be addressed by the drill;
3) seek synergies between different disciplines interested in the Rapid Access;
4) develop a coherent science plan for the use of the drill; 5) set priorities
between the science targets; and 6) engage early-career and underrepresented
researchers. The workshop will provide support for a two-day conference with a
total attendance of about 60 members of the Antarctic glacial- and subglacial-
science communities. The support provided by NSF will cover partial travel costs
for 20 key US participants and full travel costs for 12 early-career
researchers.