* 1719404
* Investigating the Health and Wellbeing of Alaska Native Elderly in Northwest Alaska through Community Participatory Based Research Methods
* GEO,OPP
* 08/29/2016,06/30/2021
* Jordan Lewis, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2021
* USD 490,739.00

Alaska Native communities have a strong sense of respect for their older
residents. In many Alaskan rural communities, whose primary population is Alaska
Native people, the elderly are still relied upon for their deep knowledge and
understanding of the natural environment, heritage languages, and cultural
practices which are important not only for economic survival but social cohesion
and community wellbeing. However, change is deeply affecting Alaska Native
communities and Alaska Native people are forced to adapt to the new
environmental, economic and social realities that affect their worlds. This
research project will explore how Alaska Native elderly are adapting to rapid
economic, environmental, and social change by exploring Alaska Native elderly
and their own understanding and definition of what successful aging means to
them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research project will establish a better
understanding of successful aging from the perspectives of Alaska Native elderly
in Northwest Alaska. Being the Principal Investigators second research project
on this topic, this project has the potential to inform future studies of
indigenous successful aging, studies that allow the elderly themselves to
subjectively define for themselves what it means to age well. In the spirit of
community-based participatory research, several communities in Northwest Alaska
reached out to the principal investigator, Dr. Jordan P. Lewis (Aleut, Native
Village of Naknek), to request that similar research be conducted in their
region. They did so after learning of his "Successful Aging Study," which was
carried out in Bristol Bay Alaska from 2011-2014 and brought awareness of the
value of positive, or generative, focused research with the elderly,
highlighting their lessons and knowledge for healthy aging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study will consist of 60 qualitative in-
depth interviews with Alaska Native elderly to establish an indigenous
understanding of what successful aging means for Alaska Natives in Northwest
Alaska and what is required to age in place. Interviews will be conducted with
Alaska Native elderly and their family members in their own homes in five
participating communities, as well as those who have relocated to the Quyanna
Care facility in Nome, Alaska. Through these interviews the research team will
to explore the concept of successful aging and hope to gain a sense of Alaska
Native beliefs about aging, what is required to age in place? and how relocation
to facilities for the elderly impacts views of successful aging? In the spirit
of Community-Based Participatory Research (CBPR), participants will be engaged
through the entire research process, from conception to data analysis. Meetings
will be held in participating communities to review the findings and receive
feedback; this will ensure the findings reflect the unique perspectives of the
Elders, families, communities, and region. These findings will also be compared
with the previous study on successful aging conducted in Bristol Bay to compare
and contrast experiences of aging in these two rural regions of Alaska. This
study will also explore what is required to age in place to reduce or eliminate
the need for the elderly to relocate - taking with them the language, culture,
and history of the community. Previous research by the PI has shown that
enabling older Alaskan Native people to remain in their homes and communities
contributes to the health and wellbeing of the communities. The research will
shed additional light on what it means to age well in rural Alaska and determine
what role their community plays in how Alaska Native people subjectively define
their aging process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this proposed
research advances discovery through the establishment of a locally and
culturally informed, Alaska Native, understanding of successful aging that
builds on the PI's previous projects. In addition to contributing to the
academic literature on successful aging, it promotes teaching and learning from
the Elders on healthy aging in rural Alaska. It also educates researchers on the
importance of CBPR and allowing the elderly to subjectively define their aging
process, as well as engaging the local community throughout the entire research
process, which promotes the coproduction of knowledge and bi-directional
learning. This research project broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups (Alaska Natives) and puts them on equal footing with the scientists in
interpreting results and in presenting the results. This research also has the
potential to contribute to the disciplines of anthropology, gerontology,
community psychology, sociology, and others by paving the way for future
researchers interested in indigenous aging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
findings can influence health and social policy in Alaska and how healthcare and
long-term support services are delivered to older residents in rural
communities. The results of this research will be published and be disseminated
for other researchers, gerontologists, anthropologists, and students to use with
the permission of the tribal governing authorities, the Alaska Native
participants and their communities. This study will also highlight that aging
does not have to equal poor health and immobility; aging well should be a right
that can be attained by everyone. This research has the potential to inform
health professionals, policy advocates, local and state officials about the
factors that determine whether or not rural Alaska communities are able to meet
the needs of their elderly and enable them to live their remaining years as they
may wish.