* 1719607
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhancement of Jarvis Christian College Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (J-CURE) Program in the Biological Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Shakhawat Bhuiyan, Jarvis Christian College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2022
* USD 399,810.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Jarvis Christian College
(JCC) seeks to develop and implement course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CURE) in the biology curriculum, provide access to scientific
research experiences for undergraduate students and increase the research
capacity of faculty in the biological sciences. The benefits of the proposed
activity to society will be measured by the ability to attract, retain and
inspire more students to the bioscience disciplines and their eventual migration
to graduate school and the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of the program is to introduce, train and support a diverse group of
underrepresented students and expose them to the cutting edge educational and
research activities in the biological sciences. The specific goals are to: 1)
enhance the biology curriculum with the integration of course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) into the biological sciences; 2)
increase students' exposure to and research competency in biological sciences
through academic and summer internships and peer-mentored research; and 3)
upgrade teaching and research infrastructure to support the curriculum redesign
for hands-on research experience for students. It is anticipated that this
program will enhance the quality of STEM education at JCC, leading to the
formation of a new research-intensive academic curriculum. The proposed program
is a strategy for increasing the capacity of JCC to produce more STEM graduates
who are competitive for graduate school and STEM careers.