* 1719017
* CIF: Small: Info-Clustering: An Information-Theoretic Framework for Data Clustering
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Tie Liu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 439,315.00

Clustering refers to a procedure that groups similar objects together while
separating dissimilar ones apart. This simple idea has a wide range of
applications in different areas of scientific research. From the mathematical
viewpoint, the problem of clustering is quite unique in that it attempts to
discover unknown patterns of data without a clear knowledge of the ground truth.
Instead of jumping to a specific algorithm or a dataset (which is a common
practice in the literature), this research aims to lay a rigorous theoretical
ground, upon which many meaningful and practical implementations can be
developed subsequently. This research is accompanied by the investigator's
continuing effort in curriculum development, involving undergraduate and
graduate students in research, and broadening the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
aforementioned goal, the investigator plans to take an information-theoretic
view of the data clustering problem by modeling each object to be clustered as a
piece of information. A key advantage of this information-theoretic view is that
now the similarity among multiple objects can be naturally measured by the
amount of shared information. This is precisely where information theory, with
the accumulation of over 70 years of active research, can be most useful. The
main agendas of this research are to understand: 1) what clustering algorithms
can be derived from the proposed info-clustering framework by leveraging the
large body of literature on multivariate dependency modeling including graphical
models and parameter families; 2) whether the proposed info-clustering framework
can be leveraged to make some progress on the long-standing open problem of
subset feature selection in statistics and machine learning.