* 1719652
* RUI:  The Non-Linear Universe: Precision Numerical Cosmology and Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* John Giblin, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research of Professor John T. Giblin, Jr. at Kenyon
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Universe is nature's greatest laboratory; as
we look toward understanding the fundamental nature of matter and energy, we
must confront the secrets of the Universe that surrounds us. The past few
decades have left fundamental physics with several large, unanswered questions:
what is the nature of dark energy, what is the nature of dark matter, and what
lies at energies beyond the Standard Model of particle physics? Professor
Giblin's research seeks to understand how we can extract information from
observations of the Universe as we attempt to answer these questions. As the
Universe evolved from higher to lower temperatures, it likely underwent
(sometimes) violent transitions. To understand what might have occurred, and how
we might extract information from the residual radiation from these processes,
very careful numerical examinations of these processes will be necessary.
Professor Giblin and his students will develop these techniques and give
indications of how we can look for signatures of fundamental physics in the
Universe around us. Additionally, this research will have significant broader
impacts, providing high-impact hands-on research experiences for undergraduate
students, thereby enhancing the scientific literacy of the next generation. This
project will also fund the development of computational modules that can be used
to bring fundamental physics to high-school classrooms across the country. This
work is therefore in the national interest as it prepares our students to
confront the great questions of fundamental physics with sophisticated technical
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this work will employ numerical
methods in order to examine the consequences of beyond-leading-order non-linear
physics. Such explorations require careful treatment --- generally conducted
using discretized (lattice) methods. Professor Giblin and his students will
continue to develop these methods as they apply to more complex gauge fields
(both abelian and non-abelian) and to effective field theories. This work will
explore the relationship between gauge fields and gravitational waves, to
investigate whether gravitational waves can mediate the interactions of gauge
fields. Additionally, this work will examine the role of gravitational back-
reaction in general and how it affects precision predictions at the end of
inflation, the formation of compact structures, and the evolution of scalar-
field dark matter. This work will also provide predictions of the impact of
future cosmological observations.