* 1719875
* Cornell Center for Materials Research - MRSEC
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2024
* USD 23,826,675.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR), a
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center, is enhancing national
capabilities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields and
materials research at all levels through an integrated research and education
program. The central mission of the Center is to explore and advance the design,
control, and fundamental understanding of materials through collaborative
experimental and theoretical studies. The Center focuses on forefront scientific
challenges of a scope and complexity requiring the combined expertise of
interdisciplinary teams of researchers and collaborators. In doing so, the
Center is developing the underlying science needed, for example, to advance
next-generation computer memories, to enable information processing with light,
and to realize a new class of self-folding devices based on atomically-thin,
paper-like materials. Through these research activities, the Center is educating
a diverse cadre of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars
to become leaders in the field of materials research at industrial, academic,
and government organizations, while also developing pedagogical materials for
K-12 classrooms that excite and inspire the next generation of scientists and
engineers. The CCMR Shared Facilities enable frontier research while enhancing
the nation's infrastructure for advanced research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The goal of the
Mechanisms, Materials, and Devices for Spin Manipulation IRG is to discover,
understand, and apply new mechanisms for controlling spins in magnetic devices.
The Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRG's) research aims to provide the
scientific foundations for energy-efficient nonvolatile memories with
revolutionary capabilities as well as frequency-agile nanoscale microwave
sources and signal-processing devices. The goal of the Structured Materials for
Strong Light-Matter Interactions IRG is to understand, create, and harness
exceptionally strong and unconventional light-matter interactions for scientific
discoveries and future photonic information processing technology. The IRG aims
to enhance the nonlinear effects that enable photon-photon and photon-matter
interactions and to efficiently create and control the emission of high-quality
single photons for quantum optical technology. The IRG is designing,
fabricating, and testing "structured materials:" high-performance optical
materials that are sculpted on the nano- or mesoscale to enhance their optical
properties, enabling stronger photon-photon and photon-material interactions.
The goal of the 2D Atomic Membranes for 3D Systems IRG is to explore the
fundamental challenges associated with transducing small local signals into
global observable changes at nanoscale dimensions in a targeted design
structure. To do this, the group is combining recent advances in two-dimensional
atomic membranes growth with the scale-invariant properties of the centuries-old
art forms of origami ("ori" = fold) and kirigami ("kiri" = cut). Their aim is to
take miniaturization to its ultimate limit, creating atomically thin "paper"
materials that self-fold into incredibly responsive structures with lateral
features at the micron to nanometer scale. Through a series of integrated
educational activities, the CCMR is impacting K-12 teachers and students;
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scholars; and faculty.