* 1719353
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Multiscale-Modeling and Raman Spectroscopy to Uncover Correlated Atomic Motions in Hybrid and Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrew Rappe, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 395,754.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

The National Science Foundation and the United States -- Israel Binational
Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this collaboration between a US-based
researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The NSF Division of Materials
Research funds this award, which supports research and education on how
materials absorb light, how electrons behave after absorbing that energy, and
how ionic motions can influence them. Many important processes involve
interactions of light with matter, including solar energy conversion, light
detection, and optical computing. This project brings together theoretical and
experimental efforts to explore these processes using state-of-the-art
investigational techniques. The PI and his group plan to focus on hybrid
perovskites, materials that have recently been shown to have promising
photovoltaic properties. Despite this promise, the lack of physical
understanding of the ability of these materials to convert light to electricity
impedes further progress.

The theoretical work includes quantum mechanical modeling of materials and
simulations, aiming to provide a deep understanding of the electronic states in
these materials, as well as an understanding of the vibrational properties. The
experimental work will center around using light to excite vibrational motions,
revealing how the ions move, and how the ionic motions are affected by
temperature, electric field, and previous light excitation. These spectroscopic
studies of the vibrations will be connected to the theory and modeling to
produce a complete picture of the behavior of these materials.

The advancement of highly efficient photovoltaics that are easy to fabricate is
a compelling societal need. The hybrid perovskites appear to be moving toward
commercial acceptance, except that the basic physics behind their favorable
properties and their evolution and degradation are not understood. This project
represents an opportunity for theoretical condensed matter physics to play a
vital role in assessing material properties and in opening the gateway to
widespread acceptance of this technology. This could provide a wide range of
societal dividends from improved and less expensive photovoltaics to sensors and
optical computing elements.

This project also offers unique opportunities for engaging and training the next
generation of scientists to apply complex condensed-matter physics in a context
of compelling interest to them, through venues ranging from public lectures, in-
class discussions and tailored modules, to research projects at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels, and binational and
international conferences. The US-based graduate students will travel to Israel
to carry out research at the Israeli PI's group.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The National Science Foundation and the United States --
Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this collaboration
between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The NSF Division
of Materials Research funds this award, which supports research and education on
uncovering and understanding the correlated ionic motions in halide (and hybrid
organic-inorganic) perovskite (HOIP) materials. This class of materials has
shown enormous potential as next-generation photovoltaic materials. Despite this
promise, the lack of physical understanding of the ability of these materials to
convert light to electricity impedes further progress. Ionic motion plays a key
role in the property evolution of these materials, and it has been proposed to
play a signature role in the anomalously favorable excited-carrier dynamics and
lifetime.

The PIs propose theoretical modeling and targeted Raman spectroscopy to reveal
and rationalize a range of ionic motions, including harmonic and anharmonic
phonons, incipient polar order, and other correlated ionic motions on various
length- and time-scales. First-principles calculations will provide insight into
interatomic interactions and short-time dynamical features. Longer time scales
will be accessed via molecular dynamics and will be analyzed with a suite of
correlation function tools. Raman spectroscopy will probe ionic motions and
confirm and extend theoretical interpretations. Specific activities include: i)
revealing and analyzing correlated ionic motions and the onset of polar order in
the hybrid and halide perovskites; ii) the effect of temperature and electric
field on dynamic and static ordering; iii) hydrogen bonding and structural
ordering; iv) illumination-induced structural ordering and disordering; v) polar
ordering and the Rashba effect.

The advancement of highly efficient photovoltaics that are easy to fabricate is
a compelling societal need. The hybrid perovskites appear to be moving toward
commercial acceptance, except that the basic physics behind their favorable
properties and their evolution and degradation are not understood. This project
represents an opportunity for theoretical condensed matter physics to play a
vital role in assessing material properties and opening the gateway to
widespread acceptance of this technology. This project will make connections
between disparate scientific disciplines including crystalline solids, liquids,
and molecular materials, and will develop new techniques for Raman spectroscopic
interrogation of materials and correlation function theoretical analysis of
complex ionic behaviors.

This project also offers unique opportunities for engaging and training the next
generation of scientists to apply complex condensed-matter physics in a context
of compelling interest to them, through venues ranging from public lectures, in-
class discussions and tailored modules, to research projects at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels, and binational and
international conferences. The US-based graduate students will travel to Israel
to carry out research at the Israeli PI's group.