* 1719432
* The Biomechanics of Specific Locomotion used by Our Closest Living Primate Relatives
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Shannon McFarlin, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 219,346.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship award supports a rising scholar at the intersection of
several fields of science: Human Evolution, Biomechanics, Evolutionary Modeling
and Primatology to investigate the origins of the peculiar type of locomotion
(also called knuckle-walking) that is used only by our closest living primate
relatives, chimpanzees and gorillas, and may have been used by our earliest
ancestors. This bizarre form of locomotion has led to decades of research
focusing on why an animal would knuckle-walk over any other form of locomotion,
and when and how many times it has evolved. However, critical to addressing any
hypotheses concerning the origin of knuckle-walking are basic data that allow
the Fellow to understand how it works. By fully understanding how knucklewalking
works, the project team will be able to directly investigate the origin and
evolution of knucklewalking in apes. This will enable the team to infer its
presence in fossil apes as well as the last common ancestor of humans and
chimpanzees. The project has substantial collaboration with scientists and
students in Rwanda, going much deeper beyond simply doing fieldwork and data
collection. The research team will host Rwandan university students for
internships, and students conducting their senior research at the Karisoke
Research Center. This project also facilitates opportunities to engage Rwandan
undergraduate students and early career scientists. Through this type of
international collaboration, US scientists, postdoctoral scholars and students
engage in meaningful research to advance the state of the art in the field of
anthropology and biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a team of
scientists utilize state-of-the-art laboratory- and field-based biomechanical
analyses of locomotion in chimpanzees, gorillas, and macaques, as well as
phylogenetic comparative methodologies in order to test assumptions about the
evolution of this unique form of locomotion, and to understand how, when, and
how many times this locomotor behavior evolved. Specifically, in this project
the team of scientists will: 1) perform a 3-D jointlevel mechanical analysis of
knuckle-walking in chimpanzees and digitigrade/palmigrade walking in macaques,
2) create a computational model that allows for examination of the benefits of
knuckle-walking over other forms of terrestrial locomotion, 3) use evolutionary
modeling to track the evolution of knuckle-walking in the hominoid tree of life
and to infer its presence in fossil apes, and 4) develop protocols for
collecting non-invasive 3-D field kinematic data from wild, critically
endangered mountain gorillas, including knuckle-walking. The broader impacts of
this research will target both scientific and educational domains. The
researchers will develop protocols to investigate locomotion in wild, critically
endangered mountain gorillas. This will not only provide never-before-seen
insights into gorilla locomotion, but the protocols will be widely applicable to
other endangered species. Moreover, this project will support the research of an
early-career scientist, and will involve mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students. By training the next generation of scientists and creating freely-
available data resources and research protocols, this project will facilitate
discoveries about the origin of our closest living ape relatives, as well as the
origin of our own species, that go far beyond the present project. The project
involves international collaboration at multiple levels, and is co-funded by the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.