* 1719681
* International Travel Proposal: Funding to support travel and attendance at the 4th Intl. Symposium on Ranaviruses -  Budapest, Hungary.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Victor Chinchar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Growing concerns about amphibian declines, the increasing reliance of humans on
aqua- and mari-culture as a food source, and the ability of ranaviruses to
infect divergent hosts underscores the need for a conference that brings
together investigators interested in various aspects of infectious disease in
cold-blooded vertebrates. Hence, the purpose of this proposal is to request
funds to partially support the attendance of US investigators at the 4th
International Symposium on Ranaviruses (4th ISR) to be held in Budapest, Hungary
in conjunction with the 10th International Symposium on Viruses of Lower
Vertebrates (10th ISVLV). The ISVLV (June 4 - 7, 2017) and ISR (June 7 - 10,
2017) will facilitate communication between senior and junior faculty, post-
doctoral fellows, and graduate/veterinary students working on five continents
whose prime focus is on viruses that target cold-blooded vertebrates. The
majority of the funds in this award will be used to support the travel of
trainees (graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) and junior faculty, with
special attention paid to supporting members of underrepresented groups.

Ranaviruses (RVs, family Iridoviridae) are emerging pathogens that target
ecologically- and commercially important fish, amphibians, and reptiles. The RVs
are promiscuous pathogens and the lack of host specificity suggests that
infections in aqua- or mari-culture facilities may spread to wildlife, and vice
versa. In view of the above, the purpose of this proposal is to request funding
to support an international meeting, the 4th International Symposium on
Ranaviruses (4th ISR) focused on RVs and the diseases they cause. The meeting
will bring together a diverse array of investigators (e.g., virologists,
veterinarians, immunologists, ecologists, veterinary pathologists) and provide a
forum for the discussion of RVs and their impact on cold-blooded vertebrates. To
further increase the usefulness of this meeting, the 4th ISR will be coupled to
the 10th International Symposium on Viruses of Lower Vertebrates (ISVLV). The
ISVLV has a long-standing interest in viruses infecting lower vertebrates and
the joint meeting will facilitate collaboration among scientists interested in
this field of study. Thus, the joint ISR-ISVLV meeting will bring together one
of largest groups of investigators focused on viruses of poikilothermic
vertebrates and leverage their complementary skills and expertise to produce a
comprehensive understanding of pathogens that impact not only wildlife, but also
important food species.