* 1719866
* A biocultural investigation of epigenetics, gene expression and the intergenerational effects of stress in mothers and neonates
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Connie Mulligan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 499,446.00

This project will investigate relationships among maternal stress, epigenetic
markers, and infant outcomes in a sample of mother-infant pairs in which the
mothers experienced extreme stress during pregnancy. The goal of the research is
to better understand how epigenetic mechanisms may link stress in one generation
and changes in gene expression and later-life outcomes in the next generation.
The idea that stress, including psychosocial stress, may be related
physiologically to changes in an offspring's outcomes later in life is central
to many anthropological models of growth, development, adaptation and
plasticity. The research findings also will be potentially informative for
understanding the increasing prevalence of stress-related disorders in the
United States. This project will support ongoing international research
collaborations and integrative graduate training in biological, cultural, and
medical anthropology for students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most stressful environments today is found in
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) where war and post-war conflict has
ravaged the country for over 20 years. This project will investigate the role of
DNA methylation and gene expression in translating experiences of violence and
stress in a sample of mothers into altered well-being outcomes for those mothers
and their offspring. The project will therefore advance our understanding of
human phenotypic plasticity, a central theme in anthropological, biocultural
research. The proposed biocultural approach integrates sophisticated
ethnographic, epigenomic, transcriptomic, and hormonal data; a wealth of
biological samples, maternal stress exposures and neonate/maternal outcomes have
already been collected for 100 mother-infant pairs. The biological samples will
be assayed for DNA methylation (Illumina MethylationEPIC BeadChip), gene
expression (Agilent SurePrint G3 Human Gene Expression array), and cortisol-
based stress measures (ELISA and LC-MS). Associations among maternal stress, DNA
methylation, gene expression and neonate/maternal outcomes will be tested using
multiple regression analyses, to better understand the biological and molecular
mechanisms that underlie adaptive responses to stress. The project will focus on
genes involved in the stress process, e.g., HPA axis genes, as well as the
entire genome to test for genome-wide effects of stress.