* 1719047
* SHF:Small:New models, design, and test methods for long-term aging of nanometer VLSI
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Sandeep Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 440,000.00

Transistor aging refers to the phenomenon that a transistor degrades with use
over time. Hence, as digital chips are used, transistor aging reduces their
performance and increases power consumption. Aging also causes some chips to
fail prematurely during their expected lifetimes (called lifetime failures).
Since such failures can corrupt user data, cause expensive system downtime, and
require expensive maintenance, industry practice requires lifetime failure rates
to be of the order of 10 to 100 parts per million. This project will develop
completely new methods and CAD tools for design and testing of digital chips to
combat aging in uniquely efficient ways. These new methods and tools will
dramatically improve yield, dramatically reduce power, and provide chips with
extremely low lifetime failure rates, even as aging continues to grow in
severity as we approach the end of Moore's Law. In turn, the society at large
will reap significant benefits of this research, since lower cost digital
systems with low lifetime failure rates will help improve many essential
services, especially health, security, and finance. In addition, this project
will train students and industry experts in the art and science of aging and its
mitigation and prepare them for the era near and beyond the end of Moore's Law.
Also, significant outreach effort will ensure that undergraduate students and
students from groups underrepresented in STEM will participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has identified and will address
three major limitations of existing aging research: serious inaccuracies of
existing models in estimating long-term aging for real-life chip usage, the
inability of existing memory designs to combat the most common type of memory
aging, namely asymmetric aging, and the fact that existing approaches for post
fabrication chip testing either provide extremely low yields or unacceptability
high lifetime failure rates due to aging. Specifically, this project will
develop completely new methods and tools for aging, demonstrate their
effectiveness via extensive simulation studies and experiments on test chips,
disseminate results and share new tools with academic and industry experts, and
train students.