* 1719554
* Collaborative Research: Mathematics Immersion for Secondary Teachers at Scale
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Daniel Heck, Horizon Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2022
* USD 826,728.00

Current reforms in mathematics place new demands on teachers, changing the focus
of the mathematics they teach focusing on what it means to do mathematics, not
just learn facts and methods that are the results of the work of others.
Teachers need strong professional development to meet these new demands. The
goal of this project will be to provide the field with a cost-effective model
for intense content-based professional development in ways that have not been
possible before, except through costly face-to-face models, by creating and
testing design principles for blended online courses. Team members will design,
implement, and research the effects of a professional development immersion
experience in mathematics for practicing secondary teachers (grades 7-12). The
project will provide mathematics immersion experience to over 300 teachers at 56
sites across the country. Over the course of two years, each of 14 instructors
will work with four geographically separated groups of 4-7 teachers, engaging
them in mathematics as learners and facilitating conversations that connect the
experience to their teaching and professional work. The project will provide the
field a concrete model for modern practice-based mathematics immersion,
conducted at scale. The model has the potential to broaden participation in
immersive professional development experiences, offering opportunities to
greater numbers of teachers and expanding the diversity of school contexts
affected. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions
will investigate fidelity of course implementation and differences in enactment.
RQ1. How well can instructors enact the blended course design with fidelity and
create immersion experiences in mathematics for participating teachers? RQ2.What
variations exist among instructors' enactment of the courses? What explains
differences in enactment, and how do they relate to teachers' experiences in the
courses? RQ3. What is the impact of the professional development on teachers'
(a) mathematical habits of mind, (b) beliefs about the nature of mathematics and
mathematics teaching, and (c) engagement in their professional mathematics
community? RQ4. What is the impact of the professional development on teachers'
instructional practices, particularly on the types of investigative mathematics
learning experiences that teachers provide for students? The project will use
established measures to research the effects of these experiences on teachers'
content knowledge, mathematical habits of mind, beliefs about mathematics,
involvement in a professional community, and teaching practices. The first two
research questions will be answered through qualitative data analysis of session
enactment logs, video-recorded course sessions, and interviews. The second two
research questions will be addressed through repeated measures analysis, with
all teachers assessed three times over the course of the project. For research
question 3, the outcome measures will be total and scale scores of the measures
of teachers' knowledge, preparedness to teach mathematics, and beliefs.
Additionally, qualitative analysis of interview data will explore trends in the
frequency and nature of teachers' engagement over time. For research question 4,
the outcome measures will be teaching practices with qualitative analysis of
observations and interviews.