* 1719490
* Exploiting emergent scale invariance
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* James Sethna, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

NONTECHNICAL Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education that aims to hone a powerful fundamental
theory into a practical approach toward a more realistic description of a wide
variety of phenomena. Important parts of our world fluctuate on many scales.
Clouds are wispy, fractals are bumpy, and Rice Krispies crackle. (So does the
Earth - earthquakes). Materials, like metal alloys and the membranes of
biological cells, can fluctuate on many scales, when their compositions are set
near special points. Fifty years ago, the explanation for these fluctuations was
discovered to be a kind of scale invariance: these systems look nearly the same
after they are magnified, for example big and small cloud wisps look similar.
This scale invariance was explained by a theory, describing how the laws
governing these systems change when the systems are magnified. The wisps of
clouds and the milk in puffed rice have rules that become the same upon changing
scale. But this elegant theory has not reached its potential, for example in
predicting the weather, or in describing how materials like bone, concrete, and
sea-shells form and break. Science can explain the whorls within whorls of
turbulence, but it needs to mesh the biggest whorls into the engineer's models
designing airplane wings, or the meteorologist's seashores and mountains. This
project will build on the PI's recently developed methods for solving this
theory more completely and systematically. The PI aims to turn this elegant
theory of physics into the bones of a practical engineering tool. In particular,
far from these special, scale-invariant points there are well-established
methods to calculate the properties of materials and alloys. The PI will develop
tools to merge these two descriptions into an integrated, powerful tool for
describing complex materials and systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education that aims to extend the quantitative validity of the
renormalization group and enable it to engage more realistic problems.
Understanding critical phenomena and emergent scale invariance is a key to many
of our scientific and engineering challenges. The current formulation of the
field is split between an admiration of universal scaling laws and dense,
inscrutable calculations for exactly solvable systems, for example the 2D Ising
model, and systems near special points, for example the Ising model in 1D and
4D. These latter calculations often violate the naive power laws and Widom
scaling usually expected. The PI has recently used the mathematics of
bifurcation theory to arrange these anomalous universality classes into
universality families, characterizing the logarithms, exponentials, and
invariant combinations of scaling variables, many for the first time. These new
methods are closely associated with known techniques for incorporating analytic
and singular corrections to scaling, and the PI will combine the new correct
critical-point singularities with corrections to scaling to dramatically extend
the realm of quantitative validity. The project will use the 2D nonequilibrium
random-field Ising model to illustrate both the new predicted scaling forms and
the role of corrections to scaling, generating a quantitative theory predicting
avalanche sizes and magnetization curves over an enormous range of disorder,
until the size scale becomes as small as that of the lattice structure. The
project will also develop tools to extract entire phase diagrams and concomitant
materials behavior for experiments on cellular membranes, honing and validating
the tools using the complex phase diagram of a multiparameter membrane model for
microemulsions and tricritical Ising phenomena.