* 1719390
* RUI:  CQIS:  OP:  State-Preparation-and-Measurement Tomography
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Mark Beck, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 02/28/2019
* USD 145,000.00

Quantum mechanics is on the threshold of fundamentally changing modern
technology in a number of areas, with new technologies emerging regularly. As
these emerge, verification techniques are necessary to ensure confidence and
reliability. The primary objective of this project is to develop new ways of
uncovering errors that occur in quantum systems, while using a minimum of
assumptions about those systems. For example, in quantum communication involving
quantum key sharing, it is important for the communications partners to be
assured that they have successfully shared a secret key, when in fact they have
not. The error detection scheme at the core of this project will let them detect
this error, while making a minimum of assumptions about their apparatus. The
experiments will advance the movement of quantum technologies from theoretical
possibility to actual implementation. These experiments will be performed by
undergraduate students, preparing them for scientific careers by exposing them
to emerging fields of research and new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
important operations performed in experiments characterizing quantum systems are
(i) preparing systems in particular states and then (ii) performing measurements
on those states. State preparation and measurement are usually independent,
uncorrelated operations, and when analyzing data it is usually assumed that this
is the case. However, if there are indeed correlations between the state
preparations and the measurements, it is possible to draw erroneous conclusions
from measured data. The primary objective of this project is to experimentally
demonstrate a technique called loop state-preparation-and-measurement (SPAM)
tomography, which is capable of detecting such correlated errors while making a
minimum of assumptions. No assumptions need to be made about either the state
preparation or the measurements, other than that the experimenter knows the
Hilbert space dimension of the system they are working with. Experiments will be
performed on one- and two-qubit systems, with the qubits encoded in the
polarizations of individual photons. The group proposes to demonstrate that loop
SPAM tomography is capable of detecting correlations between state preparations
and measurements of single qubits. They also propose to detect nonlocal
correlations between measurements of two qubits in which one party is attempting
to fake a Bell inequality violation.