* 1719265
* Targeted Infusion Project: New Physics and Astronomy Program at the University of The Virgin Islands
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Antonino Cucchiara, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 12/31/2020
* USD 297,330.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at the University of the Virgin Islands seeks to develop
the newly approved undergraduate program in Physics and Astronomy at the St.
Thomas and Sr. Croix campuses. The project is informed by an on-going evaluation
with a strong plan for formative and summative
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement and study
evidenced-based strategies in the development of a physics and astronomy major.
The project goals are to: implement active learning practices in classrooms,
with particular attention to the student population, which encompasses a large
underrepresented community from both the territory and the broader Caribbean;
create complementary learning opportunities using visual and interactive tools;
and provide hands-on, student-centered learning experiences, including a
research component that exposes students to diversified STEM careers. A strong
outreach component to K-12 students and teachers is included, as is the
development of courses and activities for undergraduate students not majoring in
a STEM field.