* 1719160
* SHF:SMALL: MECAR: Memory-Centric Architecture to Bridge the Gap Between Computing and Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Yuan Xie, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Traditional computer systems usually follow the so-called classic Von Neumann
architecture, with separated processing units (such as CPUs and GPUs) to do
computing and memory units for data storage.  The increasing gap between the
computing of processor and the memory has created the memory wall problem in
which the memory subsystem is becoming the bottleneck of the entire computing
system. As technology scales, data movement between the processing units (PUs)
and the memory is becoming one of the most critical performance and energy
bottlenecks in various computer systems, ranging from cloud servers to end-user
devices. As we enter the era of big data, many emerging data-intensive workloads
become pervasive and mandate very high bandwidth and heavy data movement between
the computing units and the memory.  The fundamental goal of this project is to
advance the trend of bridging the gap between computing and memory, with an
application-driven approach. 

By leveraging the PI's prior extensive research on 3D-stacked memory and non-
volatile memory architecture, the PI proposes to focus on (1) designing memory-
centric processing unit (PU) architecture with massive GB on-chip/on-package
memory integrated with computing units; (2) investigating new processing-in-
memory(PIM) memory architecture designs with both DRAM and emerging NVM; (3) and
co-design and co-optimization of both memory-centric PU architecture and NDC/PIM
memory architecture, with the emerging data-intensive applications such as
neural computing and graph analytics as application driver to guide the
architecture optimization. The success of this research will have enormous
economic and social benefits as broader impact. The research will provide the
design guidelines for enabling future computing systems beyond the state-of-the-
art, ranging from high performance exascale computing to low power mobile
systems. Consequently, it will enhance nearly every digital device available
today from consumer to enterprise electronics. It can also spawn new
applications involving the computation on the exascale of data, e.g. data
mining, machine learning, bio-informatics, etc. It is expected that this project
will serve as a catalyst to accelerate the adoption of data-intensive and
memory-centric technologies in future computer systems and applications from
architecture and system design perspectives. The PI has extensive industrial
ties with summer internships planned, which will be invaluable for broadening
the knowledge and skills of the students. The PI will also strive to educate a
broad audience on the emerging technologies through regular and online classes.
Publication/lecture notes will be released on public websites to promote the
broader dissemination of scientific knowledge.