* 1719512
* Broadening Participation Research:  Investigating Faculty Influences on STEM Degree Production  at HBCUs
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Aretha Marbley, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 05/31/2022
* USD 349,971.00

Prairie View A&amp;M University proposes to investigate the role of Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) faculty in the production of
underrepresented undergraduates with STEM degrees. The investigators will
conduct a mixed methods research project involving HBCUs that produce
significant numbers of African American STEM graduates to determine faculty
contributions to that success. The project builds on previous research focused
on academically gifted African American students enrolled in HBCU STEM programs
that suggested the need for a more in-depth study of the faculty's influences on
student success. Recognizing the confluence of HBCU culture and climate on
student success, the researchers will be able to isolate the nuanced role of the
faculty. The overarching goal of the project is to better understand factors
that influence the retention and success of African American students in STEM
and to produce insights about how faculty can structure successful collegiate
experiences for these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
project will be guided by social capital, resilience, and cultural capital
theories. It will investigate two research questions: How do HBCU faculty
support minority student persistence and retention in STEM; and what strategies
are most effective in preparing underrepresented minority students for graduate
education and STEM careers? The research will be conducted in two phases. The
first phase will include the collection and analysis of qualitative data from
interviews, focus groups, and chat-based discussions. The second phase will use
data from the qualitative findings to develop a quantitative instrument that
will capture the factors articulated by faculty that impact the retention and
success of African American students in STEM. Data will be analyzed using open,
axial, and selective coding methods to uncover salient emergent categories and
themes, and the constant comparative method will be used to gain additional
insights on the research findings. The research will will produce a model for
STEM faculty development and training and a survey instrument for measuring STEM
faculty engagement towards success.