* 1719635
* Conference on Nonconvex Statistical Learning, University of Southern California, May 26-27, 2017
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Jong-Shi Pang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The two-day interdisciplinary Conference on Nonconvex Statistical Learning takes
place at the campus of the University of Southern California on Friday, May 26,
and Saturday, May 27, 2017. The website of the conference:
https://sites.google.com/a/usc.edu/cnsl2017/home will be continuously updated
prior to the conference and will provide a repository for the lectures of the
meeting to be made available generally. In today's digital world, huge amounts
of data, i.e., big data, can be found in almost every aspect of scientific
research and every walk of human activities. These data need to be managed
effectively for reliable prediction, inference, and improved decision making.
Statistical learning is an emergent scientific discipline wherein mathematical
modeling, computational algorithms, and statistical analysis are jointly
employed to address such a data management problem. The aim of the conference is
to bring together researchers at all levels from multiple disciplines, including
computational and applied mathematics, optimization, statistics, and engineering
to report on the state of the art of the conference subject and exchange ideas
for its further development. Collaborations among the participants will be
fostered with the goal of advancing the science of the field of statistical
learning and promoting the interfaces of the involved disciplines. The format of
the conference consists of roughly two dozen lectures given by expert
researchers of the field. Break times in-between the lectures are scheduled to
allow discussions among all participants who will include graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, researchers in academia and industry, and faculty members
in universities. This award provides support targeted for the travel expenses of
junior participants. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Till now, convex optimization has
been a principal venue for solving many problems in statistical learning. Yet
there is increasing evidence supporting the use of nonconvex formulations to
enhance the realism of the models and improve their generalizations. Superior
results and new advances have occurred in areas such as computational
statistics, compressed sensing, imaging science, machine learning, bio-
informatics and portfolio selection in which nonconvex functionals are employed
to express model loss, promote sparsity, and enhance robustness. This conference
provides a forum for the participants to report on their research and exchange
ideas pertaining to the use of nonconvex functionals in statistical learning.
The topics are organized in four main streams: modeling, advances in
computation, big-data statistical learning, and innovative applications. The
lectures will cover both theory and algorithms as well as promising directions
for further research.