* 1719280
* Arctic Observing Network: Continuing the Beaufort Gyre Observing System in 2018-2021 to Document and Enhance Understanding of Arctic Freshwater Transformations and Fate
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Andrey Proshutinsky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,579,287.00

The western part of the Arctic Ocean contains a large amount of freshwater (more
than 23,000 cubic kilometers which is comparable with the volume of fresh water
stored in all the Great Lakes). Our project uses samples from ships and moored
instruments to study the mechanisms controlling the amount of freshwater and
other ocean properties in the western Arctic Ocean under different climate
conditions. Changes in the western Arctic system are driven by changes in the
Arctic and global climate systems while at the same time they are strong enough
to influence both the weather and climate in the Northern Hemisphere. What we
learn on this project will allow us to predict changes in the Arctic Ocean and
is important for oil and gas exploration, shipping, navigation, tourism, and
military operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Arctic Observing Network project
will continue for 2018-2019 the Beaufort Gyre Observing System operations begun
in 2003 designed to document the unprecedented changes in sea ice and ocean
parameters that are presently occurring in the region. We will continue
measuring time series of temperature, salinity, currents, geochemical tracers,
sea ice draft, and sea level using bottom-anchored moorings and shipboard
measurements. Ship-based synoptic sampling covering the Beaufort Gyre will take
place during the summer of 2018 in collaboration with scientists from Canada and
Japan, with shared logistic expenses, to augment the year-round mooring
measurements. Temperature, salinity, oxygen, nutrients, barium, and 18O will
continue to be measured at standard locations along sections at 140째W and 150째W
longitudes, and ~75째N and ~78째N latitudes using a shipboard CTD/rosette to
continue the long-term time series started in 2003. Samples that provide
information on longer time-scales, such as CFCs and carbon tetrachloride,
alkalinity, total CO2, dissolved inorganic carbon, and tritium/3He, will be
collected less frequently. Expendable CTDs that profile to 1100 m depth will be
used between CTD/rosette casts to increase spatial resolution of the temperature
and salinity fields. The project will be coordinated with other elements of the
National Science Foundation?s Arctic Observing Network to enhance effectiveness
and interconnections of observational activities, and the field program will
continue to accommodate other National Science foundation- funded projects when
possible. Data will be available on the project website and at the National
Science Foundation's Arctic Data Center.