* 1719359
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Inquiry-Based Green Chemistry into Undergraduate Laboratory Courses via Silver Recycling in a Closed Loop, Multi-course Process
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Melissa Reeves, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 406,767.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Tuskegee University seeks
to improve the undergraduate chemistry experience through guided inquiry
pedagogical methods, addition of new instrumentation and real-world application
of green chemistry. The proposed program includes linking chemistry concepts and
green chemical methods to hands-on research experiences that will stimulate
students' awareness and the pursuit of scientific careers. Students will be
exposed to overarching themes of green chemistry, recycling, and sustainability,
as well as their impact on the world. Since Chemistry is a service department
for majors in four colleges at Tuskegee University, the proposed activities'
emphasis on proper waste disposal, environmental impacts, and green chemistry
principles will not only have a broad institutional impact, but will have a
major impact on preparing students for a global STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the program is to improve
Tuskegee University's chemistry laboratory curriculum and the environment
through three initiatives: 1) professional development activities for teaching
with a guided inquiry-based model; 2) inclusion of Green Chemistry principles
throughout the chemistry laboratory curriculum; and 3) increased student hands-
on access to instrumentation. The goals will be accomplished through the
development of several Guided Inquiry experiments that begin from the waste
stream of the general chemistry laboratory. Silver salt waste from general
chemistry laboratory will be collected and purified by analytical chemistry
laboratory students. The purified silver salts will be reused in general
chemistry and used as catalysts in organic chemistry laboratory synthesis.
Students in nanotechnology will use the recycled silver to synthesize silver
nanoparticles and investigate their biological activities. These silver
nanoparticles will be utilized in the biochemistry laboratories to demonstrate
their antimicrobial properties. Thus, the project will be a closed loop process
that involves various levels of the institution's chemistry laboratories. Two
significant benefits of the proposed activity include diversification of the
experiment portfolio and the reduction of laboratory waste.