* 1719825
* Challenging environments and nutritional immunology in wild primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Jessica Rothman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 376,483.00

Nutrition is critical to immunity and pathogen resistance in humans and other
primates, but the mechanisms that link nutrition and well-being in primates are
not fully understood. The goal of this project is to determine how nutritional
strategy modulates immune function in response to natural variation in nutrient
availability in one of our closest living relatives, orangutans. Studying wild
orangutans offers a unique opportunity to integrate metabolic physiology and
immunity with foraging in an ecological context, providing a natural experiment
to examine the multi-dimensional relationships of nutrition, energetics,
physiological well-being and fitness. This project will provide new insights
into the plasticity of primate nutritional strategies, their underlying causes,
and their consequences for primate populations. It will also provide
interdisciplinary research and training opportunities and promote STEM research
for undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups at Rutgers
University. In addition, several American students will participate in a study
abroad program in Indonesia entitled "Primates, Ecology, and Conservation in
Indonesia," where they will learn applied ecological methods and conservation
practices together with Indonesian student counterparts. The project will foster
international collaborations and relationships at all levels of research and
capacity development, thereby supporting the long-term success of conservation
and research at the field location. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
the interactive nature of dietary nutrition, energy balance, stress, and
immunity, to understand mechanisms linking nutritional strategy to physiological
status in primates. To investigate these dynamic relationships, the project
personnel will combine their expertise to collect and analyze field behavioral
and ecological data combined with nutritional, physiological, and immunological
data using innovative laboratory and statistical approaches. This project will
answer the following questions: How does the nutritional landscape of orangutans
vary seasonally? How do orangutans cope with this variation -- by strictly
regulating their intake of macronutrients (i.e., fats, protein, carbohydrates),
or by changing their nutritional strategy to match the nutritional landscape?
How do energy balance, stress, immune function, and parasite infections vary
with nutritional strategy? Not only will this project provide powerful new
insights into orangutan evolutionary ecology, but it will also set a new
benchmark for nutritional ecology studies in primates and other animals, help to
inform the laboratory paradigm on which it is modeled, and provide a non-human
analogue to inform models concerning the nutritional ecology of humans in modern
environments.