* 1719465
* Targeted Infusion Project: STAR (Successfully Transitioning into the Academic Realm) Program at VSU
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Brian Sayre, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2020
* USD 399,978.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Virginia State University
(VSU) seeks to enhance the ability of underrepresented minority students to face
the challenges of learning science and develop STEM identities to sustain their
interest and motivation for pursuit of STEM careers. The proposed intervention,
Successfully Transitioning into the Academic Realm (STAR) Program, is designed
to facilitate the transition to college-level academics and will build on a
previous successful pilot intervention that resulted in an increase in the
passing rates for biology majors enrolled in general biology. This project is
expected to enhance the ability of underrepresented minority students to face
the classroom challenges of learning science, and develop STEM identities which
will sustain their interest and motivation to pursue STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STAR program specific objectives are designed to
impact cognitive and non-cognitive factors using evidence-based models. This
will be accomplished through curricular enhancements to the general biology
course and a peer-mentoring, learning-community based approach. The specific
goals are to: 1) integrate critical components of BIOL130 Professional Practices
in Biology that have been demonstrated to enhance course outcomes into the
general biology course for all STEM majors; 2) develop and implement a peer
mentoring structure that integrates evidence-based and piloted practices
targeting effective academic habits and maximizing student engagement through
learning communities; and 3) implement a rigorous evaluation plan to determine
program impacts.