* 1719433
* Implementation Project: Preparing Interdisciplinary Minority Material Scientists and Engineers of the Future
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,779,388.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research.
The project at Tuskegee University in partnership with Oakland University seeks
to build on previous successful efforts to increase participation of African-
American students in STEM disciplines. The goal of this project is to prepare
undergraduate students for graduate studies and careers in material science and
engineering (MSE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize evidence-based,
high-impact pedagogical practices to improve student learning and outcomes.
Activities include: a minor in material science and engineering consisting of
multidisciplinary course-work; use of "Learning through Making" techniques;
research internships; workshops for students to build literature search,
technical writing and proposal development skills; preparation for graduate
fellowship proposals; a Young Material Scientists Research Conference; and, the
creation of virtual learning communities as a means for students to engage in
scientific dialogue. The effectiveness of the proposed interventions in
preparing undergraduate students for graduate studies and careers in MSE will be
assessed with a research study focused on the development of students' personal
self efficacy, professional efficacy and goal-directed behaviors. The project
will be advised and evaluated for effectiveness by internal and external
advisory boards and an evaluator.