* 1719684
* Collaborative Research: Stability, flexibility, and functionality of thermally tolerant coral symbioses
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Dustin Kemp, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 304,957.00

All reef-building corals require large numbers of internal symbiotic microalgae
(called Symbiodinium) for their survival and growth. These mutualisms have shown
considerable sensitivity to changes in the environment in recent decades,
especially due to global increases in ocean temperatures. When exposed to severe
thermal stress, corals loose their symbionts and often die. However, recent
experiments show that some symbionts may be more stress-tolerant. Corals with
these heat-resistant symbionts continue to receive high amounts of algal derived
nutrients and grow under elevated temperatures. If the global trend in seawater
warming continues to increase, these heat-resistant symbioses may become more
ecologically prevalent on reef systems around the world and could play a
critical role in maintaining healthy and productive coral communities. This
project will examine the ecological and physiological attributes of stress-
tolerant symbioses from the Indo Pacific where coral communities are the
largest, most diverse, and productive in the world. The researchers will conduct
a series of experiments to (1) evaluate host and symbiont attributes that
contribute to thermal tolerance and (2) characterize the relative flexibility
and functionality of various corals and symbionts exposed to typical ambient and
stressful temperatures. Broader impacts of the project include the training of
several Ph.D. students, undergraduates, and high school students in the
disciplines of physiology and ecology. The researchers will partner with Global
Ocean Exploration, Inc. to communicate this research to the general public
through short documentary videos, editorials, and podcasts. An interactive K-5
program, "Invertebrates on the Road," will introduce elementary students in
Pennsylvania to marine invertebrate diversity. Research results will also be
disseminated to the public at the University of Delaware via educational
seminars, as well as through hands-on research displays and demonstrations
presented at the annual open house "Coast Day" festival in each year of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine several attributes
important to the functional ecology of coral-dinoflagellate symbioses.
Specifically, the research team seeks to understand the interplay between coral
and symbiont physiologies under different environmental conditions and determine
the relative influence of biotic factors crucial to the performance of stress
tolerant symbioses. Results from recent experiments on Indo-west Pacific corals
found that Clade D (S. trenchii) symbionts are stress-tolerant. These symbionts
are able to maintain function and provide nutrients to their hosts under high
temperatures that typically elicit the breakdown of symbioses involving many
other species of symbiont. A number of questions arise about how enhanced
thermal tolerance symbioses may be aided by a combination of factors; for
example: Are symbionts physiologically hardier in corals that are routinely
feeding? Do host genotypes that are adapted to high temperatures affect the
physiology of their symbionts in ways that make the partnership more stress-
tolerant? A series of experiments over three years will examine the
functionality of different coral-symbiont pairings exposed to ambient and high
temperatures. Reciprocal transplants between inshore (stress-tolerant) and
offshore (stress-susceptible) reef sites will be used to produce specific host-
symbiont parings. Controlled experiments will test the relative importance of
coral trophic status (nutrient content) while holding symbiont type constant and
how changes in both coral trophic status and symbiont species identity of the
resident affect thermal tolerance. Tank experiments on shore will track rates of
photosynthesis as well as carbon translocation and assimilation from symbiont to
host tissues and skeletons. Long-term growth rates via skeletal density, linear
extension, and biomass gain will also be measured. This project will help
elucidate how biochemical, physiological and ecological differences among host-
symbiont pairings may respond to rising ocean temperatures and enhance the
future viability of coral reefs.