* 1719227
* I-Corps: Transforming Construction by Digital Fabrication of Concrete with Carbonate Cement
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Gaurav Sant, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 07/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project seeks to advance
concrete construction technology by reinventing cement production with
carbonate-based, near CO2-neutral cement and concrete surrogates. It is proposed
to utilize flue-gas borne CO2 as an 'ingredient' to rapidly mineralize digitally
fabricated construction components. The reinvented cementation chemistry and
process enable producing high-quality building elements faster than it is
possible today. It also enables the integration of a confluence of technologies,
mating carbonate-based cementation solutions with digital fabrication
technologies to overcome challenges facing the construction sector today,
including its large CO2 footprint, while also potentially improving
productivity. By rationalizing workflows, enhancing automation, and originating
new materials, this project develops innovative pathways to disruptively
transform the construction sector.

This I-Corps project exploits new advances made the rapid ambient temperature
mineralization of carbonate solids. The central technology is based on
approaches for sequestering CO2 borne in flue gases in light metal carbonates.
This renders carbonate-based cementation agents, which offer performance that is
equivalent or superior to traditional cement and concrete. Recent studies have
revealed that carbonation hardening process is rapid. Under suitable conditions
it proceeds to completion in 24 hours or less, substantially faster than
existing cementation solutions. Due to their simple composition and chemical
homogeneity, the carbonate cement precursors offer flexible, and well-
controllable rheology, an important prerequisite for enabling digital
fabrication using these materials. Taken together, carbonate-cements offer new
routes towards CO2-neutral cementation, and construction.