* 1719759
* RUI:  Heavy Ion Physics in ALICE at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Austin Harton, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2023
* USD 257,691.00

This award supports a research program in which undergraduate students are
involved in the study of heavy ion collisions within A Large Ion Collider
Experiment (ALICE) at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN). The
program has two goals: 1) to better understand matter in extreme conditions, and
2) to provide students with research experiences that stimulate an interest in
science and technology, exposes them to techniques used in experimental high
energy physics, allows the development of global relationships, and prepares
them for careers in science and technology. The project on which the students
will work is focused on understanding the behavior of extremely dense matter,
similar to that existing a fraction of a second after the Big Bang. This is
achieved by colliding atomic nuclei at very high energies and studying the
remnants of these collisions using highly sophisticated detectors. The students
involved in this project will analyze the resulting sub-atomic particles
generated by these collisions, and will contribute to the design of the
sophisticated detectors that detect the particles emanating from these
collisions. Collaboration with a large international laboratory such as the
Large Hadron Collider at CERN allows students to work with world-class
scientists and state of the art technology, thus, preparing them for STEM
careers. Additionally, a program such as this has the potential of creating a
cadre of students who become ambassadors for STEM; students who demonstrate to
their peers the benefits of pursuing careers in science, engineering, math and
technology. Students who participate in this program may serve as mentors and
role models for students of high school age and younger, thereby contributing to
the creation of a pipeline of students actively preparing for careers in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of ALICE at CERN is to understand the behavior
of matter at very high density, similar to the matter that existed a fraction a
second after the Big Bang. This state of matter, consisting of a very hot and
dense medium of quarks and gluons, is often referred to as a Quark Gluon Plasma
(QGP). By colliding nuclei at very high energies it is possible to create a QGP
in a controlled environment that facilitates the study of its properties.
Chicago State University (CSU) students will perform physics analysis of events
triggered by jets detected in ALICE's Electromagnetic Calorimeter (EmCal) sub-
detector. The students will investigate the flavor characteristics, specifically
strangeness, of jets resulting from high-energy proton-proton, proton-Pb and Pb-
Pb collisions, as well as investigating the use of jets as probes in the study
of QGP formation. In addition, CSU students will participate in a research and
development program devoted to the upgrade of the ALICE trigger detector known
as the Fast Interaction Trigger (FIT), thereby, participating in the hardware
development of an important component within the ALICE
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.