* 1719074
* SHF:Small: Accelerating Graph Analytics Through Coordinated Storage, Memory and Computing Advances
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Antonio Ortega, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Graphs represent the relationship between different entities and are the
representation of choice in diverse domains, such as web page ranking, social
networks, drug interactions, and communicable disease spreading. Due to the
sheer size of graphs in these important domains, billions of vertices with tens
of billions of edges, graph processing is a data intensive task. The size of the
graphs is expected to far exceed the size of the main memory available in many
computer systems. As such graph analytics will be hobbled by their inability to
quickly access graph vertices and edges from computer storage. Current storage
systems are mostly block based and hence treat graph data as a collection of
bytes organized into pages. The advent of affordable solid state drives (SSDs)
allows one to envision a future where SSDs can be made semantically aware of the
underlying graph storage. Rather than treating storage as a collection of
blocks, semantic awareness enables SSDs to consider graph structure while
deciding on how vertices and edges are laid out, and how to access the graph
elements efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances the vision of
semantic graph storage by proposing to make the SSD controller treat graph
vertices and edges as first class objects. In particular, this research will
design and implement a set of application programming interfaces (APIs) that
allow application developers and algorithmic designers to specify graph layout
and query storage systems using graph-oriented access requests, such as finding
all the neighbors of a given vertex. A new runtime layer for SSDs will also be
developed to exploit the semantic awareness to improve SSD endurance, garbage
collection and caching. The benefits of semantic graph storage will be
demonstrated by rethinking the implementation of graph signal processing
algorithms to achieve an order magnitude improvement in performance. Such
dramatic performance improvements in turn will enable a variety of compelling
societal benefits such as accelerated drug discovery. This research also
provides opportunities for a new generation of students to study, implement and
optimize graph analytics on experimental SSD platforms and to study the
tradeoffs between clean abstractions and the performance impact of abstractions.