* 1720591
* SBIR Phase I:  The novel NanoCont drug delivery technology for creating nanoformulated medicines with improved safety, better quality, and more predictable clinical responses.
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Anjani Jha, MAA Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is developing a novel drug delivery technology for
pharmaceutical companies with drug products or investigational compounds that
exhibit poor aqueous solubility and low bioavailability. NanoContTM technology
will provide a rapid and cost-effective approach for creating novel
nanoformulated drug products for FDA-approved and investigational compounds.
From a commercialization perspective, the technology will: (1) create improved
nanoformulations of FDA-approved compounds to extend patent life and market
exclusivity of established drugs, thus providing substantial value to
pharmaceutical companies; (2) nanoformulate investigational compounds to
increase their dissolution rate and bioavailability and facilitate the
development of promising drug candidates that would otherwise be abandoned; (3)
be developed on a continuous manufacturing platform, which will reduce overall
development costs, decrease lead time, decrease manufacturing footprint, and
permit manufacturing activities (currently outsourced abroad) to be relocated
back to the U.S. Therefore, the NanoContTM is expected to have high commercial
impact for pharmaceutical companies, facilitate development of novel drug
candidates to benefit patients, and provide economic value by increasing
manufacturing efficiencies and manufacturing jobs in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAA Laboratories (MAA) is developing a novel drug delivery
technology for pharmaceutical companies with drug products or investigational
compounds that exhibit poor aqueous solubility and low bioavailability. The
NanoContTM drug delivery technology is a manufacturing platform that uses patent
protected product specific formulation and process conditions to create
nanocrystals and a patented polymer-coating process to coat and stabilize the
nanocrystals. Polymer-coating of the drug nanoparticles acts as an energy
barrier to prevent agglomeration, thus maintaining the enhanced dissolution
characteristics and long-term product stability, as well as preventing
downstream problems, such as inconsistent bioavailability and/or dosing. The
NanoContTM platform is expected to be a disruptive technology because it offers
strictly controlled particle size/size distribution, particle stabilization,
low-cost scalability, and implementation on a continuous manufacturing platform.
There are no competitive products that offer this unique combination of
benefits. In summary, MAA?s NanoContTM drug delivery technology provides a novel
method for nanoformulating pharmaceutical crystals in a polymer coated structure
made of pharmaceutically acceptable polymers. The proposed technology on a
continuous manufacturing platform is expected to provide a rapid, readily
scalable, and broadly applicable process for developing and delivering poorly
soluble compounds as novel patentable drug products with favorable dissolution,
safety, and PK characteristics.