* 1720288
* Multi-Scale Computational Methods for Coastal Flooding
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kyle Mandli, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Flooding along the nation's coastlines can lead to devastating consequences both
to life and property as seen in Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy. Efforts to protect
our coastlines from the most dangerous of these events is critical to our
sustainable future along our nation's coastlines. The goal of this project is to
provide a means for improving our ability to forecast and predict these events
while taking into account key coastal infrastructure that are designed to
protect at-risk populations. This work not only enables direct reduction of loss
of life and economic impact via better forecasts however, it also enables the
application of mathematics and computation that can start to ask and answer
critical questions such as "I want to build a sea-wall, where should I put it
and how high should it be?". The context of these questions is also critical,
budgetary constraints and optimal protection are of course central to this
effort and this projects aims to enable answering these questions as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops numerical methods that can
answer questions related to climate change adaptation strategies addressing
coastal flooding due to tsunamis and storm surge. Both types of events have in
the past proven themselves to be immensely destructive and promise to be so in
the future. Unfortunately with climate change these events could be made worse,
whether due to rising sea-levels or changes to the likelihood of dangerous
storms, it is critical to a sustainable existence along the coastlines of the
world that we address the threat of coastal flooding. The work proposed focuses
on developing numerical methods that include sub-grid-scale structures that help
protect coastal communities with barriers such as sea-walls. The basis of the
work will be the GeoClaw framework, a finite-volume, wave- propagation, and
structured- grid code that has previously been validated for both tsunami and
storm surge events. GeoClaw addresses some of the multi-scale nature of the
coastal flooding problem by using adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) and local time
stepping but struggles to resolve fine-scale structures without significant
penalty due to the resolutions required. The work proposed focuses on
representing barriers at the sub-grid-scale level without the need for fully
resolving these structures. This will be accomplished by the development of a
new Riemann solver that will be able to represent zero-width barriers at grid
cell edges. This capability will then be used in conjunction with h-box and
semi-Lagrangian methods allowing the barriers to have flexible parameterizations
in terms of placement with respect to the grid. The method will then be tested
on realistic cases and be incorporated into a larger optimization framework that
is geared towards finding optimal adaptation solutions emphasizing the
capabilities of the flexible specification of the barrier.