* 1720480
* Exploring Structure and Symmetry in String Theory and Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Savdeep Sethi, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Savdeep Sethi at the
University of Chicago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origins of space and time are
among the enduring mysteries of nature. Did space and time emerge in some kind
of Big Bang? Will the universe end in a Big Crunch? Is there really a multiverse
of possibilities? In order to answer such basic questions about the nature of
space and time, we need a quantum theory of gravity. String theory is our best
candidate for such a theory. In his research, Professor Sethi aims to explore
structure and symmetry in both string theory and the kinds of so-called "quantum
field theories" of interest to particle physicists and condensed-matter
physicists. This research program is therefore in the national interest by
advancing the development of the infrastructure of basic science in the United
States. This research program also has concomitant broader impacts in three
areas. The first comes from providing research opportunities for undergraduates,
including continued participation in the Summer REU Opportunities for Minorities
and Women program at the University of Chicago. The second is through continued
participation in both the Space Explorers inner-city K-12 enrichment program and
the Life-Long Learning (L3) program. The final aspect involves improved
interdisciplinary ties with both cosmologists and mathematicians through
lectures at schools and workshops, through direct collaboration, and through the
organization of relevant scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, the goals of Professor Sethi's research center around two broad
themes. The "structure" aspect of this research involves exploring landscapes in
field theory and string theory. This will involve a number of topics, among them
the description of flux backgrounds from a field-theory perspective and their
realization in string theory via a novel landscape of anti-de Sitter space
solutions; the development of flux vacua in M-theory and type IIA string theory;
the role of anti-branes in flux vacua; the exploration of constraints on
inflating and de Sitter constructions in string theory; the construction of
accelerating space-times using stringy domain-wall solutions; and the study of
chiral gauge theory in two dimensions and its relation to new geometric
structures. By contrast, the "symmetry" aspect of the proposal involves
exploring the implications of spontaneously broken symmetries in gravity and in
effective field theory. The questions in gravity revolve around the extent to
which the dynamics of gravitational lumps is determined by symmetry. In a
broader context, anomalous and non-anomalous global symmetries can constrain
effective field theory couplings with implications for condensed-matter systems
such as quantum Hall systems. The final set of questions involve supersymmetry
in two ways: first to develop a symbolic computation package that can generate
supersymmetric Lagrangians with higher-derivative couplings (a long-needed tool
that will have a host of applications in both string theory and field theory),
and second to explore surprising simplifications in the vacuum structure of
supersymmetric quantum-mechanics models.