* 1720816
* Dynamics and Quantum Phase Transitions of Chiral Fermi Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Dmitrii Maslov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education that focuses on understanding and describing the correlated motion of
electrons in materials as they interact with each other and the underlying
atomic nuclei arranged on a crystalline lattice. A key ingredient is the
electron spin. Quantum mechanically, the electron behaves like a very tiny top,
and because of its charge like a tiny magnet as well. As the electron moves
through the crystalline lattice, the electric field of the nuclei looks like a
magnetic field which interacts with the magnetic character of the electron and
so, the direction of its spin. In this research project, the PI will develop a
theoretical description of electrons that interact strongly with each other and
with the periodic lattice of nuclei through its spin in natural and artificially
constructed crystalline materials. The PI will investigate a phenomenon which
results from the interplay between the electrons interacting with the lattice
and electrons interacting with each other; this leads to a new type of spin wave
which might be used to carry data in computing devices. These spin waves can
provide transfer of spin information over macroscopic distances with virtually
no loss of energy, and allow for the implementation of new computing concepts.
In connection with the research, the PI will develop a new mini-course on
subjects relevant to this award for a multi-faculty course "Advanced Topics in
Condensed Matter Physics" and organize an international workshop on quantum
phase transitions. The significance of the research results will be communicated
to a broader audience through the Funsize Physics website and public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education to develop and pursue the
consequences of a consistent theory of materials systems with strong
correlations among electrons and among spin and orbital degrees of freedom, a
chiral Fermi liquid theory. The PI will explore predictions of this theory with
consequences accessible to experiment. The research involves the identification
and investigation of possible new phases of electronic matter in materials with
strong spin-orbit-coupling and analyses of various experimental fingerprints of
the interplay between spin-orbit coupling and electron-electron interaction. The
main thrusts of the project include developing: i) a theory of electron-and
electron-dipole spin resonance effects in a chiral Fermi liquid; ii) a many-body
theory of Raman scattering from collective spin excitations in a chiral Fermi
liquid; iii) a theoretical analysis of recently observed chiral spin waves and
chiral excitons at the surface of a three-dimensional topological insulator
(bismuth selenide); iv) an analysis of possible nematic phases of a two-
dimensional electron system with SOC; and v) an analysis of the competition
among possible instabilities in the spin channel of a non-chiral Fermi liquid.
In connection to the research, the PI will develop new mini-courses on subjects
relevant to this award for a multi-faculty course "Advanced Topics in Condensed
Matter Physics" and will organize an international workshop on quantum phase
transitions. The significance of the research results will be communicated to a
broader audience through the Funsize Physics website and public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.