* 1720215
* CAREER: A Probabilistic Gene Network Model of Cellular Aging and its Application on the Conserved Lifespan Extension Mechanisms of Dietary Restriction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Hong Qin, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 03/31/2022
* USD 529,308.00

Aging is a fundamental question in biology, yet its mechanism remains elusive
despite decades of research. Using mathematical approaches coupled with
laboratory experiments, this study will illustrate the basic principles of
cellular aging and shed new light on how dietary restriction extends lifespan.
Using a novel mathematical model that demonstrates how aging in yeast cells
emerges and what genes and their interactions are involved, the close-connection
between cellular aging and the robustness of the gene interactions involved will
be examined. Given the lack of adequate methods to evaluate changes in genes and
their interactions involved in cellular aging, this novel mathematical approach
for data analysis could transform what we know about how cells age. Coupled to
this research, the educational component of the project will provide cross-
disciplinary training to minority students and cultivate their interests in
quantitative biology through integrating research with teaching, a student
Chapter for the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, tutorial
workshops, and broad dissemination of educational materials. Additionally, a new
Systems Biology course will contribute to a new Bioinformatics and Systems
Biology minor at Spelman College. Research tutorials will be uploaded to
YouTube, open research projects will be uploaded to GitHub, and an open research
blog will be developed and maintained. In summary, this project will provide
training to minority undergraduates in mathematics, computing, and systems
biology at a historically black college for
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project will
focus on aging from the perspective of gene networks through an integrated
research and teaching approach. Cellular aging will be addressed using the
budding yeast, a single-cell organism as a model system. The current knowledge
on cellular aging lacks coherence, and a major logical gap exists between
molecular pathways of aging and population characteristics of aging. Hundreds of
yeast genes are known to influence lifespan, but paradoxically, not a single
gene can be claimed as a direct cause of aging. Different and even opposite
pathways have been observed when experiments are performed in different ways.
Despite the complexity of aging, the lifespan of many species can be extended by
dietary restriction. This seemingly complicated picture and the evolutionarily
conserved lifespan extension effect of dietary restriction will be addressed by
the core idea of the study, that cellular aging is an emergent property of
stochastic gene networks. A probabilistic gene network model for cellular aging
will be used to illustrate the conserved lifespan extension mechanism of dietary
restriction in the model organism of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and study how the
organization and dynamics of the yeast gene networks will influence the aging
process. The first objective is to test a hypothesis that dietary restriction
extends lifespan by improving reliability of gene interaction through analyzing
lifespan data of hundreds of yeast mutants. The second objective is to further
develop the theoretical foundation of the network model for cellular aging.