* 1720585
* Schoolyard Scientists: An Investigation of Impacts Associated with Urban Youth Engagement in Participatory Scientific Research Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Kevin Cuff, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,908,581.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project is significant because it uses the community for learning
science of the environment, in an approach called Citizen Science or
Participatory Science Research (PSR). The project will target learning outcomes
for underrepresented middle and high school students in the urban and diverse
East San Francisco Bay Area. The fundamental issues that will be studied deal
with particulate matter (PM) in the local area. The project will generate
information that contributes to better understanding the impact of a science
curriculum with PSR activities on science learning. The project will provide
opportunities for students at a total of 10 different middle and high school
sites to engage in a broad range of activities where the students will collect,
analyze, and disseminate data generated in local urban communities. An
accompanying curriculum that includes new and previously tested skills
development activities also will be produced and used to aid students in
connecting PSR activities to inter-related topics such as: energy generation and
use, global climate, environmental degradation, and community health (asthma, in
particular). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will refine a theory of learning
that makes more explicit the connections between science practices, identity,
and value and relevance. The project will yield information useful in the future
development of effective learning environments in urban areas, providing
positive science education experiences to challenge students' previous notions
and ways of relating to science. The students will learn how to identify with
science by gaining a deeper understanding of science practices. They will learn
how to analyze and interpret data; construct explanations; engage in argument
from evidence; and obtain, evaluate and communicate information. The students
will be collecting air samples which will be analyzed using an electron
microscope. In conducting their research, students will use low cost, highly
accurate AirBeam particle monitors and tablet devices to measure and
georeference PM concentration levels as they travel within their schools and
surrounding communities. These measurements will then be used to assess
ventilation conditions within school buildings, and correlated with different
transit routes and transportation systems in an attempt to assess exposure
patterns associated with different modes of transit in a given area. The result
will be an increase in the understanding of the relevance and the value of
science in everyday life. The project will also yield high quality particulate
matter data that will be useful for local environmental efforts as well as to
public health and atmospheric scientists.