* 1720171
* Extensions of Boundary Integro-Differential Operators and the Associated Computational Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Yen-Hsi Tsai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 209,807.00

This research project will advance computer-based simulations for better process
control and prediction in a wide range of applications; these include seismic
imaging, petroleum engineering, electromagnetism in domains containing thin-
wires, and molecular biology applications where molecular electrostatics
energies are needed to understand the structure-function relations of proteins.
The training of students in the proposed research areas, both through direct
supervision of the PI or through the new graduate course to be developed, will
allow them to conduct research in highly inter-disciplinary projects and bring
state-of-the-art numerical analysis and computational algorithms to the related
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a general
framework for formulating extension of a class of boundary integro-differential
operators for numerical computation. The main advantage of the framework is that
simple and accurate numerical algorithms can easily be designed on a variety of
grid geometries and computational methodologies. The research will concentrate
on (i) boundary integro-differential equations that arise from wave scattering
problems in unbounded domains containing irregularly shaped scattering surfaces,
and (ii) calculus of variation problems posed on manifolds of different
codimensions. Regarding to (ii), minimization of convex energies and least-
action principles defined on the manifolds will be considered. The minimization
problems lead to elliptic equations on surfaces while the least-action
principles lead to hyperbolic equations. A major focus will be on deriving
extensions of these boundary operators "to the bulk", while preserving as much
analytical properties (of the operators and of the solutions) as possible, using
the additional degrees of freedom that come from the codimensions of the
boundary. Concrete applications involving electromagnetic wave propagation
coupled with thin-wires in space will be studied and simulated under the
framework.