* 1720220
* Quantum Gates, Algorithms, and Error Correction with a Neutral Atom Qubit Array
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 700,000.00

Quantum computing is attracting great interest due to its potential for solving
practical problems that are intractable on classical computers. Areas of
application include cryptography, database searching, pattern classification,
solving large systems of coupled equations, and design of new functional
materials or chemical compounds. A quantum computer is built from quantum bits,
or qubits, that store quantum information which is processed using quantum logic
gates. This project will continue the development of quantum computing using
qubits encoded in the internal states of individual atoms. While the current
state of the art involves experiments with 10-20 qubits, it is believed that
computers with many thousands of qubits will be needed to realize the promise of
quantum computation. In this respect the atom based approach being developed in
this project is particularly attractive since a large number of neutral atoms
can be held and controlled in close proximity without undesired interference
with each other. The project seeks to advance the state of the art of several
key performance metrics: the ability of qubits to preserve their quantum states
for a long time, the fidelity of logic gate operations and qubit measurements,
and the number of qubits that can be prepared in a single system. These advances
will then be used to demonstrate a quantum algorithm for database searching. The
project will contribute to scientific workforce development through training of
students and postdoctoral researchers. The training will be interdisciplinary,
drawing on methods and ideas from atomic and laser physics, electronic and
computer based control systems, and quantum information theory. Research results
will be incorporated into the University teaching curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental approach will use a two-dimensional array
of cesium and rubidium atoms trapped in potential wells defined by light. The
potential wells will be prepared by combining laser light of several different
frequencies in a way that protects stored quantum information from decoherence.
A movable optical tweezer system will be implemented to arrange trapped atoms
for 100% occupancy of an array with up to 50 qubit sites. Quantum logic gates to
create entanglement will be performed by exciting atoms to Rydberg states with
laser pulses. Adiabatic pulses with shaped temporal profiles will be used to
improve the fidelity of the entangling operations. Atomic states will be
measured without crosstalk to other qubits or loss of atoms using a two-species
approach whereby one species (cesium) will be used for memory and quantum logic,
and a second species (rubidium) will be used for measurements. The quantum
states to be measured will be transferred from cesium to rubidium atoms using an
interspecies Rydberg gate. These capabilities will then be leveraged to
demonstrate a multi-qubit quantum algorithm that provides quadratic speedup for
database searching. The team will also implement quantum error correction to
protect qubits against bit flip or phase flip errors.