* 1720568
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Device for detecting changes in the esophageal lumen using single point ultrasonic transducers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Andrew Wilcox, REFLODX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 10/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will benefit nearly 6 million children per year
who are suspected of having abnormal Gastroesophageal Reflux (GER) which can
lead to a more serious condition with numerous complications referred to as
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD). Current detection paradigms include
costly and invasive procedures that often require overnight hospitalization,
prescribing pharmacological Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs) without objective
evidence and or exposure to radiological imaging. The outcomes of this project
will lead to a low cost, non-invasive method for detecting GER, without
requiring hospitalization. This will facilitate earlier detection of GER and
reduce overall healthcare costs and burdens associated with GERD and its
accompanying complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
demonstrate the feasibility of using single point ultrasonic transducers to non-
invasively detect and characterize reflux. Current reflux detection relies on
impedance and pH probes which are placed in the patient?s esophagus through a
nasogastric probe. This often requires anesthesia and overnight hospital
observation which is costly, invasive, and prone to artifacts that change the
reflux episodes normally experienced by the patient. Ultrasonic imaging can
observe reflux occurring in the esophagus but requires hundreds of ultrasonic
transducers in a single probe and a trained clinician to manually observe and
identify the reflux events. These two factors make ultrasonic imaging costly to
use and prevents it from being used for extended periods of time, which is
necessary to determine if abnormal amounts of reflux are occurring. The proposed
project will use ultrasonic imaging as a control method to demonstrate the
ability of single point ultrasonic transducers to generate an acoustic signature
capable of detecting whether the esophagus is expanded or collapsed to identify
episodes of reflux. Detection and characterization of reflux through single
point transducers would ultimately enable the development of a portable, safe,
and accurate home monitoring device.