* 1720472
* Algorithms for Assessing and Improving Joint Inversion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jodi Mead, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 204,457.00

Understanding the structure of the earth's subsurface is essential to modern
society. For example, this knowledge aids in building safe structures, allows us
to locate minerals, hydrocarbons, groundwater and contaminants; map tunnels,
pipes and mines. The structure of the earth's subsurface can be understood by
its material properties such as rock, soil and water. However, these properties
cannot be measured directly in the subsurface. Therefore, non-invasive
geophysical measurements are used to observe them. This involves measuring an
energy response at the earth's surface, after electromagnetic waves or electric
currents are injected into the subsurface. The mathematical approach to
inferring an image of the subsurface from these energy observations is called
inversion. The major challenge in recovering a subsurface image is that no one
single image results from a given energy response. Recently, scientists have
addressed this issue by using multiple types of energy to recover an image,
which is referred to as joint inversion. In this project, the PIs use joint
inversion to combine observations of energy transfer from a large range of
frequencies. The PIs hypothesize that with information from a large frequency
range, a unique image can be created that is an accurate representation of the
subsurface. This approach can be extended to other fields such as wireless
communication and video processing. Therefore, the PIs will also develop a
software package that can be used to decide if particular data types are
complimentary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simultaneous joint inversion involves
optimizing a single objective function with information from multiple types of
data. The PIs will combine complex electrical resistivity (ER) and ground
penetrating radar (GPR) measurements in the Earth's subsurface, and determine
the effectiveness of using both types of data. The approach determines if and
how the physics describing different types of data collection techniques
contribute to abolishing the other's null space. More generally, the PIs will
determine how different types of data can most effectively regularize each
other. This will be done by quantifying decay rates of singular values of
integral solutions describing the fundamental physics for ER and GPR data. This
requires the development and implementation of a framework through which the
singular values in a joint inversion can be computed in a continuous setting.
The relationship between decay rates and an effective joint inversion will be
tested with ER and GPR field data from the Boise Hydrological Research Site.
This project helps bridge the gap between forward and inverse modeling by novel
implementations and analyses in each field.