* 1720175
* PFI:BIC - A Smart GIC-Resilient Power Grid: Cognitive Control Enabled by Data Mining at the Nexus of Space Weather, Geophysics and Power Systems Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Adam Schultz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2023
* USD 999,924.00

The North American power grid is potentially at risk of collapse from large
geomagnetic storms manifested from solar flares that generate geomagnetically
induced currents (GICs) to flow in the power grid. In 2008, with the signing of
the American Recovery Act, a $328M investment was made for the installation of
high speed sensors called synchrophasors. These generalized power sensors
provided, for the very first time, a system potentially capable of wide area
situational awareness for the grid. By developing algorithms that interrogate
these existing sensor arrays, combining them with real-time predictions of GICs
in the power grid determined from real-time geomagnetic field data that is input
to information on 3-D ground (crust and mantle) electrical conductivity
structure obtained from the NSF EarthScope Magnetotelluric Program, a "Smart
Service System" will be developed that will be capable of predicting impact
severity on individual power grid transformers. This project will provide an
important new tool for mitigating the impact of GICs on the power grid,
improving the reliability of electric power service, potentially reducing the
possibility of catastrophic blackouts, and reducing costs to power utilities and
consumers by extending the service life of key components of the
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF EarthScope Magnetotelluric Program has
systematically measured the electromagnetic impedance of the ground at a
temporary grid of stations that currently encompasses more than half of the
continental US. The impedance, a frequency dependent tensor sensitive to the 3-D
electrical conductivity structure of the Earth?s crust and mantle projects the
ground magnetic fields into electric fields at that location. We will apply
real-time streams of data from magnetic observatories to determine real-time
magnetic fields at the sites of previously occupied EarthScope stations, and by
projecting these through the impedance tensors and interpolating the predicted
ground electric fields onto power transmission line paths, voltages that drive
GICs in power grid transformers can be estimated in real-time and used as input
to improved grid power flow simulations that will be developed under project
support. This will be integrated with power flow information from mining
synchrophasor sensor networks, and with satellite space weather data and NOAA
geomagnetic activity forecasts. Human factors engineering will study power
utility control room operator interactions with the data flow and user interface
developed under project support, with iterative improvements of those interfaces
made, given human factors feedback.