* 1720889
* SBIR Phase I:  Prototype Non-Contacting Piston Position Sensors for Fluid Power Actuators
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Ryan Madson, Innotronics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the development
and demonstration of a prototype position sensor that will help convert
hydraulic and pneumatic actuators into ?smart? devices. The position sensor will
enable built-in self-diagnostics, precise feedback control, energy efficient
operation, faster industrial manufacturing and material handling processes, and
safer operations on mobile vehicles that take locations of obstacles and danger
zones automatically into account during motion. The value proposition of the new
sensor comes from its lower cost, ease of installation, and its non-contacting
operation. This project will help a start-up company demonstrate the performance
of its sensor on multiple actuator products provided by large industrial and
off-road mobile companies. This is expected to result in establishing the
viability of the sensor, customer orders for the sensor, and growth in company
revenues. The technology area addressed by the research in this project is smart
sensors and the targeted market sector is industrial machines and off-road
agriculture and construction vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a prototype position
sensor that is production-ready and ready for field testing in real-world
industrial and mobile vehicle applications. The sensor utilizes a large-distance
magnetic field model, redundant magnetic sensors on a single sensor board and
adaptive estimation algorithms to provide a novel position sensor that is small,
non-intrusive, non-contacting, easy to install and lower cost compared to other
position sensors on the market. The innovations in the sensor technology being
developed include the use of a nonlinear estimation algorithm that avoids
differentiation of complex nonlinear functions, provides more accuracy and is
computationally efficient for implementation on a microprocessor. The sensor
also includes an auto-calibration algorithm that corrects for sensor location
and orientation errors so as to ensure accurate performance with changing
cylinders. The research project will demonstrate the performance of the sensor
prototype in the lab on multiple actuators provided by collaborating large
industrial and off-road vehicle companies.