* 1720282
* Dark Matter and New Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Paolo Gondolo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 480,000.00

This award funds the research of Professors Paolo Gondolo and Pearl Sandick at
the University of Utah. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of more than 80% of the
matter in the universe is unknown. To discover the nature of this so-called dark
matter is a major open question in physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. Dark
matter has been detected only by means of the gravity it generates, and has
properties that are completely different from those of any other known physical
matter. Establishing the nature of dark matter may have implications as
important as the Copernican revolution that shifted the Earth's place in the
Universe away from its center, this time by relegating the material substance
humans are made of to a minority component. Research in this area advances the
national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most
fundamental aspects: discovering the nature and composition of our physical
universe. In their research, Professors Gondolo and Sandick aim to further our
understanding of dark matter and our ability to sort viable dark-matter models
on the basis of their observable effects. This project is also envisioned to
have significant broader impacts, including educating and exciting the local
non-academic community about science and training early-career scientists. The
project will also support a long-standing and successful outreach program at a
local science museum and in local schools that reaches thousands of young
students with the goal of attracting them to science in a fun, energetic, and
engaging way. At the same time, this project supports efforts to recruit and
retain talented women and minorities in the physical sciences through a suite of
outreach and professional-development programs at the University of Utah, in the
broader community, and at the national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically,
Professors Gondolo and Sandick will conduct individual research programs with
elements in common. They will (a) explore theoretical explanations for the dark
matter in the Universe and for theories of new particle physics beyond the
Standard Model of particle physics; (b) better understand the assumptions and
the uncertainties inherent in the relevant calculations; and (c) determine and
suggest robust strategies for the identification of dark matter and,
potentially, other new physics. These objectives will be achieved through
phenomenological studies of collider and dark-matter signatures in the Minimal
Supersymmetric Standard Model and in simplified models, the development of the
DarkSUSY software to address generic weakly-interacting massive particle (WIMP)
models, and the pursuit of a minimal number of assumptions in the particle
physics and astrophysics of dark matter through astrophysics-independent methods
and general interaction lagrangians.