* 1720374
* Scale Invariance in Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Anatoly Dymarsky, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 197,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Anatoly Dymarsky at the
University of Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program
concerns quantum field theory, the universal theoretical framework for
describing the dynamics of the elementary particles. Among the multitude of
different field-theoretic models there are those which are simpler, more
fundamental, and which include no dimensionful parameters. The goal of this
project is to advance our current understanding of such quantum field theories
without internal scales by developing new theoretical approaches that do not
rely on the assumption that the interactions between the elementary particles
are weak. The results obtained will be used to further clarify the mechanism by
which continuous systems reach equilibrium. Thus, this project serves the
national interest by extending our current knowledge of fundamental science in
areas pertaining to basic properties of quantum field theory, which has
application across many fields of science. This project is also envisioned to
have significant broader impacts. One of the goals of this project is to enhance
the quality of graduate and post-graduate physics education through the
involvement of graduate students and young researchers. Furthermore, this
research will contribute toward our understanding of nature at the fundamental
level, which is of interest to the general public. The PI is also actively
engaged in promoting elementary-particle physics by giving public lectures and
working together with a group of film producers developing a science-fiction TV
series popularizing modern physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more technical
level, the goal of this project is to study quantum field theories without
internal scales. The focus on scale-invariant models is justified by an extended
symmetry providing additional theoretical control as well as the fundamental
role these models play in defining other theories through appropriately chosen
deformations. The specific aims of the project can be divided into three broad
categories: to investigate the connection between scale and conformal invariance
in quantum field theory and identify characteristic properties of scale-
invariant non-conformal field theories; to develop a theory of thermalization in
the context of quantum field-theoretic systems, and in particular to extend the
Eigenstate Thermalization Hypothesis to continuous systems; and to improve our
understanding of the universal properties of conformal field theories. These
objectives will be achieved by a combination of non-perturbative methods such as
the holographic correspondence, conformal bootstrap, and methods of quantum
information theory.