* 1720756
* The Progenitors and Explosions of Type Ia Supernovae and Exotic Transients
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Ryan Foley, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 530,395.00

The investigators will address important questions concerning the explosion of
Supernovae (SNe), which can occur at the end of the life of a star. How do these
stars die? Astronomers use SNe as 'standard candles', because they are all shown
to explode with nearly identical energies. If the energy of an explosion is
constant, then the fainter the SNe is seen, the more distant it must be.
Astronomers use these SNe to measure the distance to galaxies. Because of their
great brightness, SNe are astronomers best tool for studying dark matter at
great distances. However there are some serious concerns; do stars with
different element composition or spin explode with different brightness? How do
the details of star systems and explosion physics influence our understanding of
dark energy?

SNe have been one of the driving forces behind some of the most interesting
physics of the past century: black holes, neutron stars, dark energy, neutrinos,
and cosmic rays. Newly discovered classes of transients have already brought
about discussions of gravitational waves, pair-instability explosions, and
r-process element creation. Discoveries resulting from research funded by this
proposal should address some similarly interesting physics.

This program will train two University of Illinois graduate students in
observational stellar astrophysics and perform an integrated education program
with undergraduate astronomy classes across the country. The graduate students
will work with data from multiple telescopes and surveys. The main scientific
goals are to (1) discover and characterize new and recently discovered classes
of astrophysical transients, (2) detail the progenitors and explosions of those
"exotic" transients, and (3) determine how Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) observables
depend on the progenitor system.