* 1720507
* Video in the Middle: Flexible Digital Experiences for Mathematics Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Angela Knotts, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 06/30/2023
* USD 2,987,524.00

This work focuses on a practical problem in mathematics education; supporting
teacher professional development for algebra teaching. The project will design
and develop a web-based form of professional development and teacher education
for learning and teaching algebra in middle school. The project is a 4-year
Design and Development project within the Teaching Strand. Forty modules are
planned that will provide focus and structure to an online professional
development experience. These modules follow an explicit learning trajectory in
which a video clip is used in the middle of an online teacher learning
experience composed of mathematical problem solving, video analysis of classroom
practice, and pedagogical reflection. Within each module activity, a teacher
experiences a consistent set of activities. Before and after teachers watch each
video clip, they engage in activities designed to immerse them deeply in both
the mathematics content and the focal instructional components. The study has
the potential to advance the knowledge of the use of educational data mining
into the research and development of teacher education materials. In researching
both the design and impact of the materials this project may offer implications
for others interested in designing online professional development and teacher
education materials. The Discovery Research preK-12 program seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers, through research
and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The professional
development is rooted in refining and consistently examining best practices in
developing the teacher materials. The study investigates the design and impact
of the materials which can support others who are interested in designing
digital professional development. The project will employ the use of data
analytics to discover what video-based modules users choose to use first, the
sequence in which they use the modules, and the modules they don't choose. The
modules will include three delivery formats to meet the variety of teacher
learning needs (individual self-paced, group-paced, facilitated/structured
course) and offer flexible pathways and sequences of multiple modules for
professional development providers and teacher educators to use in their own
contexts. Moreover, the project includes a plan to make the modules available
through open access for professional developers and educators. The project
contains a robust plan for evaluating the effectiveness of the professional
development. In Year 3, a randomized controlled trial pilot efficacy study is
planned to address the impact of teachers' participation in the group-paced
delivery and facilitated course form format on their mathematics knowledge for
teaching and teaching practice as well as the overall impact on their students'
performance. The project has a strong focus on the practical problem of
supporting teachers' knowledge of linear functions, expressions, and equations
as well as how various representations are connected and linked.