* 1720625
* Network for Computational Nanotechnology - Engineered nanoBIO Node
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Geoffrey Fox, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,032,128.00

In its original formulation due to Feynman almost six decades back,
nanotechnology began around a simple but powerful vision of a device engineered
to write the entire Encyclopedia Britannica on the head of a pin. Nanotechnology
now is a multidisciplinary field where devices are designed for applications in
a diverse array of fields such as electronics, medicine, and energy using
principles from engineering, physics, materials science, chemistry, computing,
and biology. The safe and successful application of nanotechnology in the
biological realm demands an advance in the original vision of Feynman due to the
inherent multiscale nature of biology. Engineering of these nanoBIO devices must
be based on the knowledge of how nanotechnology-based devices interact with
biological systems at the protein, cell, tissue, and organ levels. The
Engineered nanoBIO node at Indiana University (IU) will develop a powerful set
of integrated computational nanotechnology tools that address this complex,
multiscale problem and facilitate the discovery of customized, efficient, and
safe nanoscale devices for biological applications. These computational tools
will be tested and validated experimentally, and they will be integrated with
IU's key cyberinfrastructure strengths in high-performance computing and
scalable data-analysis platforms. They will meet critical national health needs
as they find applications in nanomedicine by significantly enhancing the
targeting and imaging capabilities of engineered nanoparticles, thus increasing
our ability to generate new life-saving medicines for cancer treatment.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The node will engage several groups at IU, including: the
Department of Intelligent Systems Engineering (ISE), the Biocomplexity
Institute, the Department of Chemistry, the Pervasive Technology Institute
(PTI), and the Digital Science Center. It will integrate advanced parallel
computing middleware with the Network for Computational Nanotechnology Cyber
Platform (nanoHUB). The node will be headquartered at the ISE, a department that
is uniquely positioned to make nanoHUB the place for collaborative interactions
of the interdisciplinary nanoBIO community and training of students in
nanoengineering and bioengineering focused subjects. The node will interact with
Science Gateways Community Institute in a broad outreach program targeting
under-represented communities through workshops and workforce development
forums.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials-based devices offer unprecedented
opportunities for the targeting, imaging, and manipulation of biological systems
and have the potential to revolutionize the diagnosis and treatment of many
diseases including cancer. However, this excitement about the potential of
nanotechnology in the biomedical field is tempered by concerns about the
outcomes of the interactions between engineered nanomaterials and biological
systems, because we lack a sufficient fundamental understanding to link
intrinsic nanoparticle features and incubation conditions to nanoparticle
assembly and transport, single-cell and multicellular behavior, and ultimately
therapeutic response. The Engineered nanoBIO node at Indiana University will
address this complex problem by developing new nanoscience modeling and
computational tools that span a wide range of biologically relevant length and
time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The node aims to create computational tools
designed for cutting-edge research to develop biocompatible, safe, and efficient
nanoscale devices. The node plans to contribute tools that: 1) design functional
nanoparticles and self-assembled nanostructures with user-selected
physicochemical, mechanical, and biocompatible properties, 2) evaluate and
control nanodevice-cell interactions and establish nanodevice-cell phenotype
links, and 3) enable the engineering of multicellular systems using the
nanoscale design elements and the nanodevice-cell phenotype links. The tools
will be open-sourced, helping to attract a global community of users employing
the node's tools and a global community of developers enhancing them. By
introducing enhancements to cyberinfrastructure capabilities in the Network for
Computational Nanotechnology, the Engineered nanoBIO node will provide an
overarching framework of integrated nanoBIO tools that will empower researchers
to investigate macroscale biotransport and cell phenotype response to tweaks in
the design of nanodevices. This will enable the development of metrics for
nanodevice safety, intracellular stability, and nanodevice-based detection,
imaging, and drug-delivery capabilities.