* 1720397
* Research in Particle Theory, Cosmology, and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Andrei Linde, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,415,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Savas Dimopoulos, Peter
Graham, Shamit Kachru, Renata Kallosh, Andrei Linde, Leonardo Senatore, Steve
Shenker, Eva Silverstein and Leonard Susskind at Stanford
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We live in an era of rapid progress on central
questions in fundamental particle physics, early-universe cosmology, and quantum
gravity. In particle physics, the origin of the masses of many of the elementary
particles is expected to be explained by new types of particles and interactions
found at energies of roughly 100 times the proton mass --- a scale known as the
weak scale. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) has attained energies in proton-
proton collisions that are high enough to produce such new particles, and has
discovered the elusive Higgs boson, confirming this picture. But serious
questions remain about the properties of the Higgs particle itself, and the LHC
has yet to shed light on these. Professors Dimopoulos and Graham will focus on
developing complementary experimental methods of probing fundamental physics as
well as new theoretical mechanisms to explain the still mysterious properties of
the Higgs particle. Professors Kallosh, Linde, Senatore, and Silverstein will
lead diverse efforts to develop the theory of inflation --- our leading
candidate for the physics underlying the Big Bang --- in terms of its possible
experimental signatures and underlying theoretical structures. The Stanford
group will also develop new models and tests of a diverse array of potential
early-Universe phenomena. Professors Kachru, Shenker, and Susskind are working
on issues in quantum gravity. These include studies of how the mysterious
physics of black holes (which seem to destroy particles and information by
absorbing them) can be reconciled with quantum mechanics. They also include
attempts to understand new mathematical structures underlying quantum gravity.
Collectively, this work advances the national interest by developing new tools
and paradigms in fundamental science. The broader impacts of this work include
the training of numerous junior scientists who then play prominent roles in
academia, industry, and finance, as well as the dissemination of material which
educates the general public about cutting-edge issues in modern theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors Dimopoulos and Graham
are developing ideas to look for new forces at the micron scale (plausibly
transmitted by light moduli) and new solutions to the hierarchy problem that
involve cosmological history, such as the relaxion mechanism. Professors
Kallosh, Linde, Senatore, and Silverstein are justifying new models of large-
field inflation using supergravity and string-theory ideas; developing new ways
of probing non-Gaussianity of the primordial fluctuations coming from inflation;
and developing systematic techniques to extract primordial cosmological data
from studies of large-scale structure. Professor Kachru is exploring connections
between structures in number theory (especially the theory of automorphic forms)
on the one hand and BPS states, black holes and string vacua on the other.
Professor Shenker is investigating the chaotic properties of dynamics and
spectra in quantum field theories, with a focus on those theories that may be
relevant in holography. Finally, Professor Susskind is developing a theory of
complexity in holography.