* 1720349
* Simulation of Multiphase Flow and Transport in the Partially Molten Mantle
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Todd Arbogast, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Volcanic eruptions affect, for example, local water supplies and the global
climate. Volcanism at the Earth's surface is due to partial melting of the
convecting mantle, and subsequent segregation of molten rock components. The
Earth's mantle is generally below its melting point and thus solid. Partial
melting occurs generally in three locations, at mid-ocean ridges where oceanic
crust is formed, hot-spots below ocean islands and some continental sites like
Yellowstone, and subduction zones where oceanic crust returns to the mantle and
continental crust is formed. To better understand volcanic processes,
geochemical surface observations must be linked to the composition and
distribution of mantle rocks, which are heterogeneous due to incomplete chemical
mixing of material during mantle convection. The project will develop numerical
models that can resolve the small-scale dynamics of these processes. It is a
joint effort of a mathematician and a geoscientist, as well as an undergraduate
and a graduate student, who will be educated in an interdisciplinary setting.
People so trained are in high demand by industrial and government
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives include the development of (1) a
mathematical framework for computational simulation of evolving mantle flow
which covers the degenerate case of no melt, (2) a numerical method to
accurately approximate the transport of temperature and chemical components
within the mantle flow, (3) a computer code to implement the flow and transport
algorithms, as well as a method for handling simple phase behavior. Furthermore,
(4) the code will be applied to study important problems in the geosciences and
(5) students will be educated and trained in an interdisciplinary setting.
Mathematically speaking, because there are regions with no melt, two-phase flow
in the mantle is governed by highly degenerate equations. Recent work has
established the mathematical foundations of two-phase flow when the porosity
does not evolve. The key is to scale the solution variables and equations
appropriately by the porosity, which is the volume fraction of melt. The
evolving case will be treated in this project, with the goal of providing an
appropriate computational method for simulating the flow in practical
simulations. To model the transport of temperature and the segregation of melt
components, appropriate WENO and discontinuous Galerkin methods will be
developed for this project, which will respect the possible degeneracies in the
porosity.