* 1720467
* Student Travel Support for the 2017 International Conference on Architecture Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Xuehai Qian, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 04/30/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal is for support of a travel to the 22nd ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems (ASPLOS), to be held in Xi'an, China, April 8-12, 2017. ASPLOS is a
premier forum for multidisciplinary systems research spanning computer
architecture and hardware, programming languages and compilers, and operating
systems. Papers in ASPLOS may target diverse goals such as performance, energy
and thermal efficiency, resiliency, security, and sustainability. The proposal
requests travel support funds to enable students to defray the costs of
traveling to and attending ASPLOS-22. The funds requested from NSF will help
support a large number of students who are expected to attend ASPLOS, including
those who are not ACM members. Priority will be given to students that are US
citizens and permanent residents, as well as to students belonging to under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of forum such as ASPLOS
continues to grow as we come to the end of Moore's Law, experience the explosion
of big data, scales ranging from ultra-low power wearable devices to exascale
parallel and cloud computers, and the need for sustainability, and increasingly
human-centered applications. ASPLOS embraces systems research that directly
targets these new problems in new ways. Historically, the conference has
attracted top research papers from both academia and industry, and many
innovations published in the proceedings have been influential in the history of
the processor industry. The acceptance rates for submitted papers is typically
between 15-20%.