* 1720312
* Collaborative Research:  Proximal Digital Control and Stabilization of Superconducting Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Britton Plourde, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

While there has been tremendous recent progress in constructing small-scale
quantum circuits comprising several quantum bits (or "qubits"), a fault-tolerant
quantum computer that exceeds the performance of existing classical machines
will require a network of thousands or millions of qubits, far beyond current
capabilities. Robust approaches to the control and measurement of next-
generation quantum machines have yet to be developed. This project consists of
an experimental program to develop digital control, measurement, and feedback
techniques for stabilizing the quantum state of a qubit formed from
superconducting circuit elements. The program will move quantum control and
feedback from the analog realm to the digital realm; all of the robustness
associated with digital control in the classical regime should carry over to the
quantum regime. The project will involve the extensive participation of
undergraduate and graduate researchers, and is rich in educational opportunities
at both of these levels. Science outreach in local schools will extend a broader
impact throughout the local communities of Madison and Syracuse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of an experimental program to apply
optimal control theory to the manipulation of superconducting qubits and to
implement low-latency feedback based on digital qubit readout for stabilizing
computational basis states. The group will demonstrate high-fidelity coherent
control of a superconducting qubit using complex trains of Single Flux Quantum
(SFQ) voltage pulses derived from optimal control theory. Each of these pulses
provides a delta function-like kick to the qubit, inducing a complex trajectory
on the Bloch sphere that is tailored to minimize leakage errors. In parallel,
the team will employ a recently developed approach to qubit measurement based on
the preparation of appropriate microwave cavity pointer states and microwave
photon counting, combined with SFQ-based control, to implement low-latency
feedback. This will provide a path to monitor and correct leakage out of the
computational subspace, which is particularly damaging to proposed approaches to
fault-tolerant quantum computing. The program will move quantum control and
feedback from the analog realm to the digital realm, and all of the robustness
associated with digital control in the classical regime will carry over to the
quantum regime.