* 1720392
* Partial Support of the Committee on Radio Frequencies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2020
* USD 573,905.00

The National Academy of Sciences' Committee on Radio Frequencies is comprised of
prominent scientists and engineers who provide studies and advice to the Academy
on issues involving scientific uses of the radio spectrum. Such uses often
involve techniques and applications that are outside the realm of traditional
radio spectrum applications. The Committee provides advice and guidance to the
FCC (through filings in appropriate FCC proceedings) and other regulatory bodies
toward the adoption of spectrum rules and policies needed to protect sensitive
science applications that make use of the radio spectrum, particularly in the
fields of radio astronomy, meteorology, remote sensing, oceanography, and some
other sciences. Because of the multi-disciplinary aspect of the Committee's
goals, it is supported by both the National Science Foundation and the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration. The full Committee, comprised of 15
members, meets regularly, twice a year, and between meetings it works on
crafting comments and other written documents in response to various regulatory
proceedings. Some recent publications are: Handbook of Frequency Allocations and
Spectrum Protection for Scientific Uses (National Academies Press, 2015). The
Committee also sends representatives to appropriate meetings of scientific
(e.g., the International Union of Radio Scientists) and policy-setting bodies
(e.g., the International Telecommunication Union) to help publicize their
positions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This proposal is not for
scientific research, but it constitutes fundamental support for protecting the
infrastructure that allows carrying out such research. There is a need to
protect the scientific uses of the spectrum, particularly in view of the ever-
increasing number of commercial uses, particularly wireless applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: 1) Without CORF as a watchdog, much of
radio astronomy and remote sensing might become impossible within just a few
years, as the radio spectrum becomes more and more crowded. 2) CORF's outreach
activities to specialized audiences, such as the FCC and to the general public,
about the need of scientists to have access to portions of the radio spectrum
and 3) CORF's attempt to involve younger scientists in engineering and spectrum
management issues are also deemed to contribute to the broader impact of the
committee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Committee maintains a website, where CORF
filings are available, along with presentations at the meetings and other useful
information.