* 1720438
* Strongly Extended Superradiance in Diamond Meta-Materials
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 01/31/2021
* USD 460,000.00

20th century technological applications of materials, such as semiconductors
used in electronics and mechanical sensors, rely on a classical or semi-
classical understanding of their properties. In more recent and emerging
research, scientists and engineers seek to exploit the quantum properties of
atoms, materials, and light to increase measurement sensitivity, advance
communications technologies, and develop approaches to quantum computation that
are scalable to large numbers. Interactions of light, or photons, with atoms
serve as the foundation for quantum information and quantum computation
experiments, and over time the fields of quantum information and nanoscale
optics have merged together to demonstrate a variety of light-matter
interactions. However, for most systems these interactions are limited to
relatively small numbers of atoms and over small spatial extents relative to
wavelengths of light. This project will combine the relatively large density of
atoms in many tabletop atomic experiments with the scalability of quantum
nanoscale platforms. The group has recently demonstrated a set of metamaterials,
fabricated composite materials with exotic properties, with the special property
of having zero refractive index at certain wavelengths. The research team will
use its expertise in nanoscale optics to explore how the tunable properties of
these materials can enhance atom-light interactions and open the door to new
applications in quantum information processing and computing. The group
collaborates closely with industry partners in order to efficiently transfer
fundamental insights from academia into commercial applications. This project
will contribute to the group's effort on education and outreach in two aspects:
first, these novel metamaterials will be used as a platform in education to
demonstrate the exotic material properties and interesting physical phenomena of
metamaterials and quantum optics; second, this work will directly involve
students at many different levels, providing hands-on research experience.

Superradiance is a many-body phenomenon in which atoms radiate coherently with
one another, and the effect of constructive interference leads to an N-fold
increase in the spontaneous emission rate, where N is the number of atoms. The
key requirement for this effect in most setups is that the atoms need to be
within one wavelength from one another. If the atoms are not within a
wavelength, the phase matching conditions for perfect coherence become
increasingly complex in large systems with more than one dimension. Extended
superradiance occurs when it is possible to obtain cooperative enhancement both
in power and in decay rate in regions greater than a wavelength. Because of the
lack of spatial phase advance in zero-index metamaterials, one can obtain
perfect superradiance throughout space with low radiative loss in zero-index
metamaterials. The group will use the metamaterial platform to achieve
superradiance of many atoms in a highly extended two-dimensional sample. The
project introduces a metamaterial platform that permits very large cooperative
spontaneous emission enhancement and opens the door to potentially
transformative applications to scalable quantum information processes. It will
lay the groundwork for a wide range of applications in sub-linewidth
microlasers, low-decoherence quantum information processes, and scalable quantum
memories.