* 1720931
* Culturally Responsive Indigenous Science: Connecting Land, Language, and Culture
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kimberly Christen, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,481,274.00

The intersection between Indigenous and Western science continues to be of great
importance to K-12 science education, particularly with regards to broadening
participation in STEM. With over five hundred federally recognized Native
American tribes in the United States, there is much to learn and understand.
This Culturally Responsive Indigenous Science project seeks to advance this
knowledge base through research and by catalyzing new approaches to Indigenous
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (ISTEM) learning. Using an
ISTEM focused model, the project will develop, test, and implement a culturally
responsive land-based curriculum that integrates Western science, multimodal
technologies and digital tools, and Native American tribal knowledge, cultures
and languages to investigate and address local environmental science and
sustainability concerns. While Indigenous STEM teaching and learning as
constructs have existed for many years, the rigorous research design and
extensive integration of multimodal technologies as platforms for scientific
inquiry, data management, knowledge dissemination and curation are innovative
and timely. Few, if any, Design and Development projects in the current DRK-12
portfolio explore similar work. Therefore, the broader impacts of this project
are poised to not only contribute to the DRK-12 portfolio but also advance
knowledge in Indigenous STEM education and science education, more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, hundreds of Native American
students (grades 4-9) in tribal schools located in Oregon, Washington, and Idaho
will engage in the project. Each year, approximately 60-80 students (grades
7-9), with some returning students, will also participate in enrichment
activities and in years 1-3, in the residential summer experience at Washington
State University. A qualitative, quasi-experimental design-based study will be
conducted to address three salient research questions: (a) What are the impacts
of culturally responsive and land education-based ISTEM curriculum and
technology on Native American student engagement, efficacy and achievement in
school? (b) What types of professional development activities foster teacher
efficacy and improve teacher learning and teaching of ISTEM in classrooms? and
(c) How can ISTEM foster greater family and community engagement in schools and
in Tribal Communities? Data will be collected through interviews, surveys, and
or questionnaires from participating students, teachers, and Tribal members.
Consistent with Indigenous methodologies, focus group interviews (talking
circles) will also be facilitated after ISTEM community expositions and
engagement activities to capture community impacts. Formative and summative
evaluations will be conducted by the Learning and Performance Research Center
(LPRC) at Washington State University, an independent entity of the University
with extensive expertise in project evaluation. A broad range of dissemination
activities will be employed to achieve maximum impacts, including the use of the
Plateau People's Web Portal, a digital tool designed to help Native communities
to manage, circulate, and curate their digital materials using their own
cultural protocols, language and social systems. This regional collaboration
includes partnerships with the Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs (Oregon),
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation (Washington), and the Coeur
D'Alene Tribe (Idaho). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program
build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.