* 1720698
* STTR Phase I:  Remediating Inattention via Algorithmically Generated Music
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Adam Hewett, Transparent Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project lies in treating clinical and subclinical inattention
within a few minutes, by simply listening to algorithmically-generated music.
Failures of attention have dramatic clinical and non-clinical ramifications. In
the non-clinical side, nearly 90% of people attest to wasting time in the
workplace, and this reduced efficiency has an estimated $1 T economic impact in
the US alone. At the clinical level, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), the best-characterized attentional deficit, affects over 8M children in
the US, with the leading solution being a near-epidemic growth of prescriptions
stimulants. However, over 4 M American adults do not meet all the criteria to be
diagnosed with ADHD (and therefore cannot be prescribed medication), and have no
convenient alternatives for treatment. Brain.fm is a non-invasive auditory
stimulation platform designed to treat inattention. It generates music designed
specifically to stimulate attentional networks in our brain by exploiting the
latest neuroscience concepts of how neurons entrain to stimulus rhythms. Our
objective is for Brain.fm to become a validated, non-invasive therapeutic tool
for Attention to help everyone who suffers from mind wandering, regardless of
whether they meet diagnostic criteria for ADHD.

The proposed project is aimed at experimentally demonstrating generalizable
changes in attention through auditory stimulation. For decades, neuroscientists
have observed wave-like activity in the brain and related them to attentional
states. The ability to change attentional states, via noninvasive brain
stimulation, would be greatly desirable for everyday functioning as well as
crucial for understanding how brain waves relate to behavior. The proposed
project tests a novel auditory neuroscience-informed platform solution for
delivering noninvasive brain stimulation through music. In addition to
establishing a revolutionary method to enhance attention noninvasively by tuning
brain waves through comprehensive behavioral and fMRI studies, we test the
efficacy of this method to treat inattention, especially in adults with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Key outcomes of this project
are: 1) non clinical (but Institutional Review Board-approved) studies that
determine how this auditory therapy impacts attention on an adult ADHD prone
population, 2) a deeper understanding of the neurophysiological mechanisms of
attention and neuronal entrainment, and 3)optimization of our product by testing
different versions of our algorithmically generated music on our existing
customer base. Results are expected to show how purpose-built acoustic
stimulation can support the neuronal oscillations underlying sustained
attention, thus boosting productivity and well-being.