* 1720091
* EAGER: Investigating the Evolutionary and Environmental Bases of Twinning in Human Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Lorena Madrigal, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2019
* USD 6,409.00

In this EAGER project, the investigators will study the occurrence of twins in
human populations, with a focus on high twinning rates. Fraternal twinning rates
vary across populations, and this variation and the potential adaptive
advantages of having twins are not fully understood. Previous research by these
investigators and others suggest that both genetic and environmental factors are
involved. This project will collect initial information on the scale and timing
of twinning in one population with an extremely high twinning rate, which will
provide a foundation for subsequent research projects to understand the
cultural, biological, evolutionary, and environmental contexts of multiple
births in modern humans. The project also supports international research
collaborations and may lead to findings that inform fertility research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spontaneous dizygotic (DZ) twinning occurs with the
release and fertilization of two oocytes. A genetic component to dizygotic
twinning has long been recognized, potentially including genes related to
follicle cohort size and multiple implantation, but no clear inheritance pattern
has been identified. Environmental factors such as smoking may also influence
twinning rates. The investigators will collect information on twin occurrence in
a village in southern India, to reconstruct when the village started to have
twin frequencies that are out of the normal range of other Indian populations,
and to begin to explore the potential effects of microevolutionary processes and
environmental chemical exposure.