* 1720530
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2023
* USD 23,050,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center -
MRSEC - hosted by the Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter at the
University of Pennsylvania, is a national focal point for materials research and
education. The MRSEC provides crucial support for faculty, postdoctoral scholars
and graduate students, all drawn from different disciplines, to tackle complex
materials projects that require multidisciplinary collaboration for success.
Three distinct interdisciplinary research groups proceed in parallel, to develop
ways to make glasses less fragile, produce fiber networks which chemically
reconfigure in response to stress, and explore new ways to combine and utilize
nanocrystals and liquid crystals. The Center community also builds state-of-the-
art shared experimental facilities for materials measurement, and it hosts a
range of activities that target K-16 to PhD students, post-docs, teachers,
regional academic, industrial and governmental scientists, and the general
public, emphasizing inclusion of underrepresented minorities and women. Finally,
besides providing unique interdisciplinary training for PhDs and post-docs in
fields critical for US technological competitiveness, the Center generates
discoveries, concepts and intellectual property useful for start-ups and
established companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The Penn
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center - MRSEC - facilitates core
research of three collaborative and multidisciplinary Interdisciplinary Research
Groups (IRGs). IRG-1, Rearrangements and Softness in Disordered Solids, develops
fundamental understanding of the organization and proliferation of particle-
scale rearrangements in disordered solids deformed beyond the onset of yield; in
the process, it identifies strategies for controlling nonlinear mechanical
response and enhancing toughness. IRG-2, Structural Chemo-Mechanics of Fibrous
Networks, utilizes the nonlinear mechanical responses of fibrous materials to
manipulate chemical reactions; these reactions, which are locally controlled by
macroscopic stresses applied to the network (chemo-mechanics), offer new means
to create novel self-reinforcing and sensing materials. IRG-3, Pluperfect
Nanocrystal Architectures, harnesses the interplay of surface chemistry and
geometric cues at the nano-scale for organizing nanocrystals into architectures
on hard (fabricated) and in soft (reconfigurable) materials that break from
structural periodicity to impart novel optical and magnetic response. The
research encompasses soft- and hard-matter, and biomaterials. The discoveries
and understanding generated underpin future technologies, thereby informing
industry, stimulating economy, and offering benefits to society at large. The
MRSEC is a national leader in developing a competitive and diverse science and
engineering work force in demand by academe, government and industry. It hosts
activities that target K-16 to PhD students, post-docs, teachers, regional
academic, industrial &amp; governmental scientists, and the general public,
emphasizing inclusion of underrepresented minorities and women. Vibrant
undergraduate and high school summer programs, Science Cafes, and major
partnerships with minority-serving institutions are also included.