* 1720245
* Multiscale Methods for Crystalline Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Xingjie Li, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2021
* USD 132,278.00

Crystal defects such as grain boundaries, cracks, or dislocations play
significant roles in determining material properties and behaviors. To
efficiently and reliably predict failure phenomena, fundamental level of
descriptions at nanoscales are widely used to study how defects affect
macroscopic properties such as elasticity and plasticity. Challenged by the
computational limitations as well as high-fidelity requirements, this research
project aims to develop and employ multiscale methods which can retain accuracy
around defect cores while improving efficiency through local continuum
descriptions. Two popular multiscale modeling strategies are: (1) bottom-up:
coarse-graining of microscopic descriptions (e.g., atomistic models) of material
behavior; (2) top-down: informing macroscopic models (e.g., continuum equations)
with physics gleaned from the microscopic scales. The former provides "a closer"
comparison with macroscopic experiments and the latter predicts the materials
microscopic properties. This project focuses on several aspects of the
multiscale modeling and mathematical analysis for both bottom-up and top-down
approaches, aims at developing efficient and reliable coupling methods which
smoothly integrate the microscopic and macroscopic descriptions, and
establishing rigorous error estimates that will set precise guidelines for
practical implementation (e.g., the optimal parameters used in the coupling
mechanism and the finite element mesh used in the macroscopic scale). This
project will also provide an opportunity to train both graduate and
undergraduate students in the context of challenging and interdisciplinary
research among applied mathematics, materials science and mechanical
engineering.

The overarching goal of this project is to develop multiscale methods for both
bottom-up and top-down approaches with provable performance in terms of
accuracy, efficiency, and reliability based on theoretical analysis and
comprehensive error estimates. In particular, these are the four objectives: (1)
The research will promote the understanding of bottom-up atomistic-to-continuum
(AtC) methods for complex structured crystals. Successful outcomes of this
project will greatly extend the applicability of existing AtC methods from
simple lattice crystals to more complex ones. The comprehensive error analysis
will lead to optimal coupling strategy and provide precise guidelines for
practical implementations. (2) The research will also advance the developments
of top-down nonlocal-to-local (NtL) continuum couplings. The new coupling
framework is built based on geometric reconstruction, and will remove
interfacial inconsistency while maintain all physical properties globally, such
as conservation of energy and balance of linear momentum, in multi-dimensions,
whereas none of existing coupling methods for NtL problems satisfies all of
these properties. Furthermore, mathematical analysis will be built to ensure the
well-posedness and reliability of modeling and computations. (3) This project
will enhance the understandings and interconnections between the top-down and
bottom-up approaches, and will also facilitate the exploitation of other scale-
bridging algorithms in materials science. (4) High order and robust numerical
schemes for large-scale problems will be developed to enhance the controls and
designs of defects inside complex structured crystals, and improve the
prediction of materials failures.