* 1720587
* Learning Through Collaborative Design: Professional Development to Foster Productive Epistemic Discourse in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Donna Granger, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,093,767.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida State University will investigate the
role of collaborative design in supporting teachers' professional growth around
productive epistemic discourse in high school science classrooms. The project,
Learning Through Collaborative Design Professional Development to Foster
Productive Epistemic Discourse in Science, will examine an activity that is
often used for the generation of curricular materials, collaborative design, and
explore its promise in fostering biology teachers' professional growth as part
of a larger professional development experience focused on epistemic practice.
It will establish epistemic discourse as both a means of communication and a
learning outcome in high school biology classrooms. The program goals are to
understand the role of collaborative designs in shaping science teachers'
learning about and enactment of instruction that fosters productive epistemic
discourse in science, and to produce knowledge about teacher learning that can
inform the design of professional development programs around productive
epistemic discourse in science. The outcomes of this research will provide
insight into teacher learning around a more robust understanding of science
teaching, design principles essential in creating effective approaches to
professional development, and a field tested professional development
experience. Both the research and the teacher professional growth provided by
project will involve a total of 70 teachers and their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will include two cycles of
design and development of the professional development experience. It will
include mixed methods and a longitudinal examination of teacher and student
learning fostered by professional development. The research for the first phase
will be qualitative in nature and will result in a series of case studies that
highlight different facets of the interactions that influence teachers'
learning. Following this qualitative phase, through a field study that employs
multivariate analysis of covariance and hierarchical linear models analytical
techniques, the effectiveness of the design and development stages will be
compared to an alternative professional development experience that is similar
to the project's professional development but does not include collaborative
design.