* 1720431
* Fast Galerkin Methods for Boundary Integral Reformulations of Time Dependent Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Johannes Tausch, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 204,063.00

The project will develop numerical methods for heat transfer and micro flow
problems. The focus will be on handling moving geometries that may change the
topology over time. Application areas that immediately benefit from the proposed
work are in manufacturing, for instance hot forming processes, solidification
and melting processes. Moreover, the numerical solution of micro flows is
important in the design of Mems devices, the simulation of microbial swimmers
and sedimentation processes. Engineering design is often interactive process,
and therefore speed and robustness are essential for the underlying numerical
methods. By engaging a graduate student in research, the proposed activities
will also contribute to excellence and growth in the education of the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galerkin boundary integral methods are an
effective numerical tool to solve parabolic partial differential equations.
Boundary integral operators are non-local in space and time, which implies that
their discrete counterparts are dense matrices. However, a space-time version of
the fast multipole method will be used to overcome the high numerical cost
associated with dense matrix algebra. The main goal of this project is to expand
this methodology to problems with moving geometries. Here several new techniques
will be developed, this includes quadrature methods to handle the unique
singularities of parabolic integral operators and new discretization methods of
the space-time boundary manifold which will address the difficulties associated
with topology changes. The numerical methods developed will be applied to
transient Stokes flow problems and Stefan problems. This project will also
investigate shape optimization techniques to solve for the unknown evolution of
the solid-liquid interface. Solving free surface problems by minimizing an
energy functional fits well within the variational formulation of the Galerkin
discretization and promises to be more robust and stable than the more
conventional time stepping methods.