* 1720139
* MRSEC: Center for Multifunctional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Sossina Haile, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 16,015,000.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Northwestern University
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (NU-MRSEC) advances world-
class materials research, education, and outreach via active interdisciplinary
collaborations within the Center and with external partners in academia,
industry, national laboratories, and museums, both domestically and abroad. The
intellectual merit of the NU-MRSEC resides primarily within its
interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) and seed-funded projects that promote
dynamic evolution of Center research foci. IRG-1, entitled "Reconfigurable
Responses in Mixed-Dimensional Heterojunctions", explores nanoelectronic
materials systems that simultaneously process and store information to provide
functionality comparable to that exhibited by complex biological systems such as
neural networks. IRG-2, entitled "Functional Heteroanionic Materials via the
Science of Synthesis", brings together experts in materials synthesis,
computational design of materials, and advanced characterization, to expand a
relatively unexplored class of materials with unconventional combinations of
electrical and thermal properties. The NU-MRSEC achieves broad impact through
several programs including professional development of graduate students and
postdocs, research experiences for undergraduates and teachers, as well as
outreach to K-12 students and the general public. These activities are enhanced
by partnerships with Argonne National Laboratory, Art Institute of Chicago,
Chicago Children's Museum, Chicago Museum of Science and Industry, Chicago
O'Hare International Airport, Chicago Public Schools, and Chicago City
Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Northwestern University Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (NU-
MRSEC) integrates materials research, education, and outreach through two
interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) and with external partners in academia,
industry, national laboratories, and museums, both domestically and abroad.
IRG-1, entitled "Reconfigurable Responses in Mixed-Dimensional Heterojunctions",
explores how heterojunctions consisting of nanoelectronic materials of differing
dimensionality are influenced by dielectric screening, electronic band/level
offsets, and interfacial regions. By utilizing low-dimensional materials
synthesis, surface chemical functionalization, spatially and spectrally resolved
characterization, and advanced computation, IRG-1 develops quantitative
descriptions of the nonlinear responses in mixed-dimensional heterojunctions.
Elucidation of the mechanisms governing structural changes, and the
corresponding changes in optoelectronic properties, allows controllable
reconfiguration in response to a multitude of physical and chemical stimuli,
with implications for neuromorphic computing. IRG-2, entitled "Functional
Heteroanionic Materials via the Science of Synthesis", develops new
heteroanionic materials with tunable electronic, ionic, thermal, and optical
properties, which are otherwise inaccessible from simpler homoanionic structures
and chemistries. Discovery of heteroanionic materials is facilitated by
synthetic and characterization methods that provide a panoramic view of
crystallization and diffusion processes, in which emerging phases of interest
are revealed and growth mechanisms are delineated. By emphasizing synthesis as
the central science, the tools, protocols, and databases formulated in IRG-2
enable synthesis-on-demand of complex materials suggested by computational
discovery. The research of the NU-MRSEC informs a diverse range of education and
outreach activities that target all levels including postdocs, graduate
students, undergraduates, K-12 students and teachers, as well as the general
public. Examples include Transdisciplinary Engineering and Theater Workshops
that create original science-themed plays, and Jugando con la Ciencia (Playing
with Science) that translates outreach curricula and texts into Spanish.