* 1720430
* RUI:  Implications of Non-Minimal Dark Sectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Brooks Thomas, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 120,000.00

Overwhelming evidence suggests that the majority of the matter in our universe
consists of a mysterious form of matter that neither emits nor absorbs light,
but yet makes its presence felt via its gravitational pull on normal matter. The
nature and origin of this "dark matter" continue to elude us; moreover, recent
experimental results have begun to call into question a lot of the canonical
ideas about what this dark matter might be. The research supported by this award
aims to address this "dark-matter problem" on two fronts. The first involves the
development of viable, testable alternative proposals as to what the dark matter
might be. The second involves proposing novel experimental methods for probing
the properties of the dark matter and assessing (typically through computer
simulations) what these methods could potentially reveal about the properties of
the dark matter. A significant portion of this award will support undergraduate
involvement in this research topic, thereby cultivating interest among the next
generation of scientists and honing their computational
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the research supported by this award is
to study the theory and phenomenology of non-traditional and non-minimal dark-
matter scenarios in an effort to better understand the full range of viable
possibilities for the dark sector. This research program has two facets. The
first is to identify viable alternatives to the traditional picture of dark
matter which are consistent with current experimental and observational
constraints. The second is to investigate the phenomenological and cosmological
consequences of such alternative dark-matter models with an eye toward
experimental or observational signatures which could serve to distinguish such
alternative dark-matter models from their traditional counterparts. One
promising strategy is to look for evidence of non-standard particle kinematics
at colliders, at direct-detection experiments, and at astrophysical probes of
dark matter. A significant portion of this effort will be focused on non-minimal
dark-matter scenarios within the Dynamical Dark Matter (DDM) framework. Within
the DDM framework, the dark-matter candidate is an ensemble comprising a
potentially vast number of individual particle species whose decay widths are
balanced against their cosmological abundances across the ensemble in such a way
that all phenomenological constraints are satisfied.