* 1720661
* Collaborative Research:  Developing &amp; Evaluating Assessments of Problem Solving
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Toni May-Sondergeld, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 325,732.00

Current state standards in mathematics are strategically focused on problem-
solving skills in both content standards and practice standards. Content
standards describe what math students are expected to learn at each grade level
while practice standards characterize math behaviors that all students should
experience (e.g., perseverance while problem solving and reasoning effectively
about real-world situations). Problem solving is found at every grade level. If
math teachers are expected to engage students in problem solving during everyday
instruction, then students' problem-solving performance must be assessed in a
manner that produces meaningful, valid, and reliable scores, without unduly
burdening teachers or students. Unfortunately, most problem-solving assessments
are generally framed by a set of mathematics expectations that differ from state
standards. Thus, results from those assessments are disconnected from the
mathematics content that students learn in the classroom. Previously, this
research team has built problem-solving measures for grades 6-8, which address
this gap in framing and generates meaningful, valid, and reliable scores, and do
not have unintended negative consequences on students. The current project,
titled Developing and Evaluating Assessments of Problem Solving (DEAP), builds
upon the team's prior work by creating problem-solving measures for grades 3-5.
The elementary assessments will be connected to the middle-grades assessments
and will be available for use by school districts, researchers, and other
education professionals seeking to effectively measure children's problem
solving. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly speaking, the
aims of DEAP are (a) to create three new mathematical problem-solving
assessments and gather validity evidence for their use, (b) link the problem-
solving measures (PSMs) with prior problem-solving measures (i.e., PSM6, PSM7,
and PSM8), and (c) develop a meaningful reporting system for the PSMs. The
research questions are: (a) What are the psychometric properties of the PSM3,
PSM4, and PSM5 as they relate to students' problem-solving performance? (b) How
does the evidence support vertical equating (linking) of the PSM3, PSM4, PSM5,
PSM6, PSM7, and PSM8? (c) How do the PSM3, PSM4, and PSM5, and their related
reporting systems impact teachers' instructional decision making when used
formatively? Year 1 focuses on item and test development. The study will conduct
cognitive interviews and administer tests with a small group of students to
explore how items and tests function. Rasch (1-PL) measurement will be employed,
similar to prior PSM development. Year 2 includes further pilot testing and
gathering validity evidence through cognitive interviews and test
administration. Year 3 has a final round of pilot testing and selection of
linking items for vertical equating. Year 4 involves pilot testing the PSM
series with linking items and developing a reporting system. DEAP's potential
contributions to the field are three-fold. (1) Assessments will be available for
use by the public. (2) A set of vertically equated problem-solving measures will
allow users the opportunity to explore students' problem-solving performance as
they matriculate across grade levels, which is currently not possible at the
state or national level. (3) This project fills a need in the field as no set of
measures uses vertical equating to assess elementary students' problem-solving
performance in a rigorous fashion within the context of state testing.