* 1720504
* CQIS:   Quantum Chaos and Quantum Gravity from Entanglement
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Xiaoliang Qi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

This project addresses physics questions such as: How does the "arrow of time"
emerge from quantum mechanics? How can one characterize chaos in quantum systems
with many particles? Does information get lost in a black hole? How can we
develop a quantum gravity theory that unifies general relativity and quantum
mechanics? These seemingly distinct fundamental questions are all deeply related
to the concept of quantum entanglement. In classical mechanics in systems with
many particles (many-body systems), because of chaos, it is difficult to predict
anything about the future of a complicated system. At the same time, however,
the complexity induced by chaos can generate a kind of simplicity that allows us
to ignore most details about the individual motion of the particles and describe
a many-body system efficiently by macroscopic theories such as hydrodynamics and
thermodynamics. This project will investigate how to describe chaos in quantum
many-body systems, as opposed to classical many-body systems, and how to relate
it to thermodynamics and hydrodynamics. Since the famous work of Bekenstein and
Hawking, it has been gradually realized that thermodynamics is also deeply
related to another deep mystery of nature, namely gravity. Einstein's general
relativity theory describes gravity as a theory of curved and dynamical space-
time geometry. This project will investigate how the space-time geometry may
emerge as a description of quantum entanglement in many-body systems. The
project will provide graduate students with a unique research experience in the
interdisciplinary area of quantum information science, high-energy physics and
condensed matter physics. The PI will make sustained efforts to introduce the
proposed research to undergraduate students and to disseminate the research
results of this project beyond the physics community, by lectures, classes and
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies quantum chaos and quantum
gravity using quantum entanglement. The PI plans to characterize quantum chaos
by the nonlocal propagation of quantum information, and generalize the criteria
in classical chaos such as Lyapunov exponents to quantum systems. Using
entanglement criteria of many-body quantum chaos, the relation of chaos with
thermalization of an isolated system will be investigated. Physically, chaos in
many-body systems is associated with nonlocal propagation of quantum
information, which plays an essential role in thermalization process of an
isolated system. In addition to providing a more solid foundation to understand
quantum thermalization, the PI plans to further develop a general framework of
non-equilibrium dynamics based on the new understanding of quantum chaos.
Furthermore, chaos will also be studied using special models that are solvable
under certain limit but still preserve chaos. Related to quantum gravity, the PI
plans to study holographic duality and quantum gravity using random tensor
networks, a framework suitable for describing highly entangled quantum states.
With the new language of random tensor networks, it is possible to quantify how
entanglement properties are encoded in emergent geometry. Different aspects of
the holographic duality will be investigated, including global symmetries,
geometrical fluctuation and how Einstein's equations can possibly emerge from
entanglement. The PI also plans to apply the new understanding obtained to the
long-standing black hole information paradox.