* 1720067
* A Novel Regularization-Based Computational Framework for State-Constrained Optimal Control
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Akhtar Khan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 135,000.00

The research plan for this project is motivated by a broad range of practical
applications. A relevant example is in the localized heat treatment of cancer in
which the intent is to heat the tumor cells, but at the same time assure that
nearby healthy cells are not heated, and hence not damaged. A goal of this kind
is called an optimal control problem with pointwise state constraints. The
principal investigators will develop novel computational models for the solution
of these control problems. Their research is based on the cross-fertilization of
ideas from diverse disciplines of mathematics and application domains, and has
strong potential for impact in engineering domains such as the optimization of
the process of producing hot steel profiles without the generation of cracks.
The research team will also integrate their research in the university
educational program in the mathematical sciences and will produce basic software
that can be made available for solution of other significant applications that
fall into the same modeling framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigators aim to develop a novel regularization approach for the solution of
pointwise constrained optimal control problems. Such problems are a focus of
considerable recent research and pose serious challenges for finding reliable
solutions. One of the main issues is that the associated Lagrange multipliers
are Radon measures so that the control has low regularity. This causes adverse
effects at the analytical level when obtaining optimality conditions for the
control problem, and at the numerical level when performing discretization. The
lack of regularity can be attributed to the fact that the underlying ordering
cone has an empty interior. Consequently, no general Karush-Kuhn-Tucker theory
is available. In fact, the failure of a Slater-type constraint qualification is
a common hurdle in numerous branches of applied mathematics including optimal
control, inverse problems, non-smooth optimization, and variational
inequalities. Conical regularization provides a unified framework to study
optimization problems for which a Slater-type constraint qualification fails to
hold due to the empty interior of the ordering cone associated with the
inequality constraints. The investigators plan to develop new error estimates
for the conical regularization for optimal control of partial differential
equations and variational inequalities with pointwise state constraints. The
project will test the new theoretical results for Nash equilibrium problems,
linear elasticity, and supply chains on networks. The project also has an
educational impact in the training of graduate students. The investigators will
integrate education with research and design courses to teach state-of-the-art
techniques on optimal control.