* 1720501
* Optoelectromechanical Interface in Hybrid Quantum Networks: Nonreciprocal State Conversion and Pulse Shaping
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lin Tian, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 269,994.00

This project will study the transformation of quantum information from microwave
electronic devices to optical elements via opto-electromechanical interfaces.
Passing information with high fidelity (sometimes called state-conversion)
between these devices would facilitate the construction of a hybrid quantum
network, a form of quantum computer. Such hybrid networks could be scaled up in
size more easily than some other proposed quantum computer architectures, and
they are designed to exploit the various strengths of their component
subsystems. Because mechanical motion can be coupled to electromagnetic fields
at frequencies ranging from acoustic to optical wavelengths, opto-
electromechanical interfaces made of mechanical resonators and cavity photons
provide a promising candidate to advance this goal. This project will design
interfaces with which quantum information can be transmitted uni-directionally
while simultaneously preventing noise transmission. The time-dependence of the
couplings will also be studied to better engineer the shape of photon pulses.
Ideal pulse shape ensures high-fidelity photon absorption or information
retrieval from a quantum bit. This project also includes educational and STEM
activities that can broaden the participation of women and minority students.
These activities include course development, women-STEM lectures, Student
Physics Society activities, and Bobcat day events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description. This project supports the study of
quantum state conversion between microwave and optical photons via hybrid
optoelectromechanical interface. Hybrid quantum devices are composed of
distinctively different subsystems. By exploiting the strength of each
subsystem, hybrid devices can facilitate the construction of scalable quantum
computers. An essential question in hybrid quantum networks bridging microwave
and optical frequencies is how to achieve noiseless and lossless transmission of
quantum information between the subsystems. The objectives of this project
include (1) designing optoelectromechanical interfaces for nonreciprocal state
conversion and routing between microwave and optical photons and (2) developing
numerical methods to control the pulse shape of photons transmitted through
optoelectromechanical interfaces. Nonreciprocal state conversion controls the
direction of state flow and prevents noise from being spread to other parts of
the quantum network. The group will design nonreciprocal interfaces operated
under optimal conditions with significantly reduced mechanical noise. The
effective gauge phase between the linearized light-matter couplings will be
studied to achieve this goal. Meanwhile, the pulse shape of incoming photons is
crucial for achieving high-fidelity storage or retrieval of photon state from a
quantum bit. The team will use an optimal control technique to design time-
dependent electro- and opto-mechanical couplings to achieve desirable pulse
shape. This project can provide insights on the potential and limitation of
hybrid quantum networks and deepen our understanding of the role of quantum
interfaces in hybrid systems.