* 1720321
* String Compactifications: From Geometry To Effective Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Eric Sharpe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Lara Anderson, James
Gray, and Eric Sharpe at Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In string theory
--- a proposal for a fundamental theory of quantum gravity --- the roles of
physics and geometry are intrinsically intertwined. While the questions that
string theory attempts to answer are physical, the path to those answers
frequently leads to cutting-edge challenges in modern mathematics. This award
will fund a collaborative program of research to explore the physics that arises
from string compactifications. The goals of this work include strengthening the
links between string theory and current progress in particle physics by
developing new foundational tools for the subject of string phenomenology. In
addition, Professors Anderson, Gray and Sharpe aim to further bound and
characterize the geometries arising in string compactifications. Experience
shows that when strong physical requirements are expressed in the language of
geometry, they can open the door to new and unexpected results in both physics
and mathematics. As a result, research in this area advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of basic science. Professors Anderson, Gray
and Sharpe will involve junior scientists in this project, including a
postdoctoral researcher and several graduate students who will take part in the
collaborative research. Their efforts will include the organizing of conferences
and workshops that will increase dialog between physicists and mathematicians on
pressing problems at the boundary of both fields. In all of these aspects of
student training and professional dialog, Professors Anderson, Sharpe and Gray
are committed to actively encouraging the inclusion of under-represented groups
into the frontline of progress in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the PIs will study two of the most flexible frameworks for four-
dimensional compactifications of string theory: Heterotic string theory and
F-theory. Within heterotic string theory, novel descriptions of the physical and
geometric moduli spaces will be used to compute previously undetermined aspects
of the effective theory, including the N=1 matter field Kahler potential and
physically normalized Yukawa couplings. The nonperturbative contributions to
Yukawa couplings will also be computed via quantum sheaf cohomology, a
generalization of ordinary quantum cohomology. This work will explore new
dualities including (0,2) mirror symmetry, as well as the global structure of
the moduli space of SCFT's. Within F-theory, new results in the geometry of
elliptic fibrations will be used to study the properties of singular Calabi-Yau
manifolds and their links to Hitchin systems, as well as to study the
implications of the ubiquity of multiply fibered manifolds for string dualities
and effective theories. Recent progress in geometry will be used to extract new
features of the effective theories describing F-theory compactifications,
including the explicit four-dimensional field-dependent form of flux
contributions to the superpotential.