* 1720174
* Beyond the Thermal WIMP Paradigm: Theoretical Motivations and Experimental Signatures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Rouzbeh Allahverdi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Rouzbeh Allahverdi at the
University of New Mexico. We know from observations that only 15% of the matter
in the universe is described by the Standard Model of particle physics, while
85% is made of dark matter (DM). However, the nature and origin of DM remains
one of the most profound problems at the interface of particle physics and
cosmology. A whole array of direct- and indirect-detection experiments, combined
with the successful running of the Large Hadron Collider, will help us discover
the DM and establish its particle-physics origin. The complementary information
provided by these experiments will also play a crucial role in explaining the DM
content of the universe. The research funded by this award will study
theoretical models and observational signatures of DM production mechanisms
beyond the dominant paradigm based on the notion that the DM consists of weakly
interacting massless particles. Research in this area thus advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental
directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical law. The research
funded by this award will also have significant broader impacts. Professor
Allahverdi will involve graduate and undergraduate students in his research, and
thereby provide critical training to junior physicists beginning research in
this field. The PI will additionally bring his results to a broader audience
through job shadowing and mentorship of high-school students, as well as by
visiting schools and giving public lectures. More technically, the research
supported by this award focuses on scenarios of non-thermal DM production having
a two-fold goal. First, the PI wishes to study novel theoretical models and
distinct experimental signals of non-thermal DM. In several extensions of the
Standard Model, the DM is produced in a non-thermal fashion. Second, the PI
wishes to explore interesting connections between primordial black holes (PBHs)
and non-thermal DM that can arise in a universe with non-standard thermal
history. To achieve these objectives, Professor Allahverdi will build new
particle-physics models of non-thermal DM, test their observational signals via
DM indirect-detection experiments and structure-formation data, and examine
consequences of possible connections between PBHs and DM in these models. These
investigations will help us determine the theoretical origin of DM and its
embedding within a fundamental theory. They will also enable us to use DM as a
window to the thermal history of the universe when it was only a tiny fraction
of a second old. This is far earlier than that provided by the current
observational probes involving the cosmic microwave background or Big-Bang
nucleosynthesis.