* 1720323
* RUI: Algorithms and Modeling for Chemotactic Deformable Particles in Non-Newtonian, Multiphase, Non-Isothermal, Turbulent Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Hakan Basagaoglu, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 149,996.00

This project concerns computational fluid dynamics in the field of fluid-
structure interactions. The goal of the research is to develop a new multi-scale
computationally-efficient and robust numerical model to simulate particles that
move in response to chemical stimuli in their environment. The work aims to
create new understanding of the hydrodynamic interactions of such particles with
the bulk fluid, which differs from particle-fluid hydrodynamics for non-
chemotactic particles, whose motility is driven solely by the bulk fluid flow.
The project will recruit a diverse group of talented undergraduate students and
encourage them to pursue graduate studies, focusing on challenging research
problems in a well-established interdisciplinary environment. The project will
introduce students to the intellectual excitement of computational and
mathematical research in fluid dynamics, thereby encouraging them to think
creatively and independently about potential applications and increasing their
awareness of pathways to graduate schools and opportunities in research and
development in industry employment.

This project explores a new multi-scale computationally-efficient and robust
numerical model to simulate two- and three-dimensional motility of deformable
chemotactic particles in complex fluids. This addresses two fundamental issues
that arise in the mathematical and computational treatment of particle motility
in fluids: (i) self-autonomous motion of deformable chemotactic particles in
response to spatially- and temporally-varying chemoattractant gradients, and
(ii) particle-fluid hydrodynamics in non-Newtonian fluids and multiphase flows
in laminar to turbulent flow regimes. The multi-scale model couples
intracellular signaling pathways with particle-fluid interactions using the
RapidCell model, the method of Regularized Stokeslets, and the Immersed Boundary
method. This is well-suited for sophisticated applications, including, for
example, bacterial chemotaxis promoting biofilm formation and swarm robotic odor
localization. The project includes development of a novel, multi-scale
computational fluid dynamics package suitable for theoretical analyses and
diverse multi-disciplinary applications. It will serve as a highly informative
teaching tool for graduate and undergraduate level classes.