* 1720706
* CREST-PRF: Utilizing innovative 3D reconstruction techniques to enhance our understanding of the biology and ecology of Hawaiian ecosystems
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* John Burns, Burns John
* Fellowship Award
* Emanuel WAddell
* 11/30/2019
* USD 82,500.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Tropical Conservation Biology
and Environmental Science (CREST-TCBES) at the University of Hawaii-Hilo.
Communities in the tropics and subtropics depend on the economical, ecological,
and cultural services provided by terrestrial and marine ecosystems. Recent
research has provided evidence that Hawaiian ecosystems are exhibiting signs of
reduced health and disease, a scenario likely related to rapid development in
the Hawaiian Islands. This project will improve the capability of studying the
impacts of disturbance and stressors on habitat structure and critical
ecological processes by creating high-resolution three-dimensional (3D) habitat
reconstructions of both marine and terrestrial ecosystems across a gradient of
disturbance regimes. This work will promote the progress of science and help
preserve valuable ecosystem services that affect the prosperity and welfare of
humans. K-12 students and local communities will be engaged in this project to
support education and diversity. Interactive data visualizations and immersive
virtual reality technologies will be hosted online to captivate audiences while
providing educational material. This study will provide new outreach products
designed to engage global audiences and broaden participation in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply innovative techniques to advance
ecological and biological research by collating 3D reconstruction, molecular
characterization, bioinformatics, and statistical modeling. The research goals
of this project aim to characterize the molecular profiles of eukaryote-
prokaryote symbioses and address fundamental questions about how environmental
change affects ecological systems at multiple spatial and temporal scales. The
research methods will integrate 3D structure-from-motion reconstruction
technology and data visualization tools to provide a new context for which to
decipher patterns and relationships occurring in both molecular and ecological
processes. The key elements of the project are 1) creating 3D reconstructions of
study organisms used for examining eukaryote-prokaryote symbioses, and 2)
developing 3D habitat maps for study sites used to examine the role of
anthropogenic and environmental change on the community structure and
physiological responses of several organisms. The data visualization tools will
allow for annotating the 3D models with multiple forms of biological and
ecological data to statistically examine relationships among the experimental
variables in a 3D spatial context. This innovative approach can test the
hypothesis that eukaryote-prokaryote symbioses exhibit reciprocal effects on
gene expression and metabolite abundance of the study organisms. The proposed
research will also quantify 3D habitat structure to test the hypothesis that
anthropogenic disturbance and habitat fragmentation affects the genetic
structure, survival, reproductive success, and acoustic signaling of organisms.
The outcomes of the proposed CREST-PRF will provide the basis to develop new web
applications to display data and findings from all CREST sub-projects, thus
amplifying the impact of the CREST investment at the University of Hawaii-Hilo.