* 1720263
* I-Corps: Customizable and scalable high-performance microprocessor
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Mikko Lipasti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
superior performance and energy efficiency for cost-sensitive embedded
processors. As computing devices have become ubiquitous and permeated every
aspect of life, the need for greater performance has also followed. However,
traditional design techniques to enable high performance microprocessors incur
resource costs and typically suffer from poor energy efficiency. These overheads
come at a considerable cost as most embedded designs are energy constrained and
highly cost sensitive. The byproduct of these competing design constraints has
been stagnating progress due to the ineffectiveness of traditional techniques.
Through the use of this project's novel processor microarchitecture, commercial
designs should observe approximately 30% greater energy efficiency and superior
performance without incurring resource overhead. Applications such as networking
and storage domains are initial candidates for adopting the
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on the creation of an
energy-efficient microcontroller through the use of a novel processor
microarchitecture. At the time most fundamental microprocessor techniques were
developed, power was not a problem and transistors were scarce. To satisfy these
constraints, designs focused on maximizing utilization of the few execution
resources present. As transistors became more plentiful and performance of
greater importance, designs utilized these additional transistors to enable
complex organizational and scheduling techniques to maximize the operation of
the scarce execution resources. This project's architecture reverses this trend
by allocating additional transistors to execution resources and greatly
simplifying organizational and scheduling overheads. Initial research suggests
that considerable energy and area efficiency gains are possible while
maintaining a high level of performance in comparison to current commercial
designs. Additionally, the novel structure of this microprocessor enables many
optimizations that are impractical in conventional designs due to their complex
organization and scheduling.