* 1720930
* A Partnership to Adapt, Implement and Study a Professional Learning Model and Build District Capacity to Improve Science Instruction and Student Understanding
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Hilda Borko, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,432,187.00

The Lawrence Hall of Science (the Hall) and Stanford University teams have
previously developed and tested the efficacy of a program of Professional
Learning (PL) which is focused on improving teachers' ability to support
students' ability to engage in scientific argumentation. Key components of the
PL model include a week-long summer institute and follow-up sessions during the
academic year that incorporate additional pedagogical input, video reflection,
and planning time. In this project, the Hall and Stanford are working in
partnership with the Santa Clara Unified School District (SCUSD) to adapt the PL
model based on the District's objectives and constraints, to build the capacity
of teacher leaders and a program coordinator to implement the adapted PL
program. This will enable the District to continue to adapt and implement the
program independently at the conclusion of the project. Concurrently, the
project is studying the adaptability of the PL model and the effectiveness of
its implementation, and is developing guidelines and tools for other districts
to use in adapting and implementing the PL model in their local contexts. Thus,
this project is contributing knowledge about how to build capacity in districts
to lead professional learning in science that addresses the new teaching and
learning standards and is responsive to the needs of their local
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is examining the sustainability and
scalability of a PL model that supports the development of teachers' pedagogical
content knowledge and instructional practices, with a particular focus on
engaging students in argument from evidence. Results from the Hall and
Stanford's previous research project indicate that the PL model is effective at
significantly improving teachers' and students' classroom discourse practices.
These findings suggest that a version of the model, adapted to the context and
needs of a different school district, has the potential to improve the teaching
of science to meet the demands of the current vision of science education. Using
a Design-Based Implementation Research approach, this project is (i) working
with SCUSD to adapt the PL model; (ii) preparing a district project coordinator
and cadre of local teacher leaders (TLs) to implement and further adapt the
model; and (iii) studying the adaptation and implementation of the model. The
outcomes will be: a) a scalable PL model that can be continually adapted to the
objectives and constraints of a district; b) a set of activities and resources
for the district to prepare and support the science teacher leaders who will
implement the adapted PL program internally with other teachers; and c)
knowledge about the adaptations and resources needed for the PL model to be
implemented independently by other school districts. The team also is
researching the impact of the program on classroom practices and student
learning.