* 1720801
* Designing a Middle Grades Spatial Skills Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Shannon Willoughby, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2022
* USD 445,499.00

The ability to make spatial judgements and visualize has been shown to be a
strong indicator of students' future success in STEM-related courses. The
project is innovative because it uses a widely available gaming environment,
Minecraft, to examine spatial reasoning. Finding learning experiences which
support students' spatial reasoning in an authentic and engaging way is a
challenge in the field. This project will create a portable training system that
can be easily deployed in middle grades (5th - 7th grade) as a prototype for
increasing students' spatial reasoning skills. The project will study gender
differences in spatial reasoning and examine how learning experiences can be
designed to develop spatial skills using Minecraft as a platform. The resources
will incorporate hands-on learning and engage students in building virtual
structures using spatial reasoning. The curriculum materials are being designed
to be useful in other middle grades contexts. The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is a design and development study that
will design four training modules intended to improve spatial reasoning in the
following areas: rotation, mental slicing, 2D to 3D transformation and
perspective taking. The research questions are: (1) Does a Minecraft-based
intervention that targets specific spatial reasoning tasks improve middle grade
learners' spatial ability? (2) Does spatial skills growth differ by gender? The
experimental design will compare the influence of the virtual spatial learning
environment alone vs. the use of design challenges designed specifically for the
spatial skills. The data collected will include assessments of spatial reasoning
and feedback from teachers' who use the materials. The spatial skills measures
will be administered as a pre-test, post-test, and six-month follow-up
assessment to measure long term effects.