* 1720128
* Morphological consequences of hybridization in primate and human evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Rebecca Ackermann, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 396,395.00

Hybrids are the offspring of two different species or varieties of a plant or
animal. Recent genetic evidence suggesting that our hominin ancestors interbred
with other hominin groups has highlighted hybridization in our own evolutionary
past. If there are predictable patterns in hybrid skeletons and teeth, it might
be possible to identify evidence of hybrids in the hominin fossil record, for
which genetic data cannot always be recovered. A good way to determine whether
such patterns exist is to study hybrid skeletal shape in species that are
closely related to humans. This project will provide comparative data on
hybridization in a colony of macaques (monkeys) that is no longer being expanded
and is therefore declining in size as individual animals die. Importantly,
because hybridization between Indian and Chinese macaques has occurred in this
colony over multiple generations, animals vary from those having high genetic
contributions from both of the founding varieties to those with only small
genetic contributions from one of the varieties. Hominin hybrids are likely to
have had a small genetic contribution from a second hominin species. The data
collected and the insights gained in this project will be relevant across
multiple fields, including anthropology, primatology, biology, zoology, and
quantitative genetics. The study will also support international collaborations
and postdoctoral and student mentoring and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
evidence of gene flow among archaic human lineages (Neandertals, Denisovans,
Homo sapiens) has brought admixture to the forefront of anthropological and
public interest. This study will develop principled criteria for detecting
phenotypic evidence of admixture, using a model organism that is closely related
to humans. Skeletal and dental measurements will be collected for approximately
260 macaques from the California National Primate Research Center. The study
will quantify and model hybrid phenotypic variation, evaluate how accurately
hybrids can be identified and their admixture proportions estimated from
phenotypic data, and develop strategies for detecting hybridization in other
taxa. Large, genotyped primate samples of known pedigree are very rare. The
skeletal sample and associated data will be curated at the University of
California, Davis, and made available to other researchers, extending utility of
the sample to generations of scientists.