* 1720514
* An efficacy study of a comprehensive, middle school science curriculum that integrates disciplinary core ideas, science and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Jacqueline Barber, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 03/31/2019
* USD 2,014,606.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

SRI International (SRI) in partnership with Lawrence Hall of Science (the Hall)
will conduct an efficacy study of a new comprehensive science curriculum for
middle grades 6-8 called Amplify Science Middle School (ASMS). This school
science curriculum integrates disciplinary core ideas, science and engineering
practices, and crosscutting concepts. The overarching aim of the study will be
to understand the impact of the curriculum on student achievement, classroom
implementation, and teacher practice in relation to the recommendations of "A
Framework for K-12 Science Education" and the Next Generation of Science
Standards. While the number of states fully adopting NGSS hovers at around 20,
nearly another 20 states have either incorporated the Framework or substantial
portions of the NGSS into their state frameworks. Currently, the number of
curriculum materials that have been designed for the Framework are relatively
few, and thus the efficacy evidence basis for NGSS-designed curricula is
limited. As more and more curriculum materials become available for supporting
the Framework vision, the science education field needs rigorous research on the
efficacy of curricula and the conditions required to implement them. ASMS is the
Hall's first comprehensive 6-8 grade curriculum that has been designed
specifically to meet the vision of the Framework and NGSS. Field trials of ASMS
with more than 475 teachers and 34,000 students in a wide variety of settings,
including urban, rural and suburban schools, have shown positive impact on
student achievement, providing a compelling reason for a large-scale efficacy
trial at this time.

The study will involve both quantitative and qualitative methods within an
experimental design that will allow the examination of relations between
contextual factors and student learning gains to help explain the results. Thus,
this study will be important for moving education researchers toward increased
understanding of how to meaningfully study and support teaching and learning in
districts that will be trying to implement the next generation of science
curriculum materials. Work will be conducted in districts with large numbers of
students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields so that educators
can better understand the promise of NGSS-aligned curricula in promoting access
and equity in science education. The research team will conduct a random
assignment efficacy study in 7th grade classrooms beginning in academic year
2018-19 and following up with these students as 8th graders in academic year
2019-20. Teachers in both conditions will receive professional development on
the NGSS; teachers in the treatment condition will also receive professional
development in the use of the ASMS materials. The recruiting target is a sample
of 48 middle schools within up to 6 medium to large districts in California
and/or Washington. The researchers will attempt to recruit all middle schools
and all 7th grade science teachers in a district. It is anticipated that each
school will have an average of two teachers teaching 3 sections of 7th grade
science with 30 students per section for an approximate total of 96 teachers and
8,640 students. All students should have opportunities to learn science. This
study will aim to draw valid inferences about the impact of curricula in
districts with high concentrations of students who have been historically
underrepresented in STEM. This work will also contribute to the larger,
nationwide effort to support standards-based instructional reforms in science by
helping to identify conditions needed for successful implementation of NGSS-
designed curriculum materials. The findings will provide an important basis for
investments in new curriculum materials and will be of strong interest to those
in science education and the learning sciences, as well as to district leaders
and policymakers concerned with scaling up of rigorous curriculum.