* 1720912
* CREST-PRF: Constraining Spatiotemporal Nutrient Dynamics Along An Arid-Land River Continuum
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Peter Regier, Regier                  Peter
* Fellowship Award
* Emanuel WAddell
* 09/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Water and the Environment (CWE)
at the University of New Mexico. The objective of this project is to determine
how longitudinal changes in the composition of dissolved organic carbon control
nutrient uptake dynamics and export in arid-land river networks at multiple
spatial (reach to river) and temporal (hours to years) scales. Arid lands
support approximately a third of the world's population and half of the world's
agriculture. Due to multiple competing stressors (e.g., dams, constant
dewatering, fire ash inputs and increased evapotranspiration), and overreliance
on water resources, arid-land river systems are typically less resilient and
more vulnerable to water quality degradation, including eutrophication. Results
from this project will provide tools to assess the fate and transport of carbon
and nutrients in arid river systems, and scientific knowledge to support the
development of multi-sector solutions aimed at improving nutrient recycling in
arid metropolitan areas, within the context of the food, water and energy nexus.

The proposed research will continuously monitor nitrate, phosphate, dissolved
organic carbon, and ancillary water quality parameters using state-of-the-art
sensor technology for two years along a river continuum spanning four orders of
magnitude in mean annual discharge, ~2000 m in altitude and ~500 km of stream
length. High-information-yield experiments to quantify carbon and nutrient
uptake rates will be conducted every three weeks at the sensor sites along with
laboratory analysis of dissolved organic carbon composition. The research
approach harnesses the power of "big data" by combining continuous sensor data,
field experiments, and laboratory measurements with time-series analysis and
data-based modeling techniques. Spatiotemporally comprehensive information about
the interconnections between chemistry, biology, hydrology and ecology along an
entire river network collected by this project will generate datasets and
modeling approaches to inform adaptive management of freshwater resources and
establish guidelines for total maximum daily loads in arid land rivers.
Development of novel proxy relationships correlating continuous measurements to
complex environmental parameters holds great potential to transform current
understanding of watershed nutrient cycling and advance freshwater
biogeochemistry.