* 1720465
* Collaborative Research: Worm Algorithm and Diagrammatic Monte Carlo for strongly correlated condensed matter systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Boris Svistunov, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 419,416.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports collaborative research and education on the collective
quantum mechanical behavior of electrons in materials and of solid helium-4. The
project is using and further developing two state-of-the-art computational
approaches suitable for the study of quantum mechanical systems consisting of
many interacting particles, the Worm Algorithm (WA) and Diagrammatic Monte Carlo
(DiagMC), which were both introduced by the research team. With WA the team
expects to advance understanding of striking properties demonstrated by
imperfect crystals of helium-4 at low temperatures near the absolute zero of
temperature, such as the frictionless transport of helium-4 atoms through the
crystal, called supertransport, and an almost liquid-like response to an
arbitrarily weak stress, called quantum plasticity. With DiagMC the team will
address certain notoriously difficult problems concerning the behavior of many-
electron systems, including the problem of how electrons develop the cooperative
quantum mechanical state to become superconductors. Superconductors can conduct
electricity without resistance.

Understanding quantum plasticity, supertransport, and the interplay between them
in solid helium-4 is a major challenge for modern low-temperature physics. More
generally, there is an urgent need for universal methods suitable for describing
the collective quantum behavior of electrons across all fields of physics,
quantum chemistry, and materials science. The simulations at the core of the
project provide crucial information about quantitative and qualitative
properties of these systems, test analytical predictions, help establish the
proper theoretical framework, and provide foundation for the unambiguous
analysis of experimental data and the further development of measuring
techniques.

An integral part of the project is the training of graduate students in advanced
theoretical and numerical techniques, as well as in parallel computing. The
project involves developing and maintaining a tutorial website on the numerical
methods used, and the PIs plan to edit a book on the same, targeting a broad
scientific audience.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports collaborative research and education on the collective
quantum behavior of electrons in materials and of solid helium-4. The PIs will
use and further develop two state-of-the-art Monte Carlo methods introduced by
the research team: the Worm Algorithm (WA), and Diagrammatic Monte Carlo
(DiagMC). The main goals of the project are: i) to use DiagMC for studying
notoriously difficult condensed-matter problems such as: the Cooper instability
in the fermionic repulsive Hubbard model including the possibility of high
critical temperatures, modeling electronic systems with controlled ab initio
treatment of long-range Coulomb and electron-phonon interactions, creating
alternative formulations for strongly correlated models, and understanding the
quantum-to-classical correspondence in frustrated spin models; ii) to carry out
WA studies of disorder-induced quantum physics in solid He-4, such as
supertransport and quantum plasticity associated with generic (tilted)
dislocations.

Understanding quantum plasticity, supertransport, and the interplay between them
in solid helium-4 is a major challenge for modern low-temperature physics. More
generally, there is an urgent need for universal methods suitable for strongly
correlated fermionic systems across all fields of physics, quantum chemistry,
and materials science. The simulations at the core of the project provide
crucial information about quantitative and qualitative properties of these
systems, test analytical predictions, help establish the proper theoretical
framework, and provide foundation for the unambiguous analysis of experimental
data and the further development of measuring techniques.

An integral part of the project is the training of graduate students in advanced
theoretical and numerical techniques, as well as in parallel computing. The
project involves developing and maintaining a tutorial website on the numerical
methods used, and the PIs plan to edit a book on the same, targeting a broad
scientific audience.