* 1720407
* WORKSHOP: ThinkTank (Doctoral Consortium) at ICAD 2017
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2017
* Mark Ballora, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 22,600.00

This is funding to support a "Think Tank" (workshop) of about 13 promising
graduate student scholars along with distinguished research faculty mentors, in
conjunction with the 23rd Annual International Conference on Auditory Display
(ICAD 2017), which will be held June 20-23 on the University Park campus of
Pennsylvania State University. ICAD is the premier international forum for
presenting research on the use of sound to display data, monitor systems, and
provide enhanced user interfaces for computers and virtual reality systems. It
is unique in its singular focus on auditory displays and the array of
perception, technology, and application areas that this encompasses, which
include for example data sonification, auditory wayfinding, auditory graphs,
speech interfaces, virtual environments, and associated perceptual, cognitive,
technical, and technological research and development. Many of the
interdisciplinary research and development efforts are of direct relevance to
persons with perceptual disabilities, especially visual impairments; for
example, developing wayfinding systems for the blind requires research into
effective distance cues and object identifiers used in auditory displays.
Research into the efficacy of auditory graphs may be used to help visually
impaired students and scientists participate more fully in science. Even
household devices can have more effective auditory displays that provide richer
information than the basic "beeps" they presently tend to generate. A common
approach in this field is universal design, wherein a display strategy is
developed once, to be used by all kinds of users, including those with and
without specific access issues. This year's conference theme is Sound in
Learning; more details about the conference are available online at
http://icad.org/icad2017/. The ICAD Think Tank is a doctoral consortium that
promotes scholarship and networking among new researchers in this important
emerging interdisciplinary area. It will help shape ongoing and future research
projects that have clear and important implications for development of assistive
technologies and universal access. The doctoral consortium will afford
participants exposure to a larger community, allowing them to bond among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality and culture, scientific
discipline, and institution, the students' horizons are broadened to the future
benefit of the field. This year, the organizers expect that up to 10 U.S.-based
Think Tank Scholars will have their travel and attendance heavily subsidized.
Additionally, up to 3 U.S.-based Think Tank Scholars local to the central
Pennsylvania area will have their attendance at ICAD 2017 (but not travel and
accommodation) subsidized, for a total of 13 Student Scholars. Some NSF funds
will also be used to support travel by research faculty panelists (both U.S. and
foreign-based), since they provide great value to the US students, but NSF funds
will not be used to support travel and participation of non-U.S. students. The
organizers will be proactive in promoting diversity among the attendees. Stage
in their academic program, research topic, gender and disability status are
examples of dimensions on which participant diversity will be pursued;
geographic and institutional diversity will also be strongly considered.

The ICAD Think Tank, a full-day event which will take place on June 19
immediately preceding the conference, is open to graduate students at all stages
of their educational program, including both Masters and PhD students.
Exceptional undergraduates who have demonstrated interest in pursuing this field
in their graduate careers may also be considered. The Think Tank will bring
together students from diverse backgrounds (e.g., engineering, computing, music,
and psychology), so that they can experience the broad spectrum of approaches to
auditory displays, assistive technologies and universal design. The Think Tank
will develop a supportive community of scholars and a spirit of collaborative
research, by providing participants with a friendly and open, yet rigorous,
scientific forum in which to present their research ideas, to listen to ongoing
work from peer students, and to receive constructive feedback from a panel of
distinguished experts. Panel feedback is designed to help students understand
and articulate how their work is positioned relative to related research,
whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects,
whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their
results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The Think Tank will also offer
invited speakers and discussion groups (e.g., to provide students with relevant
information about important issues for doctoral candidates, whether they are
considering academic or industrial career paths). Each student participant will
furthermore present his/her work in a special poster session during the
conference proper. And the Think Tank Chair will provide a
summary/review/debrief at the conference banquet that includes an overview of
the event's success and in which all Think Tank participants (students and
panelists) are introduced to the community.