* 1720376
* Testing the Chert Sourcing Application of Reflectance Spectroscopy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* David Dye, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 186,297.00

Drs. Ryan M. Parish and Dr. David H. Dye, of the University of Memphis and
collaborator Dr. Haluk Cetin from Murray State University are investigating the
application of reflectance spectroscopy in studying prehistoric use of stone
resources to determine the geographic source of artifacts recovered in
archaeological sites. The researchers' broad goals are to understand past
resource consumption in order to better contextualize the present use of natural
resources. The structure provided by studying past adaptation to finite
resources directly provides modern societies with a basis for current resource
strategies and sustainable practices. The researchers are building upon previous
studies demonstrating the wealth of cultural data gained by sourcing stone
resources and the need to do so with greater precision. Accurate source data
allows archaeologists to understand prehistoric procurement, selection,
consumption, organization, technology, social networking, and adaptation to
dwindling resources. The application of reflectance spectroscopy in
archaeological sourcing studies will provide an increased ability to identify
specific exploited deposits. The reflectance data paired with existing geologic
spectral databases will allow researchers to link stone molecular and mineral
variation with the geologic processes that formed the deposit, the theoretical
framework of all sourcing studies. The project provides funding for one graduate
student in addition to providing training for undergraduate archaeology and
anthropology majors at the University of Memphis. Instrumentation will establish
a hyperspectral provenance lab at the University of Memphis providing contract
services in both the public and private sectors.

Dr. Parish and colleagues will focus on the broader development of reflectance
spectroscopy in archaeological source studies. A specific focus of the study
will be on the geologic characterization of multiple deposits of chert/flint
known to have been exploited in prehistory. Linking variation with how the
deposit formed is crucial in matching artifacts back to their respected sources.
Reflectance spectroscopy is a technique well suited to addressing very sensitive
geologic information through the analysis of atomic and molecular structure
relating to composition. Whereas, the large amount of chemical variation in
chert/flint has frustrated the majority of previous studies, the successful
ability to characterize variation will lead to a greater understanding of
prehistoric stone resource consumption