* 1720914
* Project Accelerate: University - High School AP Physics Partnerships
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Gay Stewart, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,895.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Accelerate brings AP Physics 1 and,
eventually, AP Physics 2 to students attending schools that do not offer AP
Physics. The project will enable 249 students (mostly under-served, i.e.,
economically disadvantaged, ethnic minorities and racial minorities) to enroll
in AP Physics - the students would otherwise not have access. These students
either prepare for the AP Physics 1 exam by completing a highly interactive,
conceptually rich, rigorous online course, complete with virtual lab
experiments, or participate in an accredited AP course that also includes weekly
hands-on labs. In this project, the model will be tested and perfected with more
students and expanded to AP Physics 2. Further, model replication will be tested
at an additional site, beyond the two pilot sites. In the first pilot year in
Massachusetts at Boston University, results indicated that students fully
engaged in Project Accelerate are (1) at least as well prepared as peer groups
in traditional classrooms to succeed on the AP Physics 1 exam and (2) more
inclined to engage in additional STEM programs and to pursue STEM fields and
programs than they were prior to participating. In the second year of the pilot
study, Project Accelerate doubled in size and expanded in partnership with West
Virginia University. From lessons learned in the pilot years, key changes are
being made, which are expected to increase success. Project Accelerate provides
a potential solution to a significant national problem of too few under-served
young people having access to high quality physics education, often resulting in
these students being ill prepared to enter STEM careers and programs in college.
Project Accelerate is a scalable model to empower these students to achieve STEM
success, replicable at sites across the country (not only in physics, but
potentially across fourteen AP subjects). The project could potentially lead to
the success of tens of thousands of motivated but under-served students who
attend schools where the opportunity to engage in a rigorous STEM curriculum is
not available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Accelerate blends the supportive
structures of a student's home school, a private online course designed
specifically with the needs of under-served populations in mind, and hands-on
laboratory experiences, to make AP Physics accessible to under-served students.
The goals of the project are: 1) have an additional 249 students, over three
years, complete the College Board-accredited AP Physics 1 course or the AP
Physics 1 Preparatory course; 2) add an additional replication site, with a
total of three universities participating by the end of the project; 3) develop
formal protocols so Project Accelerate can be replicated easily and with
fidelity at sites across the nation; 4) develop formal protocols so the project
can be self-sustaining at a reasonable cost (about $500 per student
participant); 5) build an AP Physics 2 course, giving students who come through
AP Physics 1 a second year of rigorous experience to help further prepare them
for college and career success; 6) create additional rich interactive content,
such as simulations and video-based experiments, to add to what is already in
the AP Physics 1 prep course and to build the AP Physics 2 prep course - the key
is to actively engage students with the material and include scaffolding to
support the targeted population; 7) carry out qualitative and quantitative
education research, identifying features of the program that work for the target
population, as well as identifying areas for improvement. This project will
support the growing body of research on the effectiveness of online and blended
(combining online and in-person components) courses, and investigate the use of
such courses with under-represented high school students.