* 1720695
* I-Corps: On-line image analysis and dynamic mission planning for unmanned aerial vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Girish Chowdhary, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project explores the commercial applicability of novel image
analysis and feature detection algorithms and dynamic path planning algorithms.
The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project include creation
and commercialization of a software product for monitoring agricultural and
natural landscapes using unmanned aerial systems. The benefits of
commercialization of this advanced technology are expected to include
improvement in the profitability and productivity of major food crops, increase
in food security, and enable long-term sustainability of the nation's agronomic
and natural resources. The proposed customer-interaction efforts will also lead
to increased technical capacity among stakeholders in US agriculture and natural
resource management sectors as they will involve intensive interaction between
the proposing team with scientific and technical expertise, and the stakeholders
in the target customer segments who have the necessary on-the-ground experience.

This I-Corps project's image analysis and feature detection algorithms and
dynamic path planning algorithms have been developed for rapid and
computationally efficient detection of anomalous areas in visual spectrum images
using mobile processors. The dynamic path planning algorithms enable automatic
mid-flight modification of drone flight plans based on analysis of incoming data
from drone-based sensors. Together these algorithms enable autonomous capture of
high-value information and immediate delivery of actionable insights from drone
missions. This technology will be a significant improvement on existing
commercial offerings for drone-based monitoring, which involve high labor and
equipment costs, require cloud-connectivity for data analysis, and are difficult
to use and understand. By contrast, the fundamentally new workflow paradigms and
innovative technical advances that will be examined here will enable rapid
delivery of actionable insights about potential problems in remote environments
using consumer level drones and visual spectrum cameras.