* 1720222
* RUI:  Efficient Adaptive Backward Stochastic Differential Equation Methods for Nonlinear Filtering Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Feng Bao, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 124,995.00

Nonlinear filtering problem is a mathematical model for system estimation in
signal processing problems arising from various scientific and engineering
fields. Examples of the nonlinear filter's applications include tracking an
aircraft using radar measurements, estimating a digital communications signal
using noisy measurements, and estimating the volatility of financial instruments
using stock market data. The key mission of the nonlinear filtering problem is
to establish a "best estimate" for the true value of a dynamic system from an
incomplete, potentially noisy set of observations on that system. The goal of
this project is to develop novel numerical algorithms, which are accurate and
efficient for the nonlinear filtering problem, by solving a backward stochastic
differential equation (SDE) system. The proposed project will engage
undergraduate students at an RUI institution in computational and applied
mathematics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cornerstone of this proposed
approach, named the backward SDE filter, is the fact that the solution of the
backward SDE system is the probability density function of the signal state as
required in the nonlinear filtering problem. This project will start with the
construction of backward SDE filter algorithms that are high order in time and
adaptive in space, which blends the strengths of well known methods from this
area of research. Then, the applicability of the backward SDE filter will be
enlarged to tackle the grand challenge problems. Specifically, massively
parallel algorithms will be designed for the backward SDE filter so that it
could be implemented to solve large scale scientific computing problems on high
performance computing facilities. The backward SDE filter is a new approach to
solve the nonlinear filtering problem, and it addresses the main issues in the
numerical solutions for nonlinear filtering problems, such like the low
regularity problem and the high dimensionality problem. As a result, the
backward SDE filter will provide scientists and engineers in various disciplines
an accurate, efficient, and easy to use algorithm for data assimilation.