* 1720440
* Collaborative Research:   Efficient, Stable and Accurate Numerical Algorithms  for a class of Gradient Flow Systems  and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Jie Shen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 130,000.00

This project focuses on the development of efficient, stable and accurate
numerical algorithms for gradient flow systems which are ubiquitous in modeling
of real-world phenomena. It is expected that the research will not only lead to
efficient numerical algorithms for a class of problems of current interests, but
also contribute to better understandings of some fundamental issues in materials
science, biotechnology, and other related fields through numerical simulations.
This project will also provide opportunities for the involved graduate and
undergraduate students to learn critical skills of computational and applied
mathematics and to develop state-of-the-art numerical algorithms for science and
engineering applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The free energies of gradient
flow systems usually consist of various nonlinear potentials formulated in
diverse complex formats which present a major challenge in the construction of
efficient and accurate time discretization schemes. The project aims at
overcoming this challenge by using a flexible and robust IEQ approach that
enables one to develop time discretization schemes for a large class of gradient
flow systems. The goals of this proposal are three folds: (i) to develop a
unified numerical framework of time-marching schemes for solving general
gradient flow models with high nonlinearity; (ii) to develop efficient numerical
schemes for a number of challenging gradient flow models of current interests
(e.g., nonlinear coupled multivariable models, nonlocal models, anisotropic
models, nonlinear coupled systems that follow various physical principles,
tensor based liquid crystal models); (iii) to investigate some fundamental
issues of viscoelastic drops on substrates and active liquid crystal droplets
using the developed predictive numerical tools. The proposed schemes will lead
to numerical predictive tools that extend the capability of mathematical and
experimental analysis, and contribute to better understanding of some pressing
science and engineering issues related to multi-phase complex fluids.