* 1720311
* Dynamical Decoupling, Error Mitigation and Noise Correlations in Multi-Qubit Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Terry Orlando, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

A quantum computer is a new type of device that could harness the power of
quantum superposition, quantum entanglement, and quantum interference to
dramatically reduce computation time for challenging problems. So far, quantum
computational operations have only been realized in systems with a small number
of quantum bits (qubits). The difficulty is that qubits are very sensitive to
noise in their environment, which causes them to lose their quantum properties
before there is enough time to perform any calculations. One way to improve the
qubits is to develop new designs, using new materials and more refined
fabrication techniques. A complimentary approach is to actively counteract the
negative influence of the noise by applying a sequence of control pulses to the
qubits, which decouples them from the noisy environment. This project will
develop and implement such dynamical decoupling techniques for systems with
coupled qubits, with the goal of further improving qubit performance and
reducing error rates in multi-qubit systems.

Any realistic quantum computer will need to implement error correction
algorithms, so that residual errors can be handled as they occur. There exist
several proposals for implementing quantum error correction, but common to
protocols is that they put stringent requirements on the allowed error rate for
performing single and multi-qubit gate operations. Even though contemporary
qubit designs are close to threshold for certain protocols, it is important to
realize that most quantum error correction protocols assume that the errors of
individual qubits are uncorrelated, which is an oversimplification for most
physical qubit systems. This project will focus on quantifying correlated noise
in multi-qubit systems, which will be key for the development of more efficient
quantum error correction protocols. In addition, this team will develop novel
qubit control sequences for dynamically improving both qubit relaxation and
dephasing times by reducing the number of quasiparticles close to the device.