* 1720395
* Semiclassical Approach to Classical Simulation of Quantum Annealers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Peter Love, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 290,000.00

Quantum mechanics governs the behavior of the microscopic world, and its rules
are very different from the laws of physics that are most familiar from everyday
life. A scientific challenge of the 21st century is to harness the unique
features of quantum mechanics for new technologies. For example, a computer that
works on the basis of quantum logic would offer speed-ups and other advantages
when compared with familiar classical computers, at least for some nearly
intractable computational problems. Another type of machine called a quantum
annealer can be used to solve optimization problems. While not a full-fledged
quantum computer, a quantum annealer uses tunneling and entanglement during its
operation, and its advantages over conventional machines is a topic of much
current research. This project will attempt to show that the restrictions
present in current quantum annealers mean that these machines are not yet
sufficiently quantum mechanical to provide a fundamental computational advantage
over conventional computation methods. If successful, this work will make clear
that proposed modifications to current annealers, which are technologically
feasible, are necessary for these devices to provide useful improvements over
conventional computing approaches. If this claim is not proven, this work may
provide insights into when current quantum annealers can be expected to
outperform conventional computers.

Quantum computation promises advantages over classical computation for certain
problems. However, the experimental obstacles to the construction of a large
scale quantum computer are formidable. Quantum annealing is an intermediate
approach to obtaining some quantum advantage, and over the last decade it has
been implemented on a reasonably large scale. Quantum annealers solve
optimization problems, and there is experimental evidence for quantum effects
such as tunneling and entanglement during their operation. A general theory of
when these machines provide a quantum advantage is absent, but because of the
existence of actual hardware a large body of empirical knowledge is accumulating
about their operation. This work will address whether they can provide a
uniquely quantum advantage over classical approaches. The project will address
the following question for quantum annealers: Is there a local hidden variable
theory that describes the operation of all current quantum annealing hardware?
Theoretical tools to address this question include Wigner functions for discrete
systems that give a description in terms of quasi-probabilities that sum to one,
but which may be negative. When all the quasi-probabilities associated with
states, operations and measurements are positive, the system admits a completely
classical hidden variable description. This team will investigate whether such a
positive, classical description can be accurate for quantum annealers.