* 1720297
* Optimal Convergence Rates for Adaptive Finite Element Techniques
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Peter Binev, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2022
* USD 275,000.00

Numerical simulation is an indispensable tool for acquiring deeper and more
quantitative insight into increasingly complex scientific and technological
processes. Despite the ever-increasing power of digital computing facilities,
numerical simulation technology is somewhat of a weak link. This research
project aims to develop improved adaptive numerical algorithms, which have the
ability to optimally allocate computational resources -- viz. degrees of freedom
-- in the course of the solution process based on information gathered so far.
Economizing as much as possible the number of degrees of freedom with the aid of
adaptive solution techniques while still accurately capturing the structures of
interest remains central to large-scale simulation and a fundamental
prerequisite for ultimately further advancing the frontiers of computability.
While large-scale scientific computation usually takes place in a highly
interdisciplinary arena, the design of adaptive algorithms with rigorously-
founded certifiable performance guarantees is an inherently mathematical task
that is pursued in this project. The many conceptual facets of this research
project additionally offer unique opportunities for talented young researchers
to develop their potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at developing
and analyzing hp-adaptive approximations through a process of locally
distributing the degrees of freedom through a coarse-to-fine procedure based on
local error estimators. The challenges in accomplishing the goals of the project
have two major sources. On the one hand, the type of the partial differential
equation to which such methods are to be applied, of course, matters very much.
On the other hand, there are several fundamental problem aspects that are
independent of the particular application and are primarily of approximation-
theoretic nature. Even when restricting the problem to a fixed mesh refinement
depth and a largest allowable polynomial degree, finding the optimal degree
distribution in conjunction with an adequately locally-refined partition is an
NP-hard problem. In particular, when progressing from coarse to successively
refined meshes seemingly good degree assignments could turn out at a much later
stage to prevent near-optimal results. It is therefore of crucial importance to
address such core approximation theoretic issues and understand to what extent
they are affected by the particular type of partial differential equation. For
instance, when using conforming methods for the important class of elliptic
boundary value problems, trial functions need to be globally continuous, which
severely impedes the analysis of local refinements due to "smoothness
pollution," particularly in the multivariate case. To address these aspects and
build a solid footing for future specifications to different application areas
is the primary goal of this project. Some of the envisaged theoretical results
are expected to be of asymptotic nature. Therefore, the theoretical
investigations will be accompanied by implementing the strategies for model
problems that shed light on the quantitative behavior of the methods. A high
level of adaptivity interferes with parallelization, opening yet another
direction of research, especially regarding modern processor technologies.