* 1720296
* GOALI: Fundamental Investigations of Nucleation Processes in Silicate Liquids and Glasses with a  Goal of Developing Predictive Models for Glass Formation and Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 524,089.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Glasses have been centrally important technological
materials for thousands of years. Glass ceramics (partially crystallized
glasses) are also important, filling low technology applications such as stove-
tops and cookware, to high technology applications such as optical waveguides,
telescope mirrors, bone prosthesis and dental restorations. Used in composite
armor, ceramics are able to break up impacting projectiles while a metallic
backing plate absorbs the kinetic energy of the projectile. Controlling
nucleation, the first step in the crystallization of a liquid or glass, is
critically important for the production of glass ceramics. However, nucleation
is generally understood within the context of a model that was developed for
liquid formation in a gas in the early years of the last century and extended to
the crystallization of liquids about 60 years ago. This model is inadequate for
the level of control needed today. The previous assumptions are now questionable
and so predictions often fail to agree quantitatively with experimental data.
This research is aimed at developing a deeper understanding of crystal
nucleation and the formulation of a more quantitative model. This new model
provides a foundation for the development of computer simulations that can be
used to accelerate the discovery and design of new glasses and ceramics. The
project provides opportunities for graduate students to interact with industrial
scientists in Corning Research and Development and leads to a career path for
graduates in either industry or academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Glasses and glass ceramics are ubiquitous modern materials, fundamental
to a wide range of applications. Understanding nucleation and growth is critical
in the production of high quality glasses and ceramics and the discovery of new
ones. These processes must be precisely controlled to produce the desired
devitrified microstructures, including the number, type, and size of
crystallites formed in the glass. Currently, gaining this control is largely
empirical, resulting in long development times for new products. Glass and glass
ceramics companies are therefore working to develop improved measurement and
modeling capabilities, and to increase the fundamental understanding of
nucleation and growth processes at or beyond the state-of-the-art in the field.
This research, carried out with scientists in Corning Research and Development,
focuses on the development of a deeper understanding of crystal nucleation
through a coordinated experimental/modeling approach for two model silicate
glasses (Ba2O-2SiO2 and Na2O-2CaO-3SiO2) Key elements include scanning
calorimetric surveys to determine the temperature range of significant
nucleation, measurements of the time-dependent nucleation rates as a function of
temperature, X-ray and elastic neutron scattering studies of the glass and
nucleating crystal phases to assess the importance of glass structure on the
nucleation barrier, extending the classical theory of nucleation to include the
effects of the diffuse interface between the nucleus and the liquid/glass and to
take into account ordering in the liquid/glass, and incorporating computer
models and simulations to test these theories. The new insights gained lay the
foundation for computer models that can guide the rapid development of new
glasses and glass ceramics with an optimized microstructure. These activities
mirror a broad approach for accelerated materials development that is a national
priority. The US is in crisis, with a decreasing number of students seeking
careers in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). This research forms
an integral part of graduate student training, both in an academic and
industrial environment. This project exposes students to cutting edge glass
production and characterization techniques and leads to an optimal career path
for graduates.