* 1720964
* Multimedia Immersion Inspires STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Mercedes McKay, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 12/31/2020
* USD 449,951.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. The Multimedia Immersion (MI) project will develop, pilot, and
evaluate a nine-week STEM-rich multimedia production course for high school
students. MI will make important contributions to the field through its efforts
to design and evaluate the promises and challenges of a nine-week multimedia
curriculum in multiple urban high schools. The MI course will engage teams of
students to develop a personally and socially relevant storyline that guides
their use of accessible audio and video technologies to create a five-minute
animated video. To develop student STEM experience and provide technical
support, the project will provide guidance and learning experiences in
engineering (e.g., criteria, constraints, optimization, tradeoffs), science
(e.g. sound, light, energy, mechanics) and multimedia technologies (e.g.,
computer based audio production, video editing and visualizations through
animatics (i.e., shooting a succession of storyboards with a soundtrack).
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Because the curriculum situates engineering and science
learning in the context of multimedia production, there are natural synergies
with several existing high school courses including engineering design,
audio/video media production, and multimedia technology. Although these courses
are typically electives in high school, developing a 5-minute animated short on
a topic of interest may encourage girls and students from underrepresented
groups to select this course over other electives. MI will impact 10 teachers
and approximately 250 high school students per year. The project will result in
the following resources: nine-week curricular unit (multimedia, science,
engineering); assessments to monitor student learning of science, engineering
and technology (design logs); and research on changes in student knowledge,
interest). Project resources will be disseminated to teachers, researchers, and
curriculum and professional development providers via conference presentations,
publications, and online webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MI project builds
on student familiarity and interest in music, video and technology to promote
an: (1) understanding of engineering design and physics and (2) an appreciation
of the fundamental role of STEM in popular culture. Project evaluation will be
conducted using student surveys and an examination of work products in
conjunction with implementation challenges and successes to generate evidence
for the feasibility and utility of a high school multimedia course that
explicitly addresses science and engineering learning. Project evaluation will
use student design logs as a window into student design processes and conceptual
understanding. Student design logs are an essential feature of MI curriculum
design. With an appropriate structure, these design logs can inform teaching,
afford an opportunity for students to reflect on their own work, and provide
evidence of student thinking and learning for assessment purposes. Using student
design logs as a window into students' design process and conceptual
understanding is an important contribution to the engineering education
community which has few options for measuring student knowledge in ways that are
consistent with the hands-on, iterative nature of the design process.