* 1720230
* EAGER: Behavior-Based Incentive Mechanism Design for Crowd Defense against Phishing Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Emily Balcetis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This research is aimed at preventing harm from phishing attacks. Phishing
attacks have been on the rise in the last few years with nearly 450,000 attacks
and record estimated losses of over USD $5.9 billion just in the year 2013
alone. These attacks attempt to acquire personal information, such as username
and passwords, through fraudulent emails. Phishing emails are becoming more
targeted, using personal information about their intended victims, in an attempt
to seem like authentic emails and improve the response rate to the attacks. If a
large number of participants who receive a phishing email can respond to it
strategically using fake or deceptive information, the attacker will be
overwhelmed and misled by the number of responses, and thus making it more
costly to locate the victim. In this way, vulnerable users who tend to fall
victim to phishing scams will be hidden in a number of fake responses. The
cooperative large-population behavior of the defenders can increase
significantly the cost of attack, and hence reduce the economic incentives for
the attacker to send phishing email. This type of defense mechanism is called
crowd defense. This project will holistically explore the psychological,
economic, behavioral, and technical aspects of crowd defense mechanism
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crowd defense is a critical defense mechanism to
reverse the asymmetric advantage from the attacker to the defender. The research
aims to understand the psychological and economic factors in the behavior of
crowd defenders, create essential behavioral game-theoretic design frameworks,
and develop a proof-of-concept automated software system that enables users to
coordinate and respond automatically to phishing. The analytical and design
methodologies developed for anti-phishing crowd defense can be broadly applied
to other security problems, such as distributed denial of service attacks
(DDoS), advanced persistent threats (APT), and coordinated reconnaissance. The
tools created in this project will be released as open-source for building a
more collaborative and trustworthy cyberspace. The PIs are committed to public
education through outreach activities that will further increase the
participation of women and minorities as graduate and undergraduate students in
the project.