* 1720578
* Learning in Places: Field Based Science in Early Childhood Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Megan Bang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 06/30/2023
* USD 2,901,793.00

Recent evidence suggests that reasoning and making decisions about ecological
systems is a cultural activity that impacts participation in the core scientific
practices of observation, evidence use, and claims making. This project aims to
develop an innovative field-based science learning approach that will support
the capacity of culturally diverse students in Grades K-3 to engage in complex
ecological reasoning and related problem solving. To provide rich learning
environments, outdoor learning gardens will be created in which students,
teachers, garden educators, and families participate in activities that
facilitate the investigation of tangible ecological challenges such as water
capture and food security. This project is funded by the Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12, which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using design-based research, the project team
will collaborate with teachers, parents of participating students, and community
garden educators to collectively design and develop four key components: 1)
field-based curricular units for K-3 classrooms; 2) a model of family and
community engagement that strengthens cultural relevance and equity in field-
based science learning; 3) a pilot program of teacher professional development
that informs future scaling efforts; and 4) research that unpacks student
learning and teacher instructional practices that support children?s complex
ecological reasoning and the cultural contexts of such knowledge. Data sources
will include video, interviews, surveys, and student-created artifacts. A mixed-
methods approach will be used to produce research findings at multiple levels
including: student learning about complex ecological phenomena and field-based
practices; classroom-level learning and high-leverage teaching practices in
model units at each grade level; impacts of co-design on professional learning
and practice; and family and community organizations learning and engagement in
field-based science education. The project will be carried out by a research-
practice-community partnership in Seattle, Washington that includes learning
scientists (University of Washington), K-3 teachers and school administrators
(Seattle Public Schools), garden educators (Seattle Tilth), and parents of
participating students. In total, eight schools, 32 teachers, 800 students, and
32 families are expected to participate.