* 1720424
* Collaborative Research: The Great Plains Irrigation Experiment (GRAINEX) for Understanding the Influence of Irrigation on the Planetary Boundary Layer and Weather Events
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Roger Pielke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 111,096.00

This research project seeks to investigate the impacts of irrigation on the
evolution of the planetary boundary layer atmosphere in a region of the Northern
Great Plains, specifically in southeastern Nebraska. This study will determine
the impacts of the rapid commencement of irrigation in the spring and resultant
changes in the land-atmosphere (L-A) coupling at the mesoscale. Graduate
students at Western Kentucky University and the University of Alabama at
Huntsville will gain experience in studying/working with weather/climate models
and gain field experience. These students will be guided by NCAR and NASA-GSFC
experts also. Meanwhile, this project will also contribute science education to
K-12 students in local middle schools. For land-atmospheric interaction and
surface hydrology communities, the proposed work could potentially bring
interesting findings to advance our understanding regarding the connection
between local irrigation and precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southern
Great Plain (SGP) is a "hot spot" where soil moisture plays an important role
affecting the local atmospheric boundary layer processes and local cloud
formation as well as precipitation. Land use change and irrigation due to
agricultural activities could be important factors affecting local land-
atmospheric interactions. This research will investigate the intra-seasonal
changes in application in irrigation and their impacts on the boundary layer
atmosphere and various processes and mechanisms involved in these changes. This
study will collect field data in collaboration with the Lower Atmospheric
Observation Facilities (LAOF) of the University Consortium for Atmospheric
Research (UCAR) and conduct model simulations to further understand the impacts
of irrigation on the atmosphere. To further understand land-atmosphere
interactions and coupling, this study will use the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model centered on southeastern Nebraska, a region containing
strong soil moisture gradients due to widespread application of irrigation.