* 1720727
* CREST-PRF: Linking physiology and demography in the Eastern Mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki
* EHR,HRD
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Alex Mercado-Molina, Mercado-Molina          Alex           E
* Fellowship Award
* Emanuel WAddell
* 11/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Aquatic Chemistry and the
Environment (CAChE) at Florida International University. The project will focus
on how mercury (Hg) affects organisms' physiology, vital rates, and local
population growth. The Everglades, a network of interconnected freshwater
ecosystems that includes local areas contaminated by (Hg) and its methylated or
organic form, methylmercury, will provide a natural laboratory for this study.
The eastern mosquitofish, Gambusia holbrooki, will be used as a model species to
document the demographic and population consequences of physiological stress
induced by water contaminants (Hg). Since the eastern mosquitofish play a
critical role in the Everglades food webs, this project will advance our
knowledge and understanding of how human-induced contaminants affect aquatic
biota. Findings from this study will be useful for designing conservation and
restoration activities. The research will contribute to the postdoctoral
training of a Latin American student, thus increasing the number of
underrepresented minority candidates pursuing a career in STEM, an important
goal of the CREST-CAChE. In addition, this research project will be integrated
into the education and outreach program at the Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the research is to determine whether the organism's
physiological response to environmental stress regulates individual and
population performance. Although other studies have examined the demographic
consequences of stress in aquatic organisms, studies considering multiple life-
history traits (e.g. growth, survival, and reproduction) are scarce.
Furthermore, research examining how local population dynamics are affected by
variation in patterns of resource allocation due to physiological stress, are
warranted. This study will also test the life-history trade-off hypothesis as
the basis to understand species' adaptation to environmental conditions by
measuring the relationship between organisms' physiological conditions and
demographic and population performance. This project will address such gaps by
measuring, both in the field and in controlled lab experiments, the demographic
response of G. holbrooki to mercury-induced physiological stress. The
demographic data (growth, survival, and reproductive output) will be used to
develop stage-based population matrix models to estimate population growth rates
under different physiological pressures. By combining empirical physiological
data with demographic modeling, the proposed study will be among the first to
test such a relationship directly. The outcomes of this study will provide
quantitative evidence of the success (or failure) of using physiological
measurements as a biomarker to determine the effects of water contaminants in
the demography and life-history traits of aquatic organisms.