* 1720276
* OP: Variational Principles, Minimization Diagrams, and Mixed Finite Elements in Computational Geometric Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Gerard Awanou, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

In many devices, including projection displays, laser weapons, and medical
illuminators, it is required to accurately control light. The fundamental
question to be addressed by this research project in computational geometric
optics is the efficient design of lenses and mirrors through provably convergent
numerical methods. The goal of the project is to develop improved efficient and
theoretically sound algorithms for a variety of illumination problems. The
project involves training of graduate students through involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available tools for the design of refractors and
reflectors are limited, and some are not backed up by a sound theory. Promising
approaches consist in solving numerically the associated nonlinear partial
differential equations of Monge-Ampere type and variational methods that solve
the illumination problem as an equation in measures. Existing methods based on
partial differential equations make ad hoc assumptions and do not address
appropriately the unusual boundary conditions for these problems. On the other
hand, most existing variational methods scale poorly with the size of the
problem. This has created a need for improved efficient and robust numerical
methods based on rigorous analysis to solve computational geometric optics
problems. This project aims to: (1) implement and analyze an efficient
variational method, based on minimization diagrams, for computing solutions of a
variety of illumination problems; (2) address the numerical resolution of the
relevant partial differential equations with a provably convergent and efficient
finite-difference method; and (3) solve the relevant nonlinear equations with
mixed finite elements based on approximations by smooth functions. The project
will also investigate the convergence properties of the different approaches. It
is anticipated that the results of the project will identify which approach is
the most efficient.