* 1720129
* Building a Grades K-2 Early Algebra Learning Progression Prototype for Diverse Populations
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Maria Blanton, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,617,966.00

Research indicates that students need sustained algebra instruction throughout
Grades K-12 mathematics education, if their informal intuitions about
mathematical structure and relationships are to be transformed into the more
formal ways of mathematical thinking. Currently, however, no research-based
models are available to guide the development, characterization, and assessment
of young children's algebraic thinking, particularly at the start of formal
schooling. This study will design a curricular framework for developing
children's algebraic thinking across Grades K-2, with a particular focus on
understanding how to support the teaching and learning of algebra with students
in at-risk settings. Study outcomes will include a prototype Grades K-2
instructional sequence, related assessments, and characterizations of
progressions in students' thinking as they advance through the instructional
sequence. The impact of this work would be to provide a critical roadmap for
teaching and learning algebra in Grades K-2 that can clarify and deepen the role
of algebra in the elementary grades, strengthen current college and career
readiness standards and practices, and provide curricular support for elementary
teachers in systematically developing children's algebraic
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will use design research to develop and
empirically test a K-2 Early Algebra Learning Progression prototype for diverse
learners. The context for this study is a North Carolina elementary school,
which consists of a student population that is 64% non-white, with 63%
categorized as low SES and 27% as English Language Learners. The sample consists
of approximately 60 Grades K-2 students. To empirically test the prototype's
framework, learning goals, and instructional sequence, classroom teaching
experiments (CTEs) will be conducted in conjunction with individual student
interviews. These interviews will be conducted at three time points (pre, mid,
and post) during the CTEs. Qualitative methods of analysis will be used to
identify themes regarding children's understanding of core algebraic thinking
practices and concepts in CTE and interview data. Quantitative methods will also
be used to identify patterns of growth in students' algebraic thinking from
interview data. Results will be used to refine the framework, goals, and
sequence, as well as to identify levels of sophistication in children's thinking
as they advance through the sequence. Interview assessments conducted during the
CTEs will be analyzed for psychometric soundness to ensure they are valid and
reliable. In particular, inter-rater reliability measures will be used to ensure
that coding of interview data is consistent, internal consistency estimates of
reliability will be calculated and used to remove or modify items, and stability
of the assessment items will be examined through within-subject correlations of
common items and used to remove or modify items. For validity, observed item
difficulty will be correlated with predicted item difficulty by the project's
expert advisory board to identify items that need modification or
deletion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.