* 1720334
* Developing Teacher Noticing in Engineering in an Online Professional Development Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Merredith Portsmore, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 564,443.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). The project will research how elementary
(K-5) teachers in the Teacher Engineering Education Program (TEEP) program
progress in one particular aspect of responsive teaching, noticing student
thinking. TEEP includes four graduate-level courses that help them learn
engineering content and pedagogical approaches. There has been little
investigation of teacher professional development in engineering design. The
work that has been done focuses on increasing teachers' content knowledge and
familiarity in engineering. Most teacher professional development and research
focus on teachers learning engineering content and process, with less attention
on helping teachers develop new instructional practices necessary to help
students navigate the complex, ill-defined problems in engineering. TEEP focuses
on helping teachers develop practices of responsive teaching in engineering
design, where teachers base their instructional moves on what they notice in
their students are doing and saying. Project research will also contribute to
literature on how to support responsive teaching in web-based environments,
expanding understanding of how design principles and features developed in in-
person professional development settings can be implemented online. The project
will refine a program for engineering teachers nationwide, identify key features
that are effective in developing teachers' practice, and create video resources
for other professional development programs to use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address three research questions: (1) What do beginning engineering
teachers notice in students' engineering design work? (2) What shifts occur in
teachers' noticing over the course of a professional development program focused
on responsive teaching and how do these shifts correlate with key features of
the program? (3) What shifts occur in how teachers' talk about their goals for
students' engineering and their instructional practice? The project will conduct
independent analyses from two cohorts of teachers of three data streams: pre-
post interviews about practice; teacher-captured classroom videos; video-
stimulated interviews, and teachers' coursework. The analyses will then connect
these analyses to address the research questions. Videocases of students'
engineering will be disseminated for other teacher educators to use in
supporting teacher noticing. The research outcomes of the research will not only
advance our understandings of teacher learning, but will provide evidence that
teachers can recognize, value, and leverage students' diverse resources for
engineering. Research on the TEEP program will also provide much-needed
empirical support on whether and how online programs can be effective for
teachers' instructional practice.