* 1720533
* Mathematical Learning via Architectural Design and Modeling Using E-Rebuild
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Gordon Erlebacher, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,025,271.00

This project will explore the learning of mathematics through architectural
tasks in an online simulation game, E-Rebuild. There is a need to connect
mathematics to real world contexts and problems. In the game-based architectural
simulation, students will be able to complete tasks such as building and
constructing structures while using mathematics and problem solving. The
learning platform will be flexible so teachers can customize tasks for their
students. The project will examine how to collect data about students' learning
from data generated as they play the game. The project will explore how students
learn mathematics using the simulation and how the simulation can be included in
middle school mathematics learning. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
includes two major research questions. First, how will the design of a scalable
game-based, design-centered learning platform promote coordination and
application of math representation for problem solving? Second, how and under
what implementation circumstances will using a scalable architectural game-based
learning platform improve students multi-stranded mathematical proficiency
(i.e., understanding, problem solving and positive disposition)? A key feature
of the project is stealth-assessment or data collected and logged as students
use the architectural simulation activities that can be used to understand their
mathematics learning. The project uses a design-based research approach to
gather data from students and teachers that will inform the design of the
learning environment. The qualitative and quantitative data will also be used to
understand what students are learning as they play the game and how teachers are
interacting with their students. The project will include a mixed methods study
to compare classrooms using the architectural activities to classrooms that are
using typical activities.