* 1720633
* MRSEC:  Illinois Materials Research Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Catherine Murphy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 16,150,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Illinois Materials Research
Science and Engineering Center is to perform fundamental, innovative materials
research that has applications to societal needs, while supporting
interdisciplinary education and training of students in materials design,
understanding, and application. The scientific research comprises two highly
interdisciplinary groups. The first group aims to revolutionize our ability to
store and process information, via a new type of control of magnetism in
materials known as anti-ferromagnets. In particular, the research focuses on
controlling the behavior of these unconventional materials, which overcome the
fundamental size and switching time limits of conventional magnetic memory
storage such as currently used in computer disk drives. The second research
group focuses on designing electronic materials that can withstand large
deformations, such as bending and crumpling. Results of this research will
enable many new applications, including wearable electronics and devices
integrated with biological tissues, which require electronic materials that can
be reversibly bent without degrading. The research activities of the Center are
tightly integrated with education, outreach, and collaborative activities.
Activities focused on science communication are designed to create a cadre of
effective science communicators and enable the public to better assess and
appreciate scientific results. Workshops and internships foster enhanced
connections between academia, industry, and national labs. Advanced training for
a diverse group of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers produces well-trained scientists who can push the boundaries of
materials research in industry and academia, and increases the pipeline for the
future scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Illinois Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center is to perform fundamental, innovative research, broadly
centered on understanding the dynamic properties of materials that has
applications to societal needs, while supporting interdisciplinary education and
training of students in materials design, understanding, and application. The
research comprises two highly interdisciplinary groups. The Metallic
Antiferromagnetic Materials: Ultrafast Charge, Lattice, and Magnetization
Dynamics group advances understanding and control of metallic antiferromagnetic
materials using ultrafast optics and currents, as well as fast temperature
excursions. The key goal is to answer open questions concerning the coupling of
magnetic order, optical fields, electronic excitations, and lattice vibrations
that underlie fundamental limits on the control of magnetization dynamics. This
work will enable the development of new technologies for information storage and
processing. The Active Interfaces between Highly Deformable Nanomaterials group
transforms understanding of the link between deformations of 2D heterostructures
and molecular assemblies, and the resultant changes in electronic, chemical, and
optical properties. It explores a novel regime where non-uniform deformations
are large compared with material dimensions, resulting in emergent properties
and functionalities. Applications include flexible, reconfigurable electronics
and photonics, as well as new nano-bio technologies such as 3D sensors. The
science of the Center facilitates breakthroughs in understanding and utilizing
the dynamic properties of materials, advances applications in key areas,
increases interest, knowledge and skills for a significant number of students at
many levels, and both expands opportunities and increases the pipeline for the
future scientific workforce.