* 1720613
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Productive Use of High-Leverage Student Mathematical Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Laura Van Zoest, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,484,165.00

The project will examine how secondary mathematics teachers respond to and use
students' thinking during whole class discussion. An ongoing challenge for
teachers is making the best use of students' emerging mathematical ideas during
whole class discussion. Teachers need to draw on the ideas students have
developed in order to create opportunities for learning about significant
mathematical concepts. This study will create tasks specifically designed to
generate opportunities for teachers to build on students' thinking and then use
classroom observation and analysis of classroom video to develop tools to
support teachers in leading whole class discussion. The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the teaching practice of
building on student thinking, a practice in which teachers engage students in
making sense of their peers? mathematical ideas in ways that help the whole
class move forward in their mathematical understanding. This study examines how
teachers incorporate this practice into mathematics discussions in secondary
classrooms by designing tasks that generate opportunities for teachers to build
on students' thinking and by studying teachers? orchestration of whole class
discussions around student responses to these tasks. The project engages
teacher-researchers in exploring the building practice. The teacher-researchers
will use the project-designed tasks in their classrooms and then engage in a
cycle of analysis of their own teaching with the research team. Data collection
and analysis will rely on video analysis of classrooms, teachers? reflections on
task enactment, and data collected during research team meetings convened with
teacher-researchers to analyze practice.