* 1720206
* Collaborative Research: Parent-Teacher Organizations and the Distribution of Learning Opportunities
* SBE,SES
* 09/06/2016,09/30/2020
* Linda Renzulli, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2020
* USD 197,906.00

Parent-Teacher Organizations and the Distribution of Learning
Opportunities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses parent-teacher
organizations (PTOs) as a lens to view the ways in which parents and communities
work together to contribute to children's education. The authors also consider
the consequences for those collective efforts for educational inequality. While
prior research largely views PTOs as inconsequential based on their small
contributions to school finances, more than 90 percent of parents of elementary
school children report attending a PTO meeting. The collective action that
parents undertake via PTOs often contributes to the definition of school
cultures and shapes the distribution of learning opportunities within schools.
Since PTO participation rates, as well as access to the financial,
organizational, and social capital resources that PTOs generate, vary
substantially across racial/ethnic and socio-economic groups; PTOs may
simultaneously benefit some students and play a significant role in the
reproduction of inequality across and within schools. To make sense of parental
collective actions and their consequences, the authors develop three
theoretically-informed hypotheses about how PTOs operated in schools: PTOs as
generators of resources, PTOs as social capital, and PTOs as mechanisms for
opportunity hoarding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analyses test these hypotheses by
addressing the following research questions: How do parent-teacher organizations
affect elementary school practices as well as student behavioral and academic
outcomes? To what extent do parent-teacher organizations contribute to
educational inequality both between and within schools? To do so, the authors
construct an unprecedented data archive describing elementary school parent-
teacher organizations. Working with the Urban Institute's National Center for
Charitable Statistics' database of Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filings for
U.S. non-profit organizations, the authors have extract data describing parent-
teacher organizations affiliated with U.S. public schools between 2005 and 2012
and link these records with (1) school-level data from the National Center of
Education Statistics? nationally representative Schools and Staffing Survey
(SASS) and (2) student-level data from all North Carolina public elementary
schools. This work, coupled with qualitative research designed to validate IRS
measures of parents? collective action, will significantly contribute to the
field of Sociology as well as educational practice by shedding light on how
these organizations form and operate.