* 1720364
* Supergravity Tools for Holography
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Oscar Varela, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 165,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Oscar Varela at Utah State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General relativity and quantum field theory
have traditionally been thought to be irreconcilable theories. The former
governs the large-scale structure of the universe and is manifestly classical.
The latter describes the fundamental interactions --- electromagnetic, weak, and
strong --- that operate at a subatomic level. But, could it be possible that
these two seemingly different theories were actually two different sides of the
same coin? Could they be regarded as dual manifestations of an overarching set
of physical principles? If this were the case, general relativity and quantum
field theory would complement rather than conflict each other, as they would be
equivalent, albeit with different applicability regimes. In his research,
Professor Varela will develop aspects of this idea, which is commonly known as
the so-called "AdS/CFT correspondence". This research advances the national
interest by promoting the development of science in a fundamental direction, by
developing relations among the laws of physics at deeper and deeper levels. It
will also have broader impacts by providing training for junior physicists and
by disseminating its results to the general public, especially to members of
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Varela will study different aspects of the AdS/CFT correspondence with a focus
in the supergravity regime where tighter control of the correspondence is
attained. New tools will be introduced and developed to construct solutions to
the supergravity equations that contain anti-de Sitter space. These methods will
exploit the reformulations of higher-dimensional supergravities that make
exceptional symmetries manifest, and will also utilize restricted tensor and
duality hierarchies. Effective lower-dimensional supergravity theories with AdS
vacua will be constructed and their embeddings into string theory elucidated.
Finally, the field theory duals of those new string theory solutions will be
investigated.