* 1720600
* Lightning and Thunderstorm Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Paul Krehbiel, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,129,309.00

This is a continuation of ongoing research aimed at improving our understanding
of lightning discharges and discharge processes, as well as the electrical
structure of thunderstorms. The studies will be conducted utilizing the flash-
continuous broadband VHF interferometer developed under our current NSF grant,
along with 3-D Lightning Mapping Array (LMA) observations and fast and slow
electric field change measurements. The observations are able to characterize
lightning inside storms with unprecedented detail, both spatially and
temporally. A particular initial focus of the studies will be obtaining ground-
truth observations for validating optical observations of lightning from space,
to be obtained by the Geosynchronous Lightning Mapper (GLM) on board the
recently launched GOES-R satellite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The studies will follow up on results obtained in the current
grant that showed how high-power narrow bipolar events (NBEs) are produced -
namely by a newly-recognized phenomenon called fast positive breakdown. Further
investigation showed that the fast breakdown occurs with a wide range of
strengths, hinting that potentially all lightning discharges are initiated by
the fast positive process. The research will be aimed at substantiating and
extending these results from additional observations of NBEs and flash
initiation in Florida storms, currently being obtained in abundance at Kennedy
Space Center. A particular focus in this regard will be determining how the
negative breakdown of intracloud (IC) and negative cloud-to-ground (-CG) flashes
develops subsequent to initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another focus will be to
home in on the source and cause of highly energetic terrestrial gamma ray
flashes (TGFs). TGFs are increasingly being shown to occur during the initial
stages on IC and -CG flashes. This has been further demonstrated by ongoing LMA
and electric field change observations at the University of Utah's cosmic ray-
detecting Telescope Array (TA), which has detected several possible downward
TGFs. Additional studies, in this case utilizing the broadband interferometer,
are to be obtained at the newly-established High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
gamma ray observatory, situated at 4 km altitude in southeastern Mexico.
Different discharge processes and lightning types, such as precursor, screening,
anomalous polarity, and lull discharges will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The GLM validation
studies will valuably assist in understanding and interpreting the upcoming GLM
observations, which will quickly become a major part of nowcasting in National
Weather Service operations. The voluminous, state-of-the-art INTF and LMA data
obtained from the KSC study will be archived at KSC and made available online
for analysis by investigators and students at other institutions. As part of the
GLM validation study, the Washington DC and Wallops VA LMA networks will be
joined together and expanded northward to provide detailed lightning coverage
over a large extent of the east coast region. Ongoing analysis of the Sakurajima
volcano will be providing insights into the electrification processes of
volcanic eruptions. Finally, development and dissemination of lightning mapping
and related technology to other research communities and operational users will
be continued.