* 1720838
* Collaborative Research: High School Students' Climate Literacy Through Epistemology of Scientific Modeling
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Cory Forbes, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,136,602.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will focus on learning about model based reasoning in
science, and will develop, implement, study, and refine a 6-week climate science
module for high school students. The module will feature use of a web-based
climate modeling application, and the project team will collect and analyze
evidence of model-based reasoning about climate phenomena among students.
Scientists routinely use data-intensive, computer-based models to study complex
natural phenomena, and modeling has become a core objective of current science
curriculum standards. The project will provide new insights about student use of
scientific models to understand natural phenomena, and advance knowledge about
curriculum, instruction, and assessment practices that promote model-based
reasoning among students.

This 4-year Design and Development project will examine use of a web-based
climate modeling tool designed to provide non-scientists experiences with
climate modeling in high school geoscience classrooms. A theoretically-grounded
and empirically tested approach to design-based research, instructional design,
and assessment development will be used in an iterative cycle of instructional
innovation and education research to find answers to two research questions: 1)
How do secondary students develop epistemic and conceptual knowledge about
climate? And 2) How do secondary science teachers support student use of climate
modeling application to develop epistemic and conceptual knowledge about
climate? Data associated with conceptual and epistemic knowledge, curriculum-
embedded modeling tasks, interviews, and videorecorded observations of
instruction will be used to study impacts of the new curriculum module on 55
high school science teachers and 3,000 students. Project participants include
students from low socioeconomic populations and other groups underrepresented in
STEM fields. The curriculum will also serve as a resource for an existing,
online professional development course at the American Museum of Natural History
that engages teachers nationwide.