* 1720996
* Research on the Utility of Abstraction as a Guiding Principle for Learning about the Nature of Models in Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Daniel Capps, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 04/30/2021
* USD 449,849.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. Contemporary science education reforms consider modeling as a means to
understanding science ideas and as an essential scientific practice to be
learned. Modeling is the practice of developing and refining representations (or
"models") as analogs of scientific phenomena. Important to the practice of
modeling is the idea that, as an analog, a model draws out (or "abstracts") some
as opposed to all aspects of a phenomenon. However, a well-known problem in
modeling instruction is that leaners have difficulty understanding this
essential point. Learners often think of models as literal interpretations, or
replicas, of what they represent. The investigators hypothesize that engaging
students in a process of abstraction -- that is, drawing out common structures
from multiple scientific phenomena -- during the creation (or "synthesis") of
their own model will help students better understand the nature of scientific
models. Importantly, this approach will help students discover that a scientific
model is not simply a literal interpretation, or replica, of any single
phenomenon. Sixteen teachers and their estimated 960 students from economically
challenged communities in Georgia and Maine will participate in and benefit from
the research study in the context of high school earth and environmental science
classes. The project will develop a short instructional sequence and new student
learning assessments that are implemented in earth science classes. The findings
will help the field to understand whether the process of abstracting from
multiple phenomena during model construction supports students' understanding of
scientific models in relation to earth science ideas and the cross-cutting
concept of scale. The project will provide professional development workshops to
up to forty-six teachers over three years as means of recruiting research
participants and to cultivate teacher leadership around the new approach to
modeling. The developed products and the research findings will be shared with
researchers, teacher educators, and teachers through science education journals
and conferences.

This Exploratory Learning Strand research study builds upon prior work of
investigators at University of Georgia and University of Maine by rigorously
testing their hypothesis that that engaging students in the process of
abstracting from multiple source phenomena during model synthesis supports more
scientifically accurate understandings of the nature of models. The research has
the potential to (1) generate new knowledge about the potential value of
abstraction as a guiding principle of learning about models and modeling
practice; (2) identify ways in which specific classroom conditions, including
teacher talk and actions, enable or hinder student learning about abstraction in
models and modeling practice; and (3) demonstrate how teachers translate the
modeling approach to other science disciplines they teach. Teachers will be
recruited through existing partnerships with schools and through professional
development workshops offered to teachers nearby the two universities. To
address the first two goals, the investigators will develop and test a two-part
instructional sequence that addresses core ideas in earth science and the cross-
cutting concept of scale. The first component of the instructional sequence is a
typical model-based inquiry, and the second component requires that students
abstract structures from multiple phenomena during the synthesis of their own
models. Twelve teachers and their students will be randomly assigned to either
the treatment or the control group. The treatment group will experience the two-
part instructional sequence. The control group will initially not experience the
second component, but will have an opportunity to do so at the conclusion of the
study. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of classroom observations,
interviews with teachers, student knowledge tests, student work, and teacher
logs will be used to determine the effectiveness of abstracting during model
synthesis and classroom conditions that enable or hinder students' learning when
the approach is used. To address the third goal, investigators will document the
experience of four teachers as they develop and implement a similar
instructional sequence in other science disciplines, providing preliminary
evidence on the broader utility of the synthesis-through-abstraction approach to
modeling. A new research assessment for measuring students' understanding of the
nature of models, core ideas of earth science, and the cross-cutting concept of
scale may be broadly useful for future research on learning at the intersection
of the three knowledge dimensions. Findings will be shared by traditional means,
such as papers in peer-reviewed research and practitioner journals and
conference presentations. Investigators will conduct professional development
workshops for teachers in the third year to disseminate the products and
findings of the research to practitioner audiences and to further cultivate
participating teachers' leadership around this novel approach to modeling
practice in science education.