* 1720403
* A Southern California PULSE Vision &amp; Change Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Richard Cardullo, California Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,180.00

The Southern California (SC) Partnership for Life Sciences Education (PULSE)
Institute (SCPI) will launch a network of faculty and administrators from
diverse institutions in Southern California to promote departmental adoption of
recommendations from Vision and Change (V&amp;C). As a unique part of the
developing ecosystem of PULSE in the complex and densely populated LA Basin, the
proposed SCPI will serve as a pilot for future institutes in the Southwest as
well as other regions. The participants will develop strategies and action plans
for transforming life science at their institution and will be committed to
assessment of the project with the results informing other STEM-reform
initiatives. The SCPI will use a "systems thinking" approach as a strategy that
has been shown to be successful for a variety of other organizations. A unique
aspect of the institute will be the formation of the PULSE Catalyst Program
(PCP) which will accelerate the spread of V&amp;C in the Southern California
regions via a grass roots strategy that is synergistic with other PULSE efforts.
The Southern California and Southwest region has unique demographics compared to
other PULSE regions, and this effort will significantly impact Hispanic Serving
Institutions and community colleges which are in important
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCPI team will hold a 1.5 day planning
meeting followed by a 3-day institute for teams of three representatives from
several schools representing four institution types: research universities,
comprehensive universities, four year colleges, and community colleges. Specific
objectives of the institute include assessing departments and building capacity
for change, taking action and supporting implementation, and assessing and
improving action plans. The SCPI will use research-based assessment of the
short-term and long-term impacts, and "close the loop" by using evidence to
continuously improved reform efforts across Southern California and the
Southwest. Additional elements include initiating strong regional support
networks between departments and professional organizations such as the Society
for Native Americans and Chicanos in Science (SACNAS) and addressing the need to
increase the number of Hispanic and Native American students in science
research, leadership, and teaching careers at all levels. The SCPI will also
encourage broader collaborations between the institutions. The institute will
include participants from diverse backgrounds in order to provide the broadest
perspective and lead to sustainable change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).