* 1720579
* EAGER: Techniques for Deploying Mission Critical IoT Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Fanxin Kong, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2021
* USD 285,654.00

The rapid deployment of sensing, computing and communication devices is
resulting in significant growth in Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure, and
in increased use of this infrastructure for applications in many domains such as
medical, agricultural, environmental, commercial, and homeland security. The
area of sensor networks, and cloud and edge computing has contributed
significantly to the development of IoT. However, IoT presents a more
challenging environment as compared to edge computing and sensor networks:
Specially challenging is the deployment of mission-critical applications -
applications whose performance may deeply impact business/organization
operations. The goal of this proposal is to develop techniques to deploy mission
critical applications with stringent requirements in IoT environments.
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will address the problem of deploying mission-critical
systems by focusing on the following tasks: (a) The first thrust will be
development of techniques to customize deployments to meet the needs of specific
applications. One would like to design the IoT software base to be generic so
that it can be used by a wide range of applications. However, generic software
may not be suitable to to meet the requirements of mission critical
applications. This may force the designers to manually develop services
specialized for specific applications. The project will develop techniques that
can automatically optimize generic software to obtain customized versions to
meet the needs of specific applications. (b) The second thrust is the
development of compositional techniques that will systematically exploit
commonalities between the applications. As there may be multiple applications
that share the underlying resources, exploiting such commonalities will be
essential to meet stringent performance requirements. Extensive performance
evaluation will be conducted to evaluate the performance of implementations
generated by the proposed techniques with respect to manually developed
implementations.