* 1720789
* SBIR Phase I:  Rationally-designed, modular imaging agents for the targeted detection of tumors.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Stephen McCraith, RJS Biologics L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This NSF SBIR Phase I project takes a unique holistic approach to both tumor
imaging and cancer drug delivery. This approach harnesses cancer cell proteins
already in the body to allow selective delivery of tumor imaging agents or
cancer-killing drugs to, and into, cancer cells. By choosing cancer-specific
targeting proteins, the drugs will be transported primarily into cancer cells
and undesirable off-target enrichment will be diminished. The goal is to
mitigate drug uptake in non-cancerous fast-growing cells like; heart cells, bone
marrow, skin or hair follicles. Treated patients will benefit from improved
effectiveness of their cancer therapies. Such selective delivery should permit
lower dosages of drug to be administered while also lowering the risks of
unwanted, problematic side-effects. This cost-effective approach is well
supported by the NSF?s core mission for the technical development of innovative
drug delivery systems.

It remains challenging to provide sensitive tumor diagnosis and near-
simultaneous assessments of response to cancer treatments in treated
individuals. Of all the standard monitoring modalities, radiographic examination
has been the most widely used to measure treatment response. However, some
studies suggest up to 10-40% of cancers may not be measurable by currently
available technologies. Various delivery approaches have been used to take
advantage of endogenous molecules to transport imaging agents or drugs with
increased specificity into cancer cells. Most of these approaches utilize
macromolecular ligands or cell surface receptor binding approaches. This
proposal takes a mechanistically innovative small-molecule approach. By
harnessing the activities of endogenous inflammatory proteins produced in
abundance by cancer cells and by cells within the tumor micro-environment, small
molecule cancer drugs can be transported with efficiency to the site of their
intended effect. Selective and accurate placement of a chemically-related
diagnostic agent into cancer cells should allow a cost-effective, more
personalized and exceedingly sensitive view of treatment response.