* 1720146
* Algorithms for Arithmetic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Alexander Hulpke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 79,957.00

The objects, called arithmetic groups, considered in this project are sets of
matrices (representing symmetries of a space) whose entries can be considered as
integral coordinates in a geometrical object. They lie at the intersection of
Algebra, Geometry and Number Theory. If a number of such matrices are given, we
consider the subset that can be formed by combining these matrices that is
applying the symmetries in turn. It is called the subgroup (generated by the
matrices). A natural question now arises on whether finitely many translated
copies of such a given subgroup amount to the whole set, in this case the
subgroup is called arithmetic. This question has come up in many concrete
examples brought up by researchers in number theory or geometry but so far the
only solution approach have been ad-hoc methods for small cases. The PI will
design new algorithms for answering this question on a computer and provide an
open-source implementation of this algorithm. The project will also train a
graduate student in the development of mathematical software.

The PI will develop new algorithms for calculations with classes of arithmetic
groups, in particular developing methods that may determine whether a subgroup
given by generating matrices is itself arithmetic. Practical implementations of
these algorithms will be made available as a package for the computer algebra
system GAP. By utilizing state-of-the art techniques for finite matrix groups,
developed only in the last years, this project will make significant progress on
algorithmic questions for infinite integral matrix groups, extending current
methods that have been mostly restricted to the case of finite groups. The
approach envisioned will intermesh calculations with finitely presented groups
and with matrix groups in a novel way. Several subtasks require the development
of new algorithms for finite groups, as well as for coset enumeration, and thus
contribute to the algorithmic theory of finite and finitely presented groups.
The software developed as part of the project will be of use to investigators in
the many areas encountering arithmetic groups -- geometry, number theory,
theoretical physics, and others. The project will contribute to the development
of the open-source computer algebra system GAP (and thus also to the system
SAGE) that is used by a multitude of researchers world-wide, has been cited in
over 2000 refereed publications, and also has seen use as a tool in
undergraduate abstract algebra classes. Integrating research and education this
project will contribute to the training of a graduate student in developing
mathematical software and utilizing standard open-source software development
tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.