* 1720225
* Collaborative Research:   Zero Forcing on Graphs: Computation and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Illya Hicks, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 204,429.00

The concept of networks is a mathematical term used to analyze relationships
between objects (e.g. people, places, and things). Of particular importance is
the study of how influence propagates throughout networks, especially how one
can deduce the influence of an entire network by monitoring a few members. The
objective of this project is to establish a comprehensive knowledge base for
developing, implementing, and applying computational methods related to this
phenomenon. As a result, this research has strong connections to applications
related to social networks, electrical power networks, and quantum systems. This
project also supports a concerted effort to engage underrepresented groups
within the research. Hence, the impact of this educational component includes
the development of underrepresented groups within the next generation of STEM
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical contribution of this
project is the integration of combinatorial optimization, spectral graph theory,
and numerical analysis techniques to examine zero-forcing in networks. In
particular, the research team will incorporate branch decomposition techniques
and linear and integer programming techniques to significantly increase the
computational efficacy of algorithms to solve zero-forcing problems on graphs.
The models and algorithms that result from this study will be validated using
experimental data and also by data attainable publicly like electrical grid
data. This research will significantly advance the knowledge base of
combinatorial optimization, integer programming, and spectral graph theory while
also contributing to the increased scalability and efficiency for solving
computationally hard problems related to the aforementioned applications.