* 1720023
* OP: Collaborative Research: Compatible Discretizations for Maxwell Models in Nonlinear Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Yingda Cheng, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Nonlinear optics is the study of the behavior of light in nonlinear media. This
field has developed into a significant branch of physics since the introduction
of intense lasers with high peak powers. Compared with the huge amount of
literature on simulations of Maxwell's equations in linear optical media,
developing mathematically well-understood computational tools for space-time
models in nonlinear optical media is relatively less tackled by the
computational math community. Major advancement in this aspect can provide the
scientific community reliable and accurate tools to simulate and to understand
nonlinear optical phenomena, which hence can be better harnessed for practical
applications.

The objective of the collaborative research program is to make significant
advances in the understanding and simulations of Maxwell models in nonlinear
optics with the aim of: (1) providing robust simulation tools for the nonlinear
optics community, (2) developing novel mathematical and numerical techniques
that are specifically tailored for different types of nonlinear models. The
specific technical aspect includes the development of energy-stable time
discretizations as well as two classes of spatial discretizations, discontinuous
Galerkin methods and mimetic finite difference methods, for the propagation of
electromagnetic waves in nonlinear (dispersive) optical media. Both macroscopic
phenomenological and microscopic quantum descriptions will be considered for
modeling the nonlinear material responses. Applications involving femtosecond
soliton propagation, harmonic generation, self focusing, among others will be
simulated and compared to existing time domain methods. This collaborative
program is strengthened by a cohesive research plan that relies on the
complementary expertise of each principal investigator. The educational
components are integrated through the training of graduate students.