* 1720202
* RUI:   Amplitudes in Gauge theory and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Stephen Naculich, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Stephen Naculich at
Bowdoin College.

The research of Professor Naculich is part of an on-going effort by the
worldwide community of theoretical elementary particle physicists to develop
mathematical models to explain the nature and behavior of the smallest
constituents of matter (the so-called "elementary particles"). More
specifically, this research aims at developing more efficient mathematical tools
for calculating the predictions of a certain class of existing theories known as
"gauge theories", and extending these methods to more general theories. A second
goal of this research is to explore links between gauge theories on the one
hand, and theories that describe the behavior of gravitons, the particles
responsible for the force of gravity, on the other. The insights gained through
this research will be disseminated through journal publications, seminars, and
conference proceedings. As a result, this research will advance the national
interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental
directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical law. This project is
also expected to have significant broader impacts, since it integrally involves
participation by undergraduate students. It therefore will contribute to their
education by providing hands-on training in research methods in theoretical
physics, as well as exposure to diverse topics such as quantum mechanics, group
theory, and quantum field theory. Such involvement will encourage and prepare
highly-talented students for graduate study and careers in critical scientific
fields.

In more technical terms, this project will focus on the structure of
perturbative scattering amplitudes in gauge theories and gravity and the
relations between them. In particular, the research will involve continued
exploration of the recently discovered "color-factor symmetry" of gauge-theory
amplitudes, particularly at loop level, its extension to more general theories,
and its relationship to color-kinematic duality. This project will further
investigate Cachazo-He-Yuan representations for gauge-theory and gravity
amplitudes involving massive particles, and also loop-level amplitudes, with
particular focus on infrared divergences. This research will extend the study of
the classification of operators in effective field theories contributing to
subleading and subsubleading soft theorems. Finally, this project will continue
to explore the Regge limit of gravitational scattering amplitudes, focusing on
the interplay with infrared divergences and soft theorems, and the relationship
with analogous issues in gauge theory.