* 1720541
* Support for the International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust (HOST)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Swarup Bhunia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 04/30/2018
* USD 18,000.00

Many computing infrastructures on which we depend rely on the platforms being
secure and trustworthy. Hardware is at the most fundamental abstraction level on
which software runs. Trusted hardware platforms comprise the backbone for
successful deployment and operation of these infrastructures. Research in recent
years shows that as tampering and reverse engineering mature in their
sophistication, the challenges in guaranteeing the trust and security of these
components also grow. The International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security
and Trust (HOST) aims to continue its role as a premiere forum that invites
novel solutions to address these challenges.

Security attacks are growing in sophistication, and increasingly target
hardware. Backdoors inserted into electronic designs can allow for silent
intrusion into the system. Furthermore, new forms of attacks that exploit side-
channel signals are being developed. In addition, intellectual-property (IP)
protection is becoming a major concern in the globalized, horizontal
semiconductor business model. The intellectual merit of this proposed activity
includes professional development for undergraduate and graduate students as
well as continued growth of the symposium. Preparation has begun for HOST 2017
to be held in the Washington, DC Metro Area. This project provides opportunities
for 36 students to receive travel support (i.e., registration, transportation,
and lodging) to attend HOST 2017. Their attendance enables them to learn about
the latest tools, design methods, architectures, circuits, and novel
applications of secure hardware. Technical contributions from previous symposia
have covered topics such as: (1) counterfeit detection and avoidance, (2) side
channel analysis and fault analysis, (3) hardware architectures for
cryptography, and (4) physically unclonable functions (PUFs). The travel grants
would encourage more students to consider a technical submission, participation
in hardware demonstration to a large diverse audience, or even to attend as a
means to prepare for a technical submission in future years.