* 1720917
* Collaborative Research: Mobilizing Teachers to Increase Capacity and Broaden Women's Participation in Physics
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Robynne Lock, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 04/30/2022
* USD 203,285.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project assesses the impact of scaling-up
the teaching of physics and engineering to women students in grade levels 11 and
12, particularly in reference to retention. The problem of low participation of
women in physics and engineering has been a topic of concern for decades. The
persistent underrepresentation of women in physics and engineering is not just
an equity issue but also reflects an unrealized talent pool that can help
respond to current and future challenges faced by society. The aim is to
mobilize high school physics teachers to "attract and recruit" female students
into science (physics) and engineering careers. The fundamental issues that the
project seeks is to affect increases in the number of females in physics and
engineering careers using research-informed and field-tested classroom practices
that improve female students' physics identity. The project will advance science
(physics) identity research by testing research-based approaches/interventions
with larger groups of teachers and connecting research to practice in ways that
are both widely deployable and practical for teachers to implement. The project
will also affect female participation in engineering since developing a physics
identity is strongly related to choosing engineering. The core area teachers
will be trained in addressing student identity as a physicist or
engineer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, two research universities
(Florida International University, Texas A&amp;M-Commerce) and the two largest
national organizations in physics (American Physical Society and American
Association of Physics Teachers) will work together using
approaches/interventions drawn from prior research results that will be tested
with teachers in three states (24 teachers, 8 in each state) using an
experimental design with control and treatment groups. The project proposes
three phases: 1. Refine already established interventions for improving female
physics identity for use on a massive national level which will be assessed
through previously validated and reliable surveys and sound research design; 2.
Launch a massive national campaign involving workshops, training modules, and
mass communication approaches to reach and attempt to mobilize 16,000 of the
27,000 physics teachers nationwide to attract and recruit at least one female
student to physics using the intervention approaches refines in phase 1 and
other classroom approaches shown to improve female physics identity; and 3.
Evaluate of the success of the campaign through surveys of high school physics
teachers (subjective data) and data from the Higher Education Research Institute
to monitor female student increases in freshmen declaring a physics major during
the years following the campaign (objective data). The interventions will focus
on developing female students' physics identity, a construct which has been
found to be strongly related to career choice and persistence in physics. The
project has the potential to reduce or eliminate the gender gap in the field of
physics. In addition, the increase in female physics identity is likely to also
increase female representation in engineering majors. Therefore, the work will
lay the groundwork for adapting similar methods for increasing under-
representation of females in other disciplines. The societies involved (American
Physical Society and American Association of Physics Teachers) are uniquely
positioned within the discipline to ensure a successful campaign of information
dissemination to physics teachers nationally and under-representation of females
in other disciplines as well, engineering specifically.