* 1720870
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Non-Destructive Fatigue Monitoring System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Scott Nguyen, Braket Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project proposes to develop an
advanced non-contact, non-destructive monitoring technology to reliably identify
early fatigue damage in pipelines, piping, and tubing. Current industry practice
relies on statistically based, semi-empirical models that unfortunately can have
an order of magnitude in error in predicting fatigue life, a leading failure
mode in metals that are exposed to high cycling, high strain, and/or elevated
pressures and temperatures. The United States infrastructure relies on millions
of miles of pipes, pipelines, and tubing that are critical in the transport of
valuable fluids serving a number of industries including municipal water,
production and transport of oil and gas, and chemicals in processing plants.
Unfortunately, this aging infrastructure can fail with disastrous consequences.
The successful development and commercialization of this new technology will be
a great leap in integrity monitoring, resulting in significant reduction in
costs and delays, and eliminating catastrophic failures in the field. The
estimated total addressable market for pipeline and coil tubing monitoring are
in excess of $4 billion annually.

The intellectual merit of this SBIR project centers on the demonstration of the
technical and economic feasibility of this novel fatigue monitoring technology
with a specific target of identifying when the material has reached 90% of its
actual fatigue life. The technology is based on a novel electromagnetic
measurement scheme that can effectively detect magnetic dislocations in the
material which have been shown to be early indicators of failure due to fatigue.
Using advanced analytics, strong correlations between the measured
electromagnetic properties and fatigue life can provide a direct and reliable
identifier of imminent fatigue damage without loss of material integrity. The
major challenges that this SBIR effort proposes to address are (1) engineering
an electromagnetic-based measurement technique with sufficient sensitivity to
detect the magnetic defects seen in early fatigue damage under field operating
conditions (2) developing appropriate detection algorithms to handle the
statistical variations affecting fatigue damage and (3) engineering a cost-
effective monitoring solutions compared with alternative fatigue management
practices.