* 1720256
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at UCSB
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2024
* USD 24,021,203.00

NON-TECHNICAL: The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at the
University of California, Santa Barbara develops and sustains the necessary
human and physical infrastructure to advance materials research, education, and
training in an integrative manner. The project involves a dynamic team of
investigators from six different departments whose interdisciplinary research
contributes to advancing three different topical areas within the three
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs). Research in IRG-1 focuses on
understanding interactions within novel magnetic materials to advance a plethora
of applications including refrigeration and fine-scale motion control. Research
in IRG-2 advances plastic materials with potential impact on chemical
separations and energy storage. Inspired by nature, IRG-3 establishes the
foundational design rules for creating materials for applications such as self-
healing materials and materials for biological tissue replacement. The research
in the different IRGs integrates the preparation of new materials with the
development of forefront theories to understand them, and advanced tools to
measure materials properties. In parallel, seed projects allow new researchers,
venturing in exciting research directions, to join the Center. Shared
experimental facilities are leveraged to support the project and strengthen
interactions with industry. Developing job creation through start-ups and
impacting work-force preparedness through enhancing education and outreach is a
goal that threads through all of the activities of the
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: The Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center at the University of California, Santa Barbara includes three
IRGs. The three IRGs address fundamental problems in materials research that
cannot be advanced without contributions from a team of interdisciplinary and
collaborative-domain experts. The research in each IRG integrates synthesis with
characterization and property measurement, accompanied by theoretical and
computational efforts, to advance fundamental understanding and develop
promising materials classes for a range of applications. IRG-1 aims to
understand and develop unprecedented control over the couplings between strain,
magnetization, and temperature in single- and multiphase intermetallic compounds
to advance technologies including actuation and solid-state refrigeration. IRG-2
plans to develop novel polymeric ionic liquid chemistries, understand self-
assembly and ion transport in these materials, and develop applications that
incorporate the emergent properties of multi-valent ion conductivity, light-
driven adaptive mechanics, switchable redox activity, and magnetic response.
Inspired by natural marine materials, IRG-3 aims to discover how material
assembly and innovative processing can help establish the foundational design
rules for creating versatile, graded, multiphase soft materials for eventual use
in applications such as advanced fabrics, packaging, additive manufacturing, and
tissue replacements, as well as self-shaping, self-healing, and reconfigurable
materials platforms. Alongside the research, MRSEC scientists and education
staff are dedicated to improving access to science and to building a dynamic and
inclusive workforce of scientists and engineers. The portfolio of education
programs has a core focus on undergraduate research opportunities. Outreach
activities also involve K-12 students, support of teachers to create relevant
curricula, and the broader lay public, to share current excitement in materials
research.