* 1720499
* Cybermanufacturing: Cloud-Based Incubation Ecosystem for EWOD Digital Microfluidics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Lei He, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2023
* USD 607,675.00

Electrowetting-on-dielectric (EWOD) is a mechanism that allows physical handling
of liquids with only electrical signals, such as digitizing a liquid into tiny
droplets and manipulating them on a chip, thus enabling "digital microfluidics."
As an elegantly simple platform free of pumps or valves, EWOD digital
microfluidics has been attracting high research interest in the past 15 years
and has recently been transitioned to a few commercial products in displays and
biochemistry. However, the number of labs utilizing the technology is still
small, likely due to the difficulty in translating design intent to manufactured
devices. The project will perform fundamental research to enable a cloud-based
EWOD manufacturing system to perform that translation. The resulting
cybermanufacturing ecosystem will be accessible to a wide range of users,
allowing researchers, entrepreneurs, students, and hobbyists alike to focus on
their own ideas and applications without having to master the subtleties of EWOD
engineering and manufacturing. This may be thought of as an "operating system"
for EWOD microfluidics, similar to the computer operating systems that enabled
people with no computer hardware background to use personal computers. This
cybermanufacturing system is envisioned to have a similar impact on the field of
EWOD digital microfluidics. The project includes incorporation of research
results in coursework, outreach to and involvement of undergraduate and high
school students, and collaborations with an established chip foundry and a
distinguished biochemist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will incorporate
knowledge from EWOD research in a framework of cloud-based design and
manufacturing. If manufacturing is transparent, people of a wide range of
disciplines and levels can take advantage of EWOD digital microfluidics. A
design/manufacturability engine will allow users to express their specific
intention in a step-by-step EWOD-compatible design protocol, which then will be
converted to a verified manufacturable EWOD chip layout. When an order is
placed, the design file will be sent to a chip fabrication foundry. The user may
also order an EWOD control module and ancillary modules (e.g., programmed
heating, magnetic beads), advised by the design system and community experience.
A gateway will be made available through online graphical user interface that
allows the user to operate multiple modules and systems remotely, greatly
expanding the capability and promoting collaborations. The system architecture
will ensure bottom-up, organic growth of users and providers as well as the
knowledge in design, manufacturing, and application of EWOD digital
microfluidics.