* 1720958
* Promoting Scientific Explorers Among Students with Learning Disabilities: The Design and Testing of a Grade 2 Science Program Focused on Earth's Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Sarah Powell, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 05/31/2023
* USD 2,485,966.00

A robust understanding of core science concepts and practices is necessary for
obtaining jobs in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) fields.
Despite these occupational and practical affordances, few effective
instructional tools exist for the elementary science classroom. Moreover, early
elementary school teachers have limited materials at their disposal to promote a
rich knowledge of science among the full range of learners. The purpose of this
project is to address this need by designing and empirically evaluating a second
grade science program, Scientific Explorers, aimed at promoting an early
foundation for learning science among all students, including students at risk
for or with learning disabilities in reading and mathematics. Scientific
Explorers will be designed to improve students' knowledge and understanding of
core science concepts. Recognizing the important role of early literacy and
mathematics in science learning and teaching, this project will integrate core
disciplinary ideas with critical mathematics and literacy standards. To support
students as they engage in scientific tasks associated with Earth's Systems,
this project will engineer the Scientific Explorers program around a guided
inquiry framework. Another aim of this project is to develop and empirically
validate a science assessment that measures students' knowledge and application
of core science concepts and practices related to Earth's Systems. The Discovery
Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing a mixed-method approach, this project
will investigate the feasibility and efficacy of the Scientific Explorers
program. Additional research activities will include establishing the
reliability and validity of a second grade science assessment. Approximately 40
second grade classrooms from two different geographical regions will participate
in the project. Using multilevel modeling and item response theory techniques,
this project will address five primary research questions: (1) To what extent
can teachers feasibly implement the Scientific Explorers program in authentic
education settings? (2) What is the impact of Scientific Explorers on the
science achievement of students in participating classrooms? (3) Do early
literacy skills at the beginning of second grade predict differential response
to the Scientific Explorers program? (4) Does responsiveness to the Scientific
Explorers program differ as a function of reading disability, mathematics
disability, or a learning disability in reading and mathematics (comorbid LD)?,
and (5) To what extent does the early science achievement measure demonstrate
technical adequacy (reliability and validity)?