* 1720370
* Electricity Generation and Enhanced Heat Transfer via Pulsating Ferro-Nanofluid
* ENG,CBET
* 08/16/2016,06/30/2018
* Keisha Walters, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 90,995.00

CBET - 1403872&lt;br/&gt;Thompson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New methods for
harvesting waste energy can allow for reduced fossil fuel-dependence, off-grid
power generation and more efficient vehicles and buildings. Traditional
thermoelectric materials can be used for these applications; however, their use
is limited due to their relatively low thermal conductivities and low melting
temperatures. The proposed research project centers on a new thermal-to-
electrical energy harvesting/conversion method comprised of a capillary-sized
heat pipe filled with magnetic fluid that operates via temperature difference.
When the magnetic fluid inside the oscillating heat pipe (OHP) is exposed to a
solenoid, an electrical alternating-current is generated. The high thermal
conductivity and temperature stability of OHPs will allow for their utilization
in conditions and applications where traditional thermoelectric materials are
not viable. This new waste-heat recovery process will provide a new method for
energy recovery and thermal management in a wide range of energy efficient
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research objective is to better
understand "thermofluidic induction" a unique thermo-kinetic-electromagnetic
energy conversion process inherent to temperature-driven flow of magnetic
nanofluid near a solenoid which can result in heat transfer enhancement and
electrical power generation. Well-designed experiments on various OHP platforms
will be conducted to determine the influence of the design and operating
parameters on the performance of these OHPs in terms of heat flux and electrical
power generation. Various nanofluids will be synthesized and then characterized
using a wide range of techniques, including dynamic light scattering (DLS),
atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), in
order to determine their physical and thermal characteristics before and after
OHP-operation. The effects of thermal fatigue and nanoparticle settling will be
studied. A transparent OHP will also be constructed to better understand the
extent to which the nanofluid and OHP operating parameters affect energy
harvesting, fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Thermo-kinetic-electromagnetic
modeling will be accomplished by utilizing and modifying available multiphysics
software on select OHP models. The research objectives are to determine: (1) the
extent to which the magnetic field and heat transfer are coupled in thermally-
driven, pulsating capillary flow of ferro-nanofluid near a solenoid, (2) how to
effectively transfer heat and/or generate a magnetic field in an oscillating
heat pipe by varying specific design parameters, (3) the extent to which
thermally-driven, pulsating capillary flows of ferro-nanofluids can: (i) enhance
heat transfer and/or (ii) affect nanoparticle suspendability (agglomeration) and
particle size/distribution (i.e. thermal fatigue of nanofluids) and finally (4)
a novel, multiphysics analytical/numerical model that aids in predicting heat
transfer and electrical power generation inherent to thermofluidic induction.