* 1720656
* SBIR Phase I:  A NOVEL BIORATIONAL, VERSATILE PRODUCT TO ENHANCE CROP YIELDS AND RESISTANCE TO STRESSES
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Gary Harman, Advanced Biological Marketing, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide a new class of biorational chemicals
(based on chemical communicants from plant symbiotic fungi) that provide season-
long improvements in plant productivity including enhanced root growth,
resistance to a variety of stresses including drought, and increases in plant
yield. This system will be developed for delivery as a seed treatment or as an
augmented fertilizer. The novel products will be sold to famers through already-
developed delivery systems primarily through agricultural distributors and seed
companies. They are expected to increase plant root development, crop yields and
tolerance/resistance to drought and other adverse conditions. The products can
be used equally well by large and sophisticated farmers and seed companies,
including those using advanced plant genetic traits, but is also adaptable to
smaller growers since the input costs to users will be less than competitive
technologies for especially coping with adverse environmental stresses. These
tools and advances will assist is overcoming the adverse effects of climate
change and provide technologies to maximize scarce water resources.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to formulate the active chemicals to provide
user-friendly products for delivery in suitable agricultural systems including
seed treatments and augmented fertilizers, and to evaluate prototype products on
their advantages in the greenhouse, pilot scale and field trial systems. The
field trials will be conducted under conditions of drought stress and will
permit measurement of water use efficiency of conventional and advanced drought
tolerant corn hybrids in the presence and absence of the new products, and will
provide a means to determine the mechanism by which the active chemicals provide
improvements in plant performance. This third goal is essential since the
chemicals as applied are present only during seed germination, but enhance plant
performance throughout the season. The formulations are based on novel systems
that will sequester volatile active chemicals but release them only when seeds
are germinating. The plant performance characteristics that will be measured
include enhanced root development throughout the season, enhanced yield
parameters under water limiting conditions, and measure water use efficiency.