* 1720701
* Network for Computational Nanotechnology - Hierarchical nanoMFG Node
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Hayden Taylor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,000,001.00

To become economically viable and accessible at large scales, nanomanufacturing
critically depends on achieving control over complex process parameters and a
thorough understanding of the underlying driving scientific phenomena. The goal
of this collaborative effort will be to establish a Hierarchical
Nanomanufacturing Node for computational tools development aimed at creating
smart, model- and data-driven nanomanufacturing. By leveraging emerging advances
in computing and cyberinfrastructure, the vision of this node is to simulate
every step of the manufacturing process of a nano-enabled product. Simulation
tools developed will be optimized and tested for utility by stakeholders
including researchers in nanotechnology and related industrial sectors. In
addition, the impact of this 5-year activity on the nanomanufacturing industry
will be critically assessed. The node will be part of the established Network
for Computational Nanotechnology (NCN) Cyber Platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mission of the nanoMFG Node is to be the engine for design, simulation,
planning, and optimization of highly relevant nano-manufacturing growth and
patterning processes. Both working with the existing cyber framework (nanoHUB)
and facilitating development of human resources that will broadly impact
nanomanufacturing and nanotechnology are essential to this mission. To help
achieve this mission, computational tools for nanomanufacturing aimed at
multiscale theory, modeling, and simulation (TM&amp;S) will be developed and
broadly disseminated. The intellectual merit of this 5-year activity is the
development of nanomanufacturing simulation tools, validated by experimental
data, and integrated with data-driven uncertainty quantification. The framework
for the effort is based on a layered computational tool infrastructure
comprising the creation of the following: (1) nanoscale transport phenomena
models, (2) process models, (3) uncertainty quantification framework, (4)
application and empirical validation of process models, (5) tools for multiscale
transport phenomena, and (6) tools for nanoscale self-assembly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond nanomanufacturing, the burgeoning field of
nanoscience will significantly benefit from free, open-source computational
tools that have been validated by experiments. The collaboration will bring
researchers, educators, industries, national labs, and high schools together to
form a cohesive framework to advance nanoscience and resulting nanotechnologies,
promote STEM education, and build the human resources necessary to make
nanomanufacturing an economically viable engine for society. This will have
several impacts on realizing the varied promises promulgated by nanotechnology
as it pertains to: accelerating the high-tech economy, improving human health,
and positively impacting an array of manufacturing industry domains including
aviation, automotive, agricultural, construction machinery, and many others.
Efforts to promote workforce diversification are tightly interwoven into this
effort to both help increase participation from underrepresented groups and
institutions and also to add to the richness of the tools being developed.
Fellowships will be competitively awarded annually to help train the next
generation workforce not only on simulation and modeling tool development but
also on the value of community building and sharing of resources and expertise,
thus building a nationwide innovation ecosystem for economic development of the
U.S. and its leadership worldwide.