* 1720774
* STTR Phase I:  A Non-Chromatographic Technique for Synthetic Oligodeoxynucleotide Purification
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Fengping Wei, CGeneTech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of a novel method for synthetic
oligodeoxynucleotide purification. Currently, most oligodeoxynucleotides are
purified using chromatography. The techniques are expensive or difficult to
scale up, and unsuitable for parallel purification of multiple different
samples. The proposed technology is easy to scale up for large-scale
purification and suitable for parallel purification. Several areas that require
synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides will benefit from the technology including
oligodeoxynucleotide therapeutics and oligodeoxynucleotides used in genome
assembly for synthetic biology applications. For therapeutic manufacturing, the
proposed technology is expected to bring down the cost of production. For
synthetic biology, the bottleneck is in the area is de novo construction of
genomes, which requires large numbers of synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides.
Parallel purification using the proposed technology will make these materials
more affordable. In addition, the proposed technology can be readily extended to
purify other biooligomers including peptides and oligosaccharides. This
extension will have a high impact in areas such as biomedical research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to method for synthetic
oligodeoxynucleotide purification based on the "catching by polymerization"
concept for the purification of synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides. Currently, most
synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides are purified using chromatography methods, which
rely on the rate of speed difference at which product and impurities travel in a
solid matrix when eluted with solvents for separation. Drawbacks include
expensive instrumentation, intensive labor, use of large volumes of harmful
solvents and inability to purify long sequences. This method is expensive to
scale up and unsuitable for parallel purification. This project aims to
commercialize the catching full-length sequence by polymerization
oligodeoxynucleotide purification technology to solve these problems. The method
works by selectively tagging a polymerizable group to the oligodeoxynucleotide
product, polymerizing it into an insoluble polymer, washing away all impurities
and then cleaving the product from the polymer. Because the principle on which
the product is separated from impurities is drastically different from that of
chromatography methods, the proposed technique has many advantages, which
include no need for expensive instrumentation, simple-to-use, low waste to
product ratio, and suitability for purification of long sequences. Additionally,
the new technique is readily scalable for large-scale purification, and can be
easily adopted for parallel purification.