* 1720856
* Youth Participatory Science to Address Urban Heavy Metal Contamination
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Kathryn Nagy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2023
* USD 449,852.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the work and learning
of teachers as they engage youth from underrepresented groups in studying
chemistry as a subject relevant to heavy metal contamination in their
neighborhoods. The project is a collaboration of teachers in the Chicago Public
Schools, science educators, chemists, and environmental scientists from the
University of Illinois at Chicago, Northwestern University, Loyola University,
and members of the Chicago Environmental Justice Network. The project is
significant because it leverages existing partnerships and builds on pilot
projects which will be informed by a corresponding cycle of research on
teachers' learning and practice. The project will position Chicago teachers and
students as Change Makers who are capable of addressing the crises of inequity
in science education and environmental contamination that matter deeply to them,
while simultaneously advancing their own understanding and expertise. The
project will examine the malleable factors affecting the ability of teachers to
engage underrepresented students in innovative urban citizen science projects
with a focus on the synergistic learning that occurs as teachers, students,
scientists, and community members work together on addressing complex socio-
scientific issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to provide a network of
intellectual and analytical support to high school chemistry teachers engaged in
customizing curricula in response to urban environmental concerns. The project
will use an annual summer institute where collaborators will develop curriculum
and procedures for collecting soil and water samples. In the project, the
teachers and students will work with university scientists to analyze these
samples for heavy metals, and students will share their results in community
settings. The study design will be multiple case and be used to study the
content knowledge learned and mobilized by participating teachers as they
develop these authentic projects. The project includes explicit focus on the
professional development of high school science teachers while it also aims to
create rich learning opportunities for underrepresented high school students in
STEM fields. The contextualized science concepts within students' everyday
experiences or socio-scientific issues will likely have a positive impact on
student motivation and learning outcomes, but the experiences of urban students
are less likely to be reflected by the curriculum, and the practices of
effective secondary science teachers in these contexts are under-examined.