* 1720595
* Center for Dynamics and Control of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Edward Yu, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2024
* USD 16,188,629.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The traditional paradigm for materials research focuses
on behavior in or near equilibrium. Through two Interdisciplinary Research
Groups (IRGs), the Center for Dynamics and Control of Materials extends this
paradigm to understand and control how materials behave over times ranging from
femtoseconds to weeks, and over dimensions extending from macroscopic to atomic
scales. IRG 1 addresses the development and understanding of new composite
materials that combine inorganic and organic components. Interactions among
these constituents and their responses to their external environment enable
material properties to be tuned and reconfigured, leading to applications in
rechargeable batteries and filtration membranes. IRG 2 explores new approaches
for using light to control material properties. The realization of new phases
and quantum states of matter via interaction with light is expected to enable
new technologies for computing and communications, and to address long-standing
fundamental scientific challenges in quantum control of materials. Through the
concept of a Materials Community of Practice, these research activities are
closely integrated with new initiatives in education, outreach, and the
promotion of diversity. The Center engages elementary school teachers in
materials research to improve teacher efficacy and student engagement with
science at a formative age, and thereby increase the number and diversity of
students interested in science, engineering, and related fields. Outreach to the
public via hands-on demonstrations and collaborations between artists and
materials researchers brings materials science and technology to new audiences
who might not otherwise be engaged. And partnerships with industry and the
entrepreneurial community provide participants with experiences and connections
to prepare them for success in a broad range of
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: IRG 1, Reconfigurable Porous
Nanoparticle Networks, addresses multifunctional, reconfigurable networks of
nanoparticles, polymers, and organic molecules that respond to a range of
external stimuli. Fundamental principles are elucidated for understanding and
controlling the assembly and reconfiguration of nanoparticles connected by
molecular linkers, with theoretical and experimental efforts combining to create
unique optical, chemical, or biological materials functionality. IRG 2,
Materials Driven by Light, addresses light-matter interactions that lead to
material properties not accessible in equilibrium. Phases and ordered states
accessed via light-induced perturbations to energy landscapes, topological
material behavior enabled by optical excitation, and formation of exotic quantum
phases are explored to provide new understanding of and control over optically
responsive materials. Advances in research from these IRGs are expected to
enable responsive, reconfigurable materials based on integration of
nanoparticles and macromolecules for applications in electronics, energy
storage, water filtration, photonics, and biology; fundamental advances in
understanding and applications of material behavior accessible and controllable
using temporally structured light; and new technologies for communications and
information processing based on these advances.