* 1721754
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Production-Ready 3D Printable Cartilage Repair Device for Clinical Use
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Ben Holmes, Nanochon
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will investigate the safety and efficacy of a new type
of implantable medical device for cartilage repair in the knee. The implant is
based on a novel material that is cartilage-like, as well 3D printed designs.
Currently, cartilage damage in the knee is most effectively treated by a
metallic joint replacement. However, qualifying patient age is 55 or older.
There are several implants available to a younger and more active patient
population, but they all suffer from major limitations such as low success rate,
the size of the damage they treat, long recovery time or high cost. This project
will mature an implantable device that can support weight and encouraging new
bone and cartilage formation. The device is also made from a high performance
yet low cost material, and 3D printing can create custom made and made to order
devices that increase efficiency and further reduce cost. A low-cost device
which can decrease recovery time and increase clinical success would greatly
improve treatment of young patients, and prevent more advanced joint disease.
The project supports the NSF?s mission by increasing knowledge surrounding the
manufacturing and clinical use of biologically significant materials for
orthopedics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an ?on demand?
device to adequately fill and support a critical-sized cartilage defect while
quickly grafting to underlying subchondral bone, thus providing a new solution
to the treatment of full-thickness cartilage tissue injury. Full-thickness
cartilage lesions often are associated with a low rate of success and high
patient morbidity (meaning 60% treatment failure) due to the need for adequate
vasculature in the subchondral bone and integration with the cartilage graft.
Researchers have used complex biomimetic nanomaterials and 3D printing to create
strategies for joint repair. These materials work well in a controlled
laboratory setting, but as is can only be printed using deposition or extrusion-
based 3D printing techniques. This type of additive manufacturing is limited by
resolution and print speed / volume when compared to commercial laser-based
systems. The significance of this project is tied into improving clinical
outcomes, with a more mechanically and biologically stable implant, while also
addressing these manufacturing and cost issues. Thus, this project will validate
the efficacy of an implantable cartilage repair device, made from new tissue
growth materials and designs compatible with selective laser sintering, and
provide critical scientific validation of a functional medical implant for
orthopedic treatment.