* 1721059
* Networking Urban Resources with Teachers and University to enRich Early Childhood Science (NURTURES) Phase II: Expansion and Evaluation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Scott Molitor, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,253,548.00

Building on successful prior work, this University of Toledo project, Networking
Urban Resources with Teachers and University to enRich Early Childhood Science
(NURTURES): Researching the impact of teacher professional development and
family engagement on PreK-3 achievement, simultaneously targets young children's
teachers and families/caregivers in an effort to build both parties' capacity to
promote student interest in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) learning. Teachers participate in a two-week summer professional
development program and receive support across the school year in the form of
individualized coaching and participation in professional learning communities.
Families receive science inquiry packets (sent home from school) four times a
year and attend community STEM events throughout the year. Inquiry packets and
community events encourage science inquiry, discourse, and further exploration
of key science ideas. Project participants will include 120 teachers, 2,400
PreK-3 children and over 7,200 family members in Ohio and Michigan. The project
is funded by the Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of STEM by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extending the initial NURTURES project, developed
with NSF Math and Science Partnership funding, this follow-up project aims to:
1) Transform early childhood science teaching based upon Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS) to measurably increase student science, literacy, and math
achievement, and 2) Engage families of PreK-3 students in science inquiry
practices to measurably improve student science, literacy, and math achievement.
A particularly important facet of this follow-up project is the research effort
to parse and understand how each component (teacher professional development
versus family engagement) impacts student learning. The project will use a
randomized control group research design (RCT) to compare student achievement
outcomes among three groups: Children whose teachers received professional
development and family engagement activities, children whose teachers received
only professional development, and a control group. The project will use
standardized tests (the TerraNova Complete Battery) to measure impact on
learning gains in science, mathematics, reading, and early literacy for children
in grades K- 3. The Lens on Science assessment will measure science learning in
preschool children. This project will result in an NGSS-based program for
teachers and families that has been systematically tested and may ultimately be
scaled up to an impact study and dissemination at a broad level.