* 1721397
* SBIR Phase I:  A universal carbon detector for liquid phase chemical detection of organic molecules
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Andrew Jones, Activated Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2019
* USD 224,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research and
develop a universal carbon detector for liquid chromatography using flame
ionization detection. The commercialization of this innovation is a product that
will allow scientists to measure compounds with greater ease and accuracy, and
drastically simplify the number and types of detectors required in liquid
chromatography. The broader impacts of this product include faster drug and
product development, more accurate purity analysis, better environmental
sampling and more efficient research in many market sectors where liquid
chromatography is used. The proposed activity will result in a product that
competes in the $500M UV detector market, offering universal carbon detection
without the need for a chromophore and linear detector response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the development
of a low-cost, universal detector that is capable of responding to nearly all
organic molecules with high sensitivity and linearity. Previous attempts to
utilize the flame ionization detector have failed because of the lack of
technologies necessary for the complete vaporization of analytes and removal of
organic solvents. We have identified an oxidation-reduction microreactor that
converts all organic molecules to methane vapors. We anticipate the proposed
detector will have a sensitivity on-par with flame ionization detectors in gas
chromatography. The technology would bring unparalleled molecular quantification
to a wide variety of industries including pharmaceuticals, biofuels,
environmental testing, chemicals and foods.