* 1721133
* Preparing Next Generation Scientists through Teacher and Extension Science Partnerships and Schoolyard Citizen Science Investigations in Elementary Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Lara Gengarelly, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 452,740.00

With the release of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), great interest
and demand has been placed on the design and development of high quality, NGSS-
aligned professional development. The Standards' Three-Dimensional Learning
Framework has also required more creative and non-conventional professional
development models to support the changing landscape of science education and
instruction. This project intends to address this critical need at the
elementary school level through an innovative collaborative professional
development model. The University of New Hampshire, in partnership with New
Hampshire Schools, will bring together two groups of educators - elementary
school teachers (formal) and cooperative extension science volunteers (informal)
- to create a community-based professional development partnership that improves
educators' self-efficacy, science content knowledge, and instructional practice.
The model builds on the premise that both groups have expertise that can be
shared and collaboratively developed. Together, with an interdisciplinary team
of education experts, the teacher and extension science volunteers will learn
how to design and implement appropriate, NGSS-aligned science lessons with
elementary school students through locally relevant community-based, citizen
science projects. This is a particularly novel approach. Though both groups are
highly regarded for their contributions to elementary science education in their
respective domains (i.e., formal and informal settings), few, if any, existing
models examine the potential impact of partnering the groups together in a
shared professional development experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early
Stage Design and Development project will partner and engage approximately 50
elementary school teachers (grades 2nd-5th) and 30 extension science volunteers
from urban and rural New Hampshire in the year-long professional development
program. Over a three-year period, the target groups will participate in
workshops and citizen science investigations related to biodiversity, soil
science, stream ecology, plant phenology and/or wildlife habitats. Program
content and activities will be aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards
and New Hampshire State Standards. A mixed methods approach will be employed to
explore three aspects of the elementary school teacher?s efficacy over time. The
research questions will seek to address: (1) What changes occur in elementary
school teachers? self-efficacy teaching science and in their ability to
integrate NGSS science practices through locally relevant citizen science
projects? (2) What shifts occur in teacher content knowledge and how do the
shifts in teacher content knowledge relate to the changes in teacher self-
efficacy? (3) What is the process of collaboration between extension science
volunteers and teachers? Data will be collected through surveys, interviews, and
documents/artifacts. Formative and summative evaluations will be provided by an
Advisory Board of experts with a broad range of relevant expertise. The outcomes
of this project have the potential to impact professional development approaches
across the country and will support the goal of increasing public scientific
literacy and public engagement with science and technology by optimizing
elementary teachers' implementation of locally-relevant citizen science in their
classrooms. Similarly, by promoting a connection between the volunteers and
local schools, this innovative model provides a new avenue for extension science
volunteers to impact their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
supported by the Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.