* 1721192
* Identifying Effective Instructional Practices that Foster the Development of Algebraic Thinking in Elementary School
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Maria Blanton, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,378,542.00

There is a critical need to better prepare all students for learning algebra.
Part of this preparation involves developing a strong foundation for algebra in
the elementary grades by building on students' informal intuitions about
patterns, relationships and structure into more formalized ways of mathematical
thinking. This project seeks to identify teaching practices that can be linked
to students' early algebra learning in grades three, four and five. The goal of
the project is to use assessment data and videos of classroom teaching in order
to create a tool that can be used to document effective instructional practices.
This observation tool can then be used to support teacher professional
development in early algebra and research about how teachers' actions can be
linked to students' learning. The project is unique in its work to link an early
algebra curriculum with understanding of teachers' practices in implementing
that curriculum and students' learning of mathematics. The Discovery Research
K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to address two research
questions. First, what profiles of instructional practice are associated with
greater student performance in early algebra? Second, to what extent do these
profiles of effective instructional practices vary by grade level? The primary
product of the work is an early algebra observation protocol that will capture
non-domain and non-grade level specific practices of effective teaching in
combination with practices specific to early algebra. Videos of early algebra
classrooms will be used to design the observation protocol, which in turn, will
then be used along with student assessment data to identify profiles of
instructional practices associated with students' learning. Multiple phases of
testing and revision will be used to create the observation protocol. The
observation protocol will also generate profiles of teacher practices that can
be used to describe different models for effectively teaching early algebra. The
project will also examine implications of their work for teacher preparation and
professional development.