* 1721100
* Measuring Early Mathematical Reasoning Skills: Developing Tests of Numeric Relational Reasoning and Spatial Reasoning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Lindsey Perry, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,799,398.00

Numeric relational reasoning and spatial reasoning are critical to success in
later mathematics coursework, including Algebra 1, a gatekeeper to success at
the post-secondary level, and success in additional STEM domains, such as
chemistry, geology, biology, and engineering. Given the importance of these
skills for later success, it is imperative that there are high-quality screening
tools available to identify students at-risk for difficulty in these areas. The
primary aim of this study is to develop mathematics screening assessment tools
for Grades K-2 over the course of four years that measure students' abilities in
numeric relational reasoning and spatial reasoning. The team of researchers will
develop Measures of Mathematical Reasoning Skills system, which will contain
Tests of Numeric Relational Reasoning (T-NRR) and Tests of Spatial Reasoning
(T-SR). The measures will be intended for use by teachers and school systems to
screen students to determine who is at-risk for difficulty in early mathematics,
including students with disabilities. The measures will help provide important
information about the intensity of support that may be needed for a given
student. Three forms per grade level will be developed for both the T-NRR and
T-SR with accompanying validity and reliability evidence collected. The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the T-NRR and T-SR measures
will follow an iterative process across five phases. The phases include (1)
refining the construct; (2) developing test specifications and item models; (3)
developing items; (4) field testing the items; and (5) conducting validity
studies. The evidence collected and evaluated during each phase will contribute
to the overall evaluation of the reliability of the measures and the validity of
the interpretations made using the measures. Item models, test specifications,
and item development will be continuously evaluated and refined based on data
from cognitive interviews, field tests, and reviews by mathematics educators,
teachers of struggling students, teachers of culturally and linguistically
diverse populations, and a Technical Advisory Board. In the final phase of
development of the T-NRR and T-SR, reliability of the results will be estimated
and multiple sources of validity evidence will be collected to examine the
concurrent and predictive relation with other criterion measures, classification
accuracy, and sensitivity to growth. Approximately 4,500 students in Grades K-2
will be involved in all phases of the research including field tests and
cognitive interviews. Data will be analyzed using a two-parameter IRT model to
ensure item and test form comparability.