* 1721340
* SBIR Phase I:  A mathematics communication and collaboration system
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Andrew Randono, Alef Omega, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This project researches and develops a novel mathematics communication and
collaboration system. Mathematics is the foundation of Science and Technology,
and national competence in the STEM fields is essential to maintaining our
competitive edge on a global scale. Math literacy hinges on effective
communication of mathematical concepts and processes. However, despite
significant advances in pedagogical methods, the way we communicate mathematics
remains curiously behind the times. Preliminary customer and market research has
revealed that the lack of adequate communication tools for mathematical and
technical expressions is holding back the advance of mathematics in online
environments such as online tutoring. Moreover, the scarcity of effective
communication tools has reinforced the long-standing preconception that math is
primarily a solitary activity, and it has created an unintended and harmful
selection bias restricting the diversity of students entering STEM fields. This
project fills the void of adequate math communications tools with an dynamic,
interactive system for communicating mathematical derivations in real-time in an
online environment. The system facilitates student-student and student-teacher
remote communication of mathematics, and it is particularly suited for student-
tutor communication on online tutoring platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The math
communication and collaboration system this project develops leverages the
company's proprietary equation manipulation technology. This system employs an
integrated math engine and a touch-based interface allowing users to manipulate
equations using simple drag-and-drop gestures. It is built on a game-engine
allowing for multi-player support. This project integrates the equation
manipulation technology into a networked multi-user interface to connect one or
more users for real-time communication of mathematical derivations. The project
researches the precise needs of students, teachers, and online tutors to tailor
the user interface to the specific needs of online mathematics communication.
Specific problems the project researches include multi-player networking and
matchmaking functionality, optimal network architecture for the system, transfer
of control between users for effective communication, integration of traditional
communication tools within the system, and reduction of latency time to enhance
real-time interactivity. Successful completion of the project will result in a
first-of-its-kind math communication system that allows users in different
places to connect online and communicate a mathematical derivation as it is
happening, and as easily as if they were in the same room. The primary project
deliverable is a minimum viable product to be piloted and vetted through the
company?s existing math app.