* 1721939
* SBIR Phase I: A personalizable e-reading app that supports science learning
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Kelly Puzio, Squid Books, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will produce an innovative reading application, to
support science learning. Although the science textbook is a central curricular
resource, this resource is often inaccessible and difficult to read. Science
textbooks are syntactically (grammatically) and semantically (word meaning)
complex. Specifically, elementary and secondary science texts are often written
3 to 5 years beyond what is developmentally appropriate. Because of these
complexities, science textbooks often overwhelm students' working memory,
preventing them from constructing accurate mental representations of the target
concepts. Thus, this project will develop and test a personalizable e-reader
with embedded reading and language support. The intellectual merit of the effort
resides in its ability to improve science comprehension through personalized and
adaptive content. This project will produce content and assessments targeting
the Next Generation Science Standards on Global Climate Change. The customizable
features will make fundamental science knowledge more accessible and interesting
to students -- and thus the general public. Given these benefits, it has strong
potential to support future generations of STEM professionals and a more
scientifically literate citizenry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will produce an innovative iOS reading app to support science learning. The key
innovation will be to make science content adaptable and adjustable for
learners. This Phase I project has five technical goals: (a) create NGSS-aligned
content; (b) write and test assessments using item response theory; (c) develop
and test the back-end for the app, to include cloud-based SQL databases, content
delivery network, and the application programming interface; (d) develop and
test&amp;#8232;the front-end for the app, to include the user interface design
and the model view controller architecture; (e) conduct user testing with
students and teachers to evaluate the usabilityand initial feasibility of
SquidBooks. During Phase I, the SquidBooks team will address some technological
challenges in bringing this innovation to market. The key features of the iOS
app create a potential for unnecessary memory load. This technological challenge
will be overcome by architecting the program to be highly preprocessed and
modular. A second challenge is making scientific content more readable and
accessible. This requires a balance between using precise scientific language
and common language, while maintaining core scientific ideas.