* 1721003
* BioGraph 2.0 - Online Professional Development for High School Biology Teachers for Teaching and Learning About Complex Systems
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Eric Klopfer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,090,899.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal, BioGraph 2.0 - Online
Professional Development for High School Biology Teachers for Teaching and
Learning About Complex Systems, will develop and test an open-access, online
system of professional development for high school biology teachers in order to
build pedagogical competencies for teaching about complex systems and to support
the application of those competencies in high school biology classrooms. The
online teacher professional development (PD) will be delivered through the edX
open access platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will include
two cycles of design and development of the professional development experience.
It will include mixed methods and a longitudinal examination of teacher and
student learning fostered by professional development. The research for the
first phase will be qualitative in nature and will result in a series of case
studies that highlight different facets of the interactions that influence
teachers' learning. Following this qualitative phase, through a field study that
employs multivariate analysis of covariance and hierarchical linear models
analytical techniques, the effectiveness of the design and development stages
will be compared to an alternative professional development experience that is
similar to the project's professional development but does not include
collaborative design. The broad aim is to develop and test an open-access,
online system of professional development (PD) that includes solutions for known
challenges in teacher online PD. The project builds on a prior NSF-funded
exploratory project. The project will employ a randomized control trial to
assess the effectiveness of PD on improving teacher content knowledge and
skills, changes in classroom practices and instruction, curriculum engagement by
students and student achievement outcomes with an end goal to understand better
what facilitates online PD and to create a low cost scalable and online version
of the original NSF-funded BioGraph. This research will produce insights and
guidelines that can immediately be incorporated into the emerging field of
online professional development, and online education in general. The content
goals are to build pedagogical competencies for teaching about complex systems
and to support the application of those competencies in high school biology
classrooms.