* 1721356
* Transforming Scientific Practices to Promote Students Interest and Motivation in the Life Sciences: A Teacher Leadership Development Intervention
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Celia Smith, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,777,613.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects. This
project will investigate the influence of a professional development
intervention on the teaching and learning of content in the life sciences in the
context of place, language, and culture. The research will enable teachers to
develop lessons that will allow students to design solutions to problems of
economic, cultural, and ecological importance to the state. It will build on the
emergence of teacher leaders whose knowledge will extend beyond content in the
life sciences to include strategies for helping students develop meaningful
science identities, understand the cultural values of economic sustainability,
and buy into the principles of environmental stewardship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods approach will be used to capture data from
teachers and students through classroom observation protocols, interviews, focus
groups, and student surveys. The end products will include a refined teacher
leadership professional development model. The model will serve as a framework
for developing teacher leaders while promoting learning for underrepresented
students situated within the larger state context. Dissemination of the model
will occur through an open source online platform, formal and informal
presentations at national and international meetings and conferences, and
publications in capacity-building STEM media outlets.