* 1721646
* STTR Phase I:  Liquefied Gas Electrolytes for High Energy Density Energy Storage Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Ying Meng, South 8 Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project is focused on improving the energy density, safety and
ultra-low temperature capability of battery devices. Conventional batteries fall
short of these critical requirements for next-generation electric vehicle
technologies, which are necessary to reduce emissions and the nation?s reliance
on fossil fuel imports. Although the eventual goal of the proposed technology is
to enter automotive markets, it may have an equally strong impact for
applications in other areas requiring energy storage at low-temperatures. For
example, multiple efforts aim to enable high-atmosphere telecommunications to
further global connectivity to the internet, particularly in remote locations of
the globe in third world countries whose standard of living could be enhanced
with greater communication and education. Further, the proposed chemistry could
also potentially be useful in electrochemical deposition of difficult to plate
metals such as titanium or silicon for use in the aerospace, medical or high
tech industries, areas which will ensure the U.S. remains internationally
competitive while increasing job opportunity and tax revenue from emerging
technologies. It is also a priority of this STTR to coordinate with the partner
research institution to providing training and internship opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented communities in this
research work to further improve our national industry by training the next
generation workforce to better be prepared for industry and higher-
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a novel electrolyte
chemistry for next generation energy storage devices which has potential to
address these three critical areas (energy density, safety, wide temperature
operation). While conventional electrolyte chemistry commonly uses solvent
solutions which are typically liquid at room temperature, this project will
explore the use of solvent solutions which are gaseous at room temperature and
liquefied under moderate pressures. Preliminary work on this novel electrolyte
chemistry has shown high performance at ultra-low temperatures, enabling many
high-atmosphere and aerospace applications without need for additional thermal
management and engineering. In addition, a reversible battery shut-down
mechanism at high temperatures, inherent in the electrolyte chemistry, allow for
strong mitigation of thermal runaway for improved battery safety. Finally, high
potential for a substantial increase in energy density with use of next-
generation electrode materials has been shown to be possible. The focus of this
project will be to develop these novel electrolytes and demonstrate superior
performance in a full cell device with application to the automotive industry
and low-temperature markets. The underlying fundamental chemistry with these new
materials is a relatively new field and it is hoped these materials will lead to
advances in next-generation energy storage devices and other technologies,
leading to new industries, job growth and beyond.