* 1721986
* SBIR Phase I:  Solar Panel Companion Inverter
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Ronak Bhatt, Rivegy, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project to develop a low-cost
photovoltaic (PV) inverter is to reduce the installed cost of solar energy
systems by ~10%. This improvement in power electronics has a direct positive
commercial impact on the entire solar industry by greatly expanding the
addressable market where solar generation is economic. Societal impacts include
lowering energy costs, facilitating employment growth, driving economic
development, and lowering emissions. The project also supports an enhanced
scientific and technological understanding of a class of novel inverter
architectures that may find numerous other applications outside of the solar
industry. For example, industrial motor drives, wind turbines, battery energy
storage, and electric vehicles each make use of DC-AC (direct current ?
alternating current) conversion technologies that could benefit from these novel
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project addresses two major problems in the solar PV industry:
(1) there is tremendous pressure to reduce costs in the DC-AC inverter, and (2)
there is pressure to improve the performance of inverters, both by increasing
energy yield under partial shading conditions and by improving the lifetime of
inverters. The objectives of the proposed research are to demonstrate maximum
power point tracking (MPPT) and grid synchronization for a prototype distributed
inverter that can achieve performance comparable to commercial inverters while
being mass-produced at a lower cost. The research includes a) refinement and
application of a real-time inverter control algorithm to extract the maximum
energy from solar panels under dynamic shading conditions, b) establishing
robust communications across a network of distributed inverters, and c)
fabricating and demonstrating a system with a pathway to performance parity with
commercial inverters at a much lower cost. Anticipated technical results include
measurement of conversion efficiency, power quality, component count, and bill
of material estimates.