* 1721611
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Climate change impacts on the sustainability of key fisheries of the California Current System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* James Hilger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 361,075.00

The area off the California coast supports productive commercial and
recreational fisheries such as squid, sardine, and lobster that are important to
human cultures, economies, and livelihoods. Climate change is expected to alter
the oceanic system and contribute to changes in fish populations that will
directly affect fishers' profits and behavior, as well as managers' actions in
setting limits on harvest. This collaborative Coastal SEES study brings together
oceanographers, fisheries scientists, economists, and social scientists to
develop a better understanding of interactions among the climate and coastal
ocean system, fish populations, fishers and fishing communities, and resource
management. The research team includes state and federal scientists, and results
will be shared with the resource management community. The project will support
interdisciplinary training for undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral scientists, and the investigators will participate in a number of
public outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Coastal SEES project
assembles a diverse team of oceanographers, fisheries scientists, economists,
and social scientists to develop new, integrated understanding of climate
effects on coastal fisheries. The investigators will examine how fishing
behavior, income, jobs distribution, and livelihood viability will be altered by
climate change. The focus is on three key commercially harvested species that
are known to respond to environmental change: Pacific sardine, California market
squid, and California spiny lobster. Each of these supports an economically
important fishery and represents a different type of organism in terms of marine
habitat, latitudinal range, and time scale of response. The approach will
include global climate model projections, regional ocean modeling, fisheries
modeling, economics modeling, plus studies of management scenarios and fisher
behavior. The goal will be to help develop sustainable management strategies
under future climate scenarios given predicted ecological, social, and economic
outcomes for these three fisheries.