* 1721941
* SBIR Phase I:  A High-Force-Fidelity and Compact Actuator for an Upper-Body Exoskeletal Rehabilitation Robot
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Bongsu Kim, LinkDyn Robotics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. The
compact and torque-controllable proposed actuator will prompt the development of
a highly-potential upper-body exoskeletal rehabilitation robot that support a
wide range of motion with an anatomical mobility and impedance-based dynamic
behaviors. The high-performed exoskeleton will allow to implement contemporary
therapeutic trainings based on neurological motor learning principles. This
would enhance the efficacy of robotic rehabilitation leading to better recovery
after neuromuscular injuries. Therefore, rehabilitation robots powered by the
proposed actuator will be better accepted to physical rehabilitation market and
bring a significant commercial impact. Ultimately, this project will contribute
to reduction of socio-economic costs caused by neuromuscular impairments. Also,
exoskeletons powered by the proposed actuator would contribute to better
understanding of neurobehavioral principle of human body by serving as an
experimental tool that creates force-based human-robot interactions with
anatomical movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on developing a compact
rotary-type series elastic actuators (SEAs) for upper-body exoskeleton
application. A substantial portion of the US population suffers from
neuromuscular impairments, requiring intensive rehabilitation services. Robotic
rehabilitation has been attracting attention from many sectors because of the
potential for better rehabilitation outcome. However, the lack of anatomical
shoulder mobility and compliant dynamic control in existing upper-body
exoskeletons limits the capability to produce neurologically-based therapeutic
behaviors. The proposed SEAs will help to overcome the limitation by enabling
exoskeletons to have force and impedance-based behaviors for advanced
rehabilitation protocols. Its compact form factor will benefit the linkage
design of exoskeletons for a wide range of motion and anatomical mobility. Also,
the SEAs with the tight configuration and high torque/power capacity will
provide a high flexibility in a variety of robot designs contributing to
advances of general robotic technology.