* 1721319
* SBIR Phase I: School-based Wellness Integrated Systems Hub: a comprehensive online health service management system designed for school health centers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Tamara Kuhn, dfusion
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is maximizing chances for improved health,
academic success, and post-secondary achievement of students who use School
Based Health Centers (SBHCs) through creating more efficient, tailored services.
These gains will contribute to students' improved social, economic, and health
outcomes as adults, and a healthier U.S. population overall. The School-based
Wellness Integrated Systems Hub (SWISH) will offer a comprehensive, online
service documentation and data management system designed specifically for
SBHCs. In contrast with traditional electronic health record systems, SWISH will
serve as a single hub between data sources, eliminating the need for multiple
systems. SWISH offers mechanisms for staff to identify clinical service
priorities and those students in need of care. The platform, which complies with
health, security and privacy regulations, provides functionality that supports
the assessment, triage, coordination and provision of care across multiple roles
within SBHCs. SWISH will also facilitate evaluation of service impact on student
health, wellbeing and academic performance. This capability - not provided by
existing market solutions - serves program efficiency and effectiveness goals
and is likely to be well received by SBHC staff and administrators leading to
robust commercialization of the product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will develop and test a prototype data management system for School
Based Health Centers (SBHCs). SBHCs are proliferating in the U.S; they are well
positioned to address the unmet physical and mental health needs of underserved
youth by increasing accessibility and continuity of health care on the school
campus. Notably, while health information technology systems play a critical
role in SBHC quality improvement, operations, and sustainability, a minority of
SBHCs report having a data management system in place. This represents a
critical infrastructure gap. The proposed technology will address this gap by
providing a secure, shared environment specifically designed for SBHC providers
to document service, utilize "smart list" algorithms to identify students in
need of services, serve students efficiently, and coordinate care and resources
within and outside the SBHC. To achieve these goals, the project team will: 1)
apply their expertise in design, technology and project management to the
creation of a Minimally Viable Product prototype; and 2) usability test SWISH
with members of the target audience.