* 1721236
* Project MAPLE: MAkerspaces Promoting Learning and Engagement
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Maya Israel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 669,253.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). The project plans to develop and study a
series of metacognitive strategies that support learning and engagement for
struggling middle school students during makerspace experiences. The makerspace
movement has gained recognition and momentum, which has resulted in many schools
integrating makerspace technologies and related curricular practices into the
classroom. The study will focus narrowly on establishing a foundational
understanding of how to ameliorate barriers to engaging in design learning
through the use of metacognitive strategies. The project plans to translate and
apply research on the use of metacognitive strategies in supporting struggling
learners to develop approaches that teachers can implement to increase
opportunities for students who are the most difficult to reach academically.
Project strategies, curricula, and other resources will be disseminated through
existing outreach websites, research briefs, peer-reviewed publications for
researchers and practitioners, and a webinar for those interested in middle-
school makerspaces for diverse learners.

The research will address the paucity of studies to inform practitioners about
what pedagogical supports help struggling learners engage in these makerspace
experiences. The project will focus on two populations of struggling learners in
middle schools, students with learning disabilities, and students at risk for
academic failure. The rationale for focusing on metacognition within makerspace
activities comes from the literature on students with learning disabilities and
other struggling learners that suggests that they have difficulty with
metacognitive thinking. Multiple instruments will be used to measure
metacognitive processes found to be pertinent within the research process. The
project will tentatively focus on persistence (attitudes about making),
iteration (productive struggle) and intentionality (plan with incremental
steps). The work will result in an evidence base around new instructional
practices for middle school students who are struggling learners so that they
can experience more success during maker learning experiences.