* 1721466
* SBIR Phase I:  Adjustable Prosthetic Liner Using Contractile Electroactive Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Lenore Rasmussen, Ras Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will use shape-morphing electroactive polymers
(EAPs), also known as synthetic muscle, to provide for a streamlined and very
life-like way of configuring motion, which doesn't require motors, pulleys,
gears, or cables like traditional mechanical based motion. The power to operate
these EAPs is easily provided by electric input, including using off the shelf
commercially available batteries. In addition to the focus of this proposal on
adjustable liners, these EAPs could mend the gap between form and function for
life-like prostheses. As impact attenuating and sensing materials, these EAPs
could be developed to offer solutions for protective equipment and provide life-
like motion and control for robotics. This proposal is focused on transforming
the standard of care for people who have lost limbs or were born without fully
developed limbs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project promises to
transform the standard of care for people who have lost limbs or were born
without fully developed limbs. Amputees using mechanically driven prostheses
often experience increasing pain, as well as risk of skin breakdown and severe
infections, even over the course of daily use, due to normal anatomical changes
in the limb that are not accommodated by the static, rigid socket of their
prosthetic device. Typically, most amputees' residual limbs shrink over the
course of any given day, much like peoples' foot size changes from morning to
evening. This proposed work aims to resolve the inadequacies of current
prosthetic socket fit by using flexible pads of EAP based synthetic muscle,
built into prosthetic liners, to automatically respond to changes in patient
anatomy and ensure a continuously proper socket fit throughout the day. With the
additional ability to sense pressure, these EAPs can also serve as a diagnostic
tool to prevent skin breakdown. The prosthetic device and human should move as
one, effortlessly and naturally. This proposal will develop self-adjusting
prosthetic liners that responds to residual limb changes, maintaining a
comfortable dynamic perfect fit throughout the day, to allow the patient to
easily and comfortably engage in an active lifestyle.