* 1721410
* SBIR Phase I:  Interactive, Combined Circuit &amp; 2D Field Simulator for Educational Mobile Game
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Sara Colleran, Elloveo, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This project entails the build out of the simulation engine for a touch-based,
mobile game designed to intuitively teach the basics of electricity and
magnetism to children aged 5+. The mobile game gives users a picture of what?s
happening inside a circuit, and allows them to play with the charges, electric
and magnetic forces, voltage, capacitors, transistors, etc. The use of funds
from this NSF SBIR Grant would include the research and development required to
build and incorporate this simulator into the game. This simulator is novel, is
customized for educational use, must be extraordinarily fast, and is based on
Maxwell?s Equations, the four equations that govern all of electricity and
magnetism. The successful completion of this project will create a new way of
teaching electricity and magnetism to children, giving them a visual
understanding of the concepts. The goal is to make science and engineering more
attainable subjects to pursue in higher education. This will lead to an increase
in the number of science and engineering graduates in the US, and help to close
the international educational achievement gap, which experts agree represents
over a $1T overall opportunity loss. Besides having a profound effect on the US
economy, this also benefits the individual. In 2014, the DOE reported that the
median starting income of a STEM (engineering) graduate was $74,000, almost
$25,000 more than a non-STEM graduate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed real-
time, interactive, multi-touch-based simulator would be the first of its kind;
no combined two-dimensional field and circuit simulator exists today,
particularly for use in an educational game. This combined simulator only has 16
milliseconds to update its results, whereas a typical two-dimensional field
solver could take minutes to hours to solve. By using a novel simulator
architecture and by focusing on speed and conceptual understanding at the
necessary precision, the game simulator will be able to achieve the over 100x
speed-up required. The simulator needs to solve Maxwell?s equations and thus
calculate and display the electromagnetic physics behavior at 60 frames per
second, the rate required for interactive gaming. Several approaches are used to
accomplish this. This simulator is built from the ground up, with a unique
choice of variables that prioritizes qualitative understanding over the circuit
size and accuracy requirements of an industrial simulator. The simulator focuses
on components and circuits commonly used in teaching. The simulator also
utilizes the combined central/graphics processing hardware available in modern
mobile devices. With this simulator as the core gaming engine, the company is
building a game where children as young as five can experiment with and
intuitively understand the basics of electricity, magnetism, and circuits.