* 1721024
* Geometric and Topological Modeling and Computation of Biomolecular Structure, Function, and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Guowei Wei, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2020
* USD 375,000.00

A major feature of the biological science in the 21st century is its transition
from qualitative and descriptive to quantitative and analytical. Experimental
exploration of self-organizing biomolecular systems, such as viruses, molecular
motors and proteins in Alzheimer's disease, has been a dominating driving force
in scientific discovery and innovation in the past few decades. Unfortunately,
quantitative understanding of biomolecular structure, function, and dynamics
severely lags behind the pace of the experimental progress. Fundamental
challenges that hinder the current quantitative understanding of biomolecular
systems are their tremendous complexity and excessively large number of degrees
of freedom. Most biological processes occur in water, which constitutes 65-90
percent human cell mass. An average human protein has about 5500 atoms, which,
together with its surrounding water molecules, involve about 100,000 degrees of
freedom. The dimensionality increases dramatically for subcellular organelles
and multiprotein complexes. The real-time structure optimization, dynamic
simulation, and function prediction of molecular motors and/or viruses in human
cells are intractable with full-atom models at present. A crucial question is
how to reduce the number of degrees of freedom, while retaining the fundamental
physics in complex biological systems. This project addresses grand challenges
in the structure, function, and dynamics of self-organizing biomolecular systems
due to exceptionally massive data sets. These challenges are tackled through the
introduction of a new mathematical models, together with advanced computational
methods to deal with excessively large biomolecular data sets. This proposal
offers innovative approaches to an important area in massive data analysis,
dimensionality reduction, computational mathematics and mathematical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the aforementioned
challenges by a number of geometric and topological approaches. First, a
multiscale framework is proposed to reduce the dimensionality and number of
degrees of freedom by a macroscopic continuum description of the aquatic
environment, and a microscopic discrete description of biomolecules.
Additionally, adaptive coarse-grained approach based on persistently stable
manifolds is introduced to further reduce the dimensionality of excessively
large biomolecular systems. A total free energy functional is introduced to
bring the macroscopic surface tension and microscopic potential interactions on
an equal footing. The differential geometry theory of surfaces is utilized to
describe the interface between macroscopic and microscopic domains. Potential
driven geometric flows are constructed to minimize the total free energy
functional. Furthermore, evolutionary topology and total curvature are
introduced to analyze the topology-function relationship of biomolecules. Frenet
frames are utilized to characterize the local geometry and associated stable
manifolds in dynamical data of biomolecular systems. Machine learning algorithms
are proposed to extract stable manifolds. Finally, perturbation strategy is
introduced to explore the persistence of stable manifolds, which provides the
assurance for the reliability of the coarse grained model. In addition to
promising and extensive preliminary results illustrating the power of this
approach, extensive validation and application have been proposed to ensure that
the proposed methodology yields robust and powerful tools for biomolecular
structure optimization, function prediction and dynamical
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences with cofounding from the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.