* 1721968
* SBIR Phase I:  Removal of VOCs using Novel Photocatalytic Table-Top Luminaires
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Melissa Petruska, SONATA SCIENTIFIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is establishment of sustainable, cost-effective
technology to mitigate local volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) and other indoor
air pollutants by using photocatalysts to effectively destroy them at their
point of generation. VOC exposure is pervasive in many commercial environments,
including nail salons, where employees work with materials that emit VOCs which
can pose health risk without adequate protection. The proposed innovation
addresses key gaps limiting the successful application of photocatalysts to
these environments, specifically the need to eliminate by-products that may form
during VOC destruction and the use of visible light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as
alternatives to the harmful ultraviolet (UV) lights currently employed for
photocatalysis. Novel photocatalytic materials will be applied to achieve safe,
facile implementation at the point of exposure in commercial activities where
employees are directly impacted. An improved understanding of the activity of
innovative photocatalysts in the visible light range will enhance the overall
understanding of photocatalytic materials. The technology will also form the
core foundation of high performance and attractive residential products, which
will improve indoor air quality in homes. Together, these applications hold the
promise to broadly impact society by providing improved health for millions of
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to improve
indoor air quality by developing a technology platform to enable efficient and
effective point-of-use VOC removal in commercial, residential, and select
industrial environments. Photocatalysts are widely known as effective chemical
scrubbers and disinfectants. When exposed to UV light, the surfaces become
chemically active via formation of reactive oxygen species. This surface
chemistry has been proven effective to decompose toxic VOCs and to kill spores,
bacteria, and viruses. Because it is harmful to humans, the use of UV light to
activate the photocatalyst greatly limits implementation of this technology.
Additionally, ineffective photocatalyst designs can result in incomplete
decomposition of the VOCs. The goal of the current research is to develop a
visible-LED-activated photocatalyst engineered to completely convert target VOCs
to carbon dioxide and water. The improvements to the photocatalyst design will
enable its implementation in luminaires that are easily integrated into the work
environment at the point of VOC generation. The decomposition of VOCs at
concentrations typically found in commercial and home environments will be
explored using the developed photocatalyst, with particular attention given to
the mitigation of by-products and the enhancement of photocatalyst lifetime.