* 1721863
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Three Dimensional Flocked Carbon Fiber Microwave Absorbers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Robert Doneker, TangiTek, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2018
* USD 224,956.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will support the
development, characterization, and commercialization of nonconductive,
magnetically loaded, carbon fiber (CF) composite microwave absorbers.
Manufacturers use absorbers to protect their products from unwanted
Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) and to meet Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) regulations and standards. EMI from external and internal sources can
degrade the operation and performance of electronics. The demand for EMI
absorbing materials that are cost effective, lightweight, thin, flexible and
wide-spectrum continues to grow rapidly as microwave communications and mobile
technologies become ubiquitous. The overall EMI shielding market exceeded $5.4
billion in 2015 and is expected to grow to $7.8 billion in the next 5 years.
Absorber materials developed in this project can be applied to almost any type
of antenna, circuit board, cable, gasket or enclosure. The project goal and
broader impacts of this technology are development of lightweight, thin, high
performance, microwave absorber materials that provide increased energy
efficiency, design flexibility, reduced costs and improved connectivity for a
wide range of markets, applications, products and devices. The product is
suitable for many market sectors including automotive, consumer electronics,
telecom and aerospace where thin, lightweight and wide-spectrum response is
needed.

The intellectual merit of the project will be the creation of new CF composites
for microwave absorption. This project will measure and define the fundamental
electromagnetic absorption parameters of these composites in the 1 - 12 GHz
range. Characterization data such as dielectric constants, complex electric
permittivity, magnetic permeability, loss tangents and layer thickness of the
absorbers will be measured and derived. Such parameterization is essential for
simulation modeling and design optimization of such absorbers for various
markets and applications. Absorber attenuation and frequency response will be
simulated and validated with laboratory transmission line and reflectivity
testing. These composites use both magnetic and dielectric mechanisms to absorb
microwave energy. Composite CF absorber materials are nonconductive and rely on
insertion loss and impedance matching and/or cavity resonance effects.
Processes, techniques and equipment needed for commercial production will be
investigated. Graduate students and faculty will be supported in development of
test, measurement and modeling techniques. The execution of the project will
demonstrate the effectiveness and advantages of using CF composites as microwave
absorbing materials and will provide a pathway to commercialization and product
design. Successful completion of the project will create new high performance
materials for the aerospace, automotive and consumer markets.