* 1721752
* SBIR Phase I:  Pre-filled Cartridges for Personalized Medicine
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Arun Giridhar, PharmaPrinter LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to design, build, test, and refine a cartridge of
medicine for use with an inkjet printer for printing medicine that was developed
with past NSF ERC support for academic research and I-Corps support for market
research. Similar to how a conventional inkjet printer deposits small quantities
of liquid ink on blank paper, the printer deposits precisely measured quantities
of medicine on blank carriers to make the final pharmaceutical product. Due to
its smaller size and relatively quick production times, the printer enables and
is currently aimed at personalized medicine applications, wherein dosages and
other product factors are customized to individual named patients by their
medical practitioner and drug products are made for the patient to suit based on
such a patient-specific prescription. The detailed development of medicine
cartridges has not been attempted before, and is specifically pursued in this
SBIR Phase I project to demonstrate cleanliness, address potential
counterfeiting concerns, provide ease of use, and provide tracking if required.
Such cartridges are envisioned to enhance the impact of printed medicine for
personalized medicine applications, thereby improving the level of healthcare
for this nation?s ill and creating a high-value just-in-time pharmaceutical
production market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is technologically very challenging
to adapt the cartridge concept to pharmaceutical applications. These challenges
include: the need for the cartridge to maintain cleanliness and integrity during
storage and in use; the need to ensure that final products match required
composition and dissolution profiles; the need to ensure that the contents of a
cartridge are shelf-stable over its life; the prevention of any accidental
introduction of impurities or deliberate counterfeiting; and the need to
preclude operator error in wrong-substance or wrong-dose dispensing. Further
challenges include the need to select and optimize cartridge size and form
factors. Preliminary designs for cartridges have been identified, and this SBIR
Phase I support will enable such designs to be built, tested and improved. Such
cartridges will be filled with both inert materials and with certain specific
drug substances identified as being of commercial interest. The cartridge and
printer are planned to recognize each other to prevent operator transcription
error. Testing for composition and impurities is planned with standard
analytical chemistry techniques used in the pharmaceutical sector, such as high
pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) or mass spectrometry. The end result is a
robust and reliable cartridge, to transform personalized medicine for the better
for everyone.&lt;br/&gt;