* 1721284
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced Physical-Layer Secure Wireless Chaotic Waveforms for Industrial IoT
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Anthony Hill, Chaos Prime Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a new disruptive approach to enable the
digital transformation of US industrial infrastructure through extreme low
latency, highly reliable and secure wireless networks. The proposal aligns
closely with U.S. government programs such as Manufacturing USA and the National
Robotics Initiative. The World Economic Forum reported recently that
manufacturing has been immensely important to the prosperity of nations. This
has never been more true than right now as countries compete to make huge
investments in the digital transformation process of their manufacturing firms.
The innovation provides significant advancement that is expected to boost U.S.
worker productivity, advance wireless innovation and increase cost savings and
business agility. The Industrial Internet of Things drives new investment in
automated factories, industrial digital networks and integration with real-time
edge computing. Data expansion at the edge of today's networks are new
challenges for industrial firms that seek to deploy flexible and economically
viable digital infrastructure. The company provides an innovative solution that
enables wireless edge computing. Instead of expensive and inflexible wired
networks, this new technology unlocks the full potential of wireless sensor
networks for automation and control systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will demonstrate the company's concept of ultra-secure, highly reliable,
time-sensitive/synchronized wireless protocol for Industrial IoT markets. The
novel system design is a general purpose, extremely low latency, wireless
communications link that supports real-time connection to industrial devices.
The company's technology operates chaos-based spread spectrum communications
links, functional chaos-based IIoT sub-nets with anticipated scalability of a
plurality of sub-nets operating within unlicensed bands. Enabling an extreme
precision time synchronization is critical to industrial systems and network
applications in time-sensitive edge computing networks. To date, standard access
technologies such as Ethernet are not deterministic and clock synchronization
protocols are fundamentally limited by the characteristics of packet switching
or efficient access to reliable clocks. In particular, legacy network's jitter,
packet buffering and scheduling in switches and network stack overheads add non-
deterministic variances to the round trip time, which must be accurately
measured to synchronize clocks. This proposal is for a wireless-based
synchronization technology that uses more granular timing mechanisms to achieve
nanosecond precision. The company introduces a clock synchronization protocol
that uses wireless chaotic waveforms that connects to network devices for
decentralized clock synchronization. This eliminates the need for wires and non-
deterministic elements in clock synchronization protocols.