* 1721940
* STTR Phase I:  New devices for the rapid and accurate characterization of airborne microbes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Mark Hernandez, Aerosol Devices Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader reaching impacts/commercial potential of this Small Business
Innovation Research project stems from the development and application of a new
generation of cost-effective devices that can efficiently recover, preserve and
quantify airborne microbes in near real time. An improved ability to
characterize the microbiology of indoor aerosols has a multitude of important
engineering and public health benefits for urban society. This includes a vastly
improved ability to monitor bioaerosols in health care settings; in water-
damaged buildings; in plane/rail/bus transportation centers; as well as other
high-density public venues. Through this work, emerging aerosol technology will
be optimized and deployed in portable instrumentation that reports what
currently marketed aerosol monitoring equipment cannot provide: the identity,
distribution and abundance of airborne microorganisms indoors. This approach
provides an unprecedented path to compile large exposure databases, which enable
the scientific and medical community to better understand the potential effects
of indoor microbial air pollution. Compared to conventional aerosol sampling,
these new filter-less devices require little human oversite, communicate aerosol
data to cloud-based servers, and preserve bioaerosol samples with exceptional
fidelity. These next generation instruments provide an innovative, unobtrusive
and practical method for surveying the indoor air we breathe every day, in near
real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project integrates portable
lasers for real-time microbe enumeration, with humidity controls that
efficiently recover bacteria, fungi and pollen from indoor air. This advanced
equipment assembly accurately counts, preserves and concentrates airborne
microbes for stringent biochemical analysis that is relevant to public health.
The opportunity for this new instrumentation leverages the fundamental
technological advantages it has over conventional sampling equipment, which
until now predominantly relies on filtering large quantities of indoor air. The
mechanical stresses microbes must endure during conventional air filtration,
seriously compromises the accuracy of airborne microbial analyses. The research
objective of this work is to challenge this novel instrumentation array with
known quantities of airborne microbes that commonly inhabit the indoor
environment. Using widely accepted engineering and biochemistry methods, the
overarching goal is to systematically validate the efficiency of this new
equipment, both in the laboratory and in the field. We anticipate markedly
better quantitative recovery of airborne microbial activity and genetic material
(DNA) where directly compared to its filter-based counterparts. Thus, the
commercial and societal value of this new instrumentation is realized through
displacing outmoded aerosol collection methods with highly efficient filter-less
air sampling devices, outfitted with modern optics and digital automation.