* 1721358
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Stoichiometric, Direct-Injected, Soot-Free Engine for Heavy-Duty Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Bernard Johnson, ClearFlame Engines, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will focus on the development of a new alternative to
Diesel engines for use in heavy-duty applications such as on-road
transportation, off-road farm equipment, and stationary power generation.
Currently, Diesel engines are used in all of these applications because they are
robust and powerful. Unfortunately, they also produce significant smog, soot,
and greenhouse gases that are damaging to individuals and the environment. In
contrast, the engines developed under this project will have cleaner exhaust
while producing more power at increased efficiency, all while utilizing
inexpensive alternative fuels. Since Diesel-fueled engines move 70% of the
world's goods, and produce 30% of distributed power around the globe, these
engines are inextricably linked to quality of life, and transformational
improvements in their operation can have a large, broad, positive impact on
society. This project's new engines will continue to provide essential services,
but in a way that reduces operating costs (creating savings that can be passed
on to consumers) and emissions (further saving consumers money, and improving
air quality in heavily-trafficked regions). These engines will fulfill a
critical market need for clean, powerful engine solutions, and can be integrated
into existing American-made engine product lines, increasing manufacturing
revenue, stimulating job creation, and ensuring that the United States will
remain a global leader heavy-duty engine production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on enabling these clean, powerful engines by
developing a novel, high-temperature combustion system that allows traditional
engines to be adapted to burn alternative fuels in an efficient and soot-free
manner. This requires integration of a unique combination of technologies,
joined in a way that provides benefits far greater than those that can be
achieved with the individual components in isolation. Removing any piece from
this specific combination drastically reduces performance. Because each
component plays a critical role, this project has high risk (as each subsystem
must function properly), but its sophistication also presents a high barrier to
similar efforts (since incorrect use of any component yields significantly worse
results). This project will build on previous proof-of-concept data that
verified the feasibility of this concept, and will focus on the development of
key engine subsystems, seeking to mitigate risk enough that investment from the
private sector is possible. At the end of the project, the subsystems will be
integrated into a stationary power generator as a retrofit to an existing Diesel
engine, adapting it for alternative fuel use. This would serve as a prototype
platform for the technology?illustrating its increased efficiency and power,
along with reduced emissions?and demonstrating the value of the technology to
market incumbents, hopefully spurring a licensing arrangement for engine
production.