* 1721163
* Integrating Chemistry and Earth Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Jonathon Grooms, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,258,223.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This Integrating Chemistry and Earth science (ICE) project will
design, develop, and test a new curriculum unit for high school chemistry
courses that is organized around the question, "How does chemistry shape where I
live?" The new unit will integrate relevant Earth science data, scientific
practices, and key urban environmental research findings with the chemistry
curriculum to gain insights into factors that support the approach to teaching
and learning advocated by current science curriculum standards. The overarching
goal of the project is to develop teacher capacity to teach and evaluate student
abilities to use the practices of scientists and concepts from Earth science and
chemistry to understand important phenomena in their immediate, familiar
environments. The project has the potential to serve as a model for how to make
cutting edge science directly accessible to all students. The project is a
collaborative effort that engages scientists, science education researchers,
curriculum developers, school curriculum and instruction leaders, and science
teachers in the longer term challenge of infusing Earth science concepts and
practices across the core high school science
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current guidelines and standards for science
education promote learning that engages students in three interrelated
dimensions: disciplinary core ideas, scientific practices, and crosscutting
ideas. This project is guided by the hypothesis that when provided sustained
opportunities to engage in three-dimensional learning experiences, in an
integrated Earth science and chemistry context, students will improve in their
ability to demonstrate the coordination of disciplinary core ideas, scientific
practices, and crosscutting concepts when solving problems and developing
explanations related to scientific phenomena. This project will employ a design
based research approach, and during the two development-enactment-analysis-and-
redesign cycles, the project team will collect student assessment data, teacher
interview data, observational data from lessons, teacher surveys, and reflective
teacher logbooks. These collected data will provide information about how
teachers implement the lessons, what students do during the lessons, and what
students learn from them that will lead to better design and a better
understanding of student learning. This information will be used to inform the
modification of lessons from cycle to cycle, and to inform the professional
development materials for teachers. The research agenda for the project is
guided by the following questions: 1. What are the design features of ICE
lessons that support teachers in enacting three-dimensional instruction within
the context of their classroom? 2. What are the design features of embedded
three-dimensional assessments that yield useful classroom data for teachers and
researchers regarding their students' abilities to integrate core ideas,
scientific practices, and crosscutting concepts? 3. What is the nature of
student learning related to disciplinary core ideas, scientific practices, and
crosscutting concepts that results from students' engagement in ICE lesson sets?
4. What differences emerge in student engagement and learning outcomes for ICE
lessons that incorporate local phenomena or data sets as compared to lessons
that do not? 5. What contextual factors (i.e., school context, administrative
support, time constraints, etc.) influence teachers' implementation of three-
dimensional instruction embedded within ICE lessons?