* 1721884
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable fabrication of stable perovskite solar panels using slot-die coating technique
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Gregory Gibson, FAS HOLDINGS GROUP
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to revolutionize the US solar cell market with low-
cost and high-efficiency solar cells. The development of cost-effective and
efficient solar power technologies is of national interest because solar power
has broad potential to support US priorities such as economic growth and job
creation, as well as mitigation of climate change. However, the cost of solar
energy is still high, and technological innovations are needed to further lower
costs and increase efficiency. The efficiency of perovskite solar cells has
surged to over 22% in five years of research and now rivals that of CdTe and Si-
based solar panels. Perovskite inks are made from Earth-abundant, inexpensive
precursors and can be printed on plastic foils, which can significantly reduce
their manufacturing and installation costs. However, before commercialization of
this technology can be considered, device stability and the feasibility of
reliable, scalable manufacturing of large-area panels have to be established.
This project will bridge this critical knowledge gap and develop manufacturing
technology that can compete in terms of cost and performance not only with other
solar panels but also with conventional fossil fuel-based energy sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop scalable,
reliable, reproducible, and cost-effective technology to manufacture perovskite
photovoltaic devices using an industry-proven slot die coating technique. Most
research lab perovskite solar cell devices are fabricated via spin casting, and
have a device area of less 1 sq. cm. Despite the impressive progress of this
technology, its commercially viable scalability and reliability have not yet
been demonstrated. In this project, slot-die coating will be used, which is a
proven technology to be scalable for large area processing and robust for high-
yield manufacturing in a wide range of applications. We will use the slot die
coating method and air stable p-i-n devices architecture to manufacture
perovskite solar panel with a target power conversion efficiency of 20%,
operational lifetime of more than 10,000 hours, power-to-weight ratio of 1
kW/kg, and target manufacturing cost of less than $0.3/W, which is more than a
40% reduction in costs when compared to industry leading photovoltaic
technologies.