* 1721607
* SBIR Phase I:  Envimetric - Soil and water contamination predictive modeling tools
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jason Dalton, Azimuth1, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to help environmental engineers identify and
delineate the bounds and concentrations of soil and groundwater contaminants
with greater speed and accuracy. Over 30,000 contaminant spills have been
identified in the United States alone, with thousands yet to be investigated and
returned to safe levels. The resources and effort being applied to these sites
is insufficient to ensure the safety of the affected communities across America.
Focusing the remediation resources available, in the right place increases the
rate at which federal and state regulators can close site investigations. As a
result, environmental professionals will perform remediation earlier, making the
site safe and productive again for local communities. The innovations developed
in this project will enhance understanding of contaminant migration and develop
a technical capability to use these findings to prepare more accurate conceptual
site models during a contaminant investigation. Faster site models resulting in
successful remediation directly translates into cost savings for environmental
clean-ups, reduction in damage to the environment, as well as increased
throughput and efficiency for the environmental engineering
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This SBIR Phase I project proposes to create
unique summary models for the flow, extent, depth, and shape of contaminant
plumes, with the goal of targeting resources to accelerate the remediation
process for local communities. The project leverages algorithmically derived
models of contaminant migration combined with public and private data from
decades of environmental investigations across the country. Once the data are
aggregated and analyzed, the project team will produce a collection of guideline
statistics and software tools for use by engineers investigating future sites
that are mathematically similar to those in the combined database. The project
uses predictive algorithms to determine the likely extent of underground
contaminations and applies statistical uncertainty measures to the conceptual
site model. These mechanisms will enable environmental professionals to
understand when and where additional data is required. In addition, by using a
more accurate and sophisticated measure of uncertainty, the project?s models
will provide definitive guidance to field engineers on where to collect new
sample data and where they have sufficient certainty to remediate the site using
excavation or other means. These innovations will lead to the goal of safer and
cleaner communities in less time, with fewer costs, with reduced environmental
damage.