* 1721000
* Collaborative Research: Fostering Collaborative Computer Science Learning with Intelligent Virtual Companions for Upper Elementary Students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Eric Wiebe, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,399,088.00

There is growing recognition that children can, and should, learn computer
science. One of the central tenets of computer science is that it is a
collaborative discipline, yet children do not start out with an intrinsic
ability to collaborate. The project will provide the opportunity for upper
elementary students to learn computer science and build strong collaboration
practices. Leveraging the promise of virtual learning companions, the project
will address three thrusts. First, the project will collect datasets of
collaborative learning for computer science in diverse upper elementary school
classrooms. Second, the project will design, develop, and iteratively refine its
intelligent virtual learning companions, which support dyads of students in a
scaffolded computer science learning environment with an interactive online
coding tool. Third, the project will generate research findings and evidence
about how children collaborate in computer science learning, and how best to
support their collaboration with intelligent virtual learning companions. There
will be three families of deliverables: learning activities and professional
development, an intelligent learning environment with virtual learning
companions, and research evidence that furthers the state of scholarship and
practice surrounding the collaborative learning of computer science. The project
will situate itself in highly diverse elementary schools in two states, Durham
County, North Carolina and Alachua County, Florida. This project is supported by
the Discovery Research PreK-12 program, which funds research and development of
STEM innovations and approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the
research question, "How can we support upper elementary-school students in
computer science learning and collaboration using intelligent virtual learning
companions?" The initial dataset will provide a ground-truth measure of
students' collaboration approaches to classroom computer science learning tasks
through instrumenting computer labs in elementary schools for collecting
dialogue and problem-solving activity. The project will collect triangulating
qualitative data to better understand impactful classroom dynamics around dyadic
learning of computer science. The technical innovation of the project is the way
in which student dyads are supported: each pair of children within the
elementary school classroom will interact with a dyad of state of-the-art
intelligent virtual learning companions. These companions will enhance the
classroom experience by adapting in real time to the students' patterns of
collaboration and problem solving to provide tailored support specifically for
that pair of students. The virtual learning companions will model crucial
dimensions of healthy collaboration through their dialogue with one another,
including self-explanation, question generation, attributing challenges to the
task and not to deficits in each other, and establishing common ground through
uptake of ideas. The project will compare outcomes of computer science learning
as measured in two ways: individual pre-test to post-test, and quality of
collaboratively produced solutions. The project team will measure collaborative
practices through dialogue analysis for the target collaboration strategies, as
well as interest and self-efficacy for computer science. The project will
utilize a multilevel model design to study the effect of the virtual learning
companions on student outcomes. Using speech, dialogue transcripts, code
artifact analysis, and multimodal analysis of gesture and facial expression, the
team will conduct sequential analyses that identify the virtual learning
companion interactions that are particularly beneficial for students, and focus
our development efforts on expanding and refining those interactions. They will
also identify the affordances that students did not engage with and determine
whether to eliminate or re-cast them. The analytics of collaborative process
data will once again be augmented with qualitative classroom data from field
notes, focus groups, and semi-structured interviews with students and teachers.
The themes that emerge will guide subsequent refinement of the environment and
learning activities.