* 1721594
* STTR Phase I:  SampleStream: A Sample Preparation Platform for Biologics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Neil Kelleher, Integrated Protein Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2018
* USD 224,218.00

This STTR Phase I projects aims to address major limitations in the analysis of
pharmaceuticals that are based on proteins, a group of therapeutics known as
biologics. Current methods for sample preparation and analysis of these drugs
require highly trained staff and expensive equipment to execute the multitude of
different analytical approaches that are employed to characterize these
molecules. Both personnel and equipment costs combine to limit the number of
drug candidates evaluated by pharma companies, makes it more difficult for
regulatory agencies to reproduce data provided in applications and makes it
difficult to identify counterfeit drugs. The company aims to address this issue
by creating a highly flexible sample preparation device based on a fluidic
channel that operates at reduced pressure. Proteins trapped within the channel
can undergo digestion, reduction, alkylation and other common sample preparation
procedures in an unattended and automated fashion. Subsequently, prepared
samples may be eluted at high concentration, ready for downstream analysis. By
dramatically reducing the equipment costs and reducing the required expertise
for sample preparation, the company?s technology will have a large impact on the
number of drug candidates that are evaluated by pharma companies, it will make
it easier for regulatory agencies to reproduce data provided by manufacturers,
and it will improve their ability to detect counterfeit drugs. All of these
benefits will result in more and cheaper biologics making it to the market,
ultimately improving the health and wellness of the
populace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The company?s device combines concepts of
diafiltration, asymmetric flow field flow fractionation and filter assisted
sample preparation to create an automated sample preparation platform that
avoids the use of robotics. By avoiding robotics and high pressure, the platform
can operate with increased robustness and dramatically reduced cost. The
proposed research aims to demonstrate the ability of the device to perform
common sample preparation steps, such as reduction/denaturation, digestion, and
deglycosylation and assess issues of reproducibility, reliability and carryover.
While many of the workflows described herein have been demonstrated in molecular
weight cutoff filters, implementation of these within a fluidic channel will
directly advance the company?s understanding of the mechanisms of loss in sample
preparation, provide a refined estimate of the cost savings that might be
achieved in real world applications, and improve our understanding of transport
for small molecules across these membranes.