* 1721434
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Purity Extraction of PET from Carpet Waste
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Mubasher Ahmed, Ambercycle, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project will enable the recycling
of valuable materials from complex wastes that today cannot be recovered. The
commercial impact from this innovation is to allow for complex waste streams
that contain multiple materials, such as carpets and textiles, to serve as the
source of raw materials for the manufacture of new goods in a way that is cost
advantaged. This gives those businesses that use such raw materials a
sustainable alternative and, a lower-cost, efficiently produced material. In
this way, there will be significant incentive for the reuse of thousands of tons
of material that today either goes to landfills, oceans, or is incinerated for
energy- a very low value application. The project will yield an entirely new
framework for recycling of complex, multi-component materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel technologies for
fractionating complex wastes. Multi-component wastes such as carpets and
textiles represent upwards of 4% of total landfill volume. Today, there does not
exist technology for recovering the high-value materials that are in these
wastes. The proposed project intends to develop a new approach using chemical
techniques as opposed to simple melt recycling, to enable the value-added
recycling of high value polymers from such wastes. Chemical process development
will take place in order to take the current status of the technology to a
status that is ready for implementation in a pilot plant. The main technical
objective is to develop the process for production of consistent, high purity
product. Materials such as polyester and nylon currently cannot be separated
from natural or cellulosic fibers such as cotton or even heavily cross-linked
rubbers as those that are found in carpet. The goals of the research are to
develop the proposers' current process for fractionating the nylons and
polyesters with an emphasis on achieving high purity products for reuse. To this
end, various solution processing techniques will be investigated for exclusion
of impurities from end product polymer.