* 1721495
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Methods, Algorithms, and Theory for Large Tensors
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Cun-Hui Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 260,000.00

Large amounts of multidimensional data in the form of multilinear arrays, or
tensors, arise routinely in modern applications from such diverse fields as
chemometrics, genomics, physics, psychology, and signal processing, among many
others. At the present time, our ability to generate and acquire such data has
far outpaced our ability to effectively extract useful information. There is a
clear need to develop novel statistical methods, efficient computational
algorithms, and fundamental mathematical theory to analyze and exploit
information in these types of data. This research project builds upon prior work
in high-dimensional statistics, genomics, quantum physics, fast functional MRI,
and closed-loop diabetes control to address the challenges in analysis of large
tensorial data sets. It is anticipated that the project will help to advance
future research in these and other areas of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main challenges in dealing with
this type of data is to develop methods of statistical inference to achieve both
the statistical and computational efficiencies. More often than not, these two
aims are not simultaneously achieved by existing methods: there is a gap between
the optimal rate in the minimax sense and the best rate achievable by existing
polynomial-time algorithms. The overarching goal of this project is to develop
statistical methods, algorithms, and theory to efficiently, both statistically
and computationally, analyze large scale data in the form of tensors. In
particular, four most common and interrelated problems will be studied
systematically: low-rank tensor denoising, low-rank tensor regression,
estimation of the moment tensor, and tensor phase retrieval.