* 1721335
* SBIR Phase I: Bridging the Education Gap Between Block-Based Programs and Cryptic C++ Code with an Internet of Things Based Interactive Code Development and Debug Platform
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* David Ewing, Firia, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2018
* USD 224,915.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a low cost educational platform which
provides students a gateway to understanding and writing software code in modern
real-world programming languages. The research addresses a pressing need in the
K-12 setting to engage both teachers and students in Coding as a Literacy.
Current approaches to teaching computer science and programming principles in
K-12 often fail to bridge the gap between block-based graphical representations
and text-based programming languages. Strong growth in Maker Spaces within
school classrooms and libraries has led to a proliferation of Maker-oriented
products in the K-12 setting, but teachers and students alike struggle to
understand the software coding required to make meaningful use of them. The
project embraces the Maker spirit with an expandable robotics platform that
provides fertile ground for lesson development, paired with software that
enables step-by-step execution of the student's code over a wireless connection.
The commercialization of this technology will augment the effectiveness of STEM
initiatives underway in the nation?s schools, keep students engaged in more
advanced computer programming as they transition into middle and high school
levels, boost the enrollment in technical disciplines at the University level,
and ultimately increase the technology-related global competitiveness of the
national workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to overcome
current limitations in microcontroller-based software development, with specific
focus on the enablement of interactive debugging capabilities without the use of
"target monitor" hardware external to the microcontroller itself. The project
includes both software and hardware development efforts, as the research is
directed at enabling a highly integrated system through the use of state-of-the-
art silicon technology designed for Internet of Things (IoT) applications. The
advent of these System on Chip (SoC) integrated circuits brings the potential
for a radically lower cost, IP-connected educational technology platform. The
hardware aspect of the project will include development of a printed circuit
board (PCB) assembly leveraging a wireless SoC to provide a Wi-Fi connected
robotic computing platform with an expandable circuit interface and a complement
of built-in peripherals designed for educational applications. The software will
provide a web-based user interface seamlessly integrated with the hardware
platform to enable a level of interactive coding not previously seen on a
wireless SoC. The commercialized product resulting from this project will
leverage this interactive debugging user experience to teach real-world
programming language development skills.