* 1721494
* SBIR Phase I:  Breathalyzer for Non-invasive Disease Detection Using a Single Ammonia Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Timothy Myles, Health Esense, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project lies in the opportunity to provide accurate,
real time information to motivate patients to manage their disease; drive early,
evidenced-based interventions; and prevent unnecessary physician visits and
hospital stays. This non-invasive device, a breathalyzer, will measure the level
of ammonia in exhaled breath. High ammonia levels are associated with conditions
such as advanced liver disease, urea cycle disorders (UCD), or adverse reactions
to medication. It has serious consequences: disorientation, organ/brain damage,
coma and even death, making it important to take steps to quickly reduce
systemic ammonia and, if the cause is unknown, trigger further diagnostic
activities. Currently, ammonia levels are determined through blood testing,
which is invasive, takes time, requires a lab/hospital visit, and is prone to
errors. There are no tools available to accurately measure ammonia, real time.
The device will enable patients and families to take control and make better
decisions: what to eat, when not to drive, when to go to the hospital, among
other things. This can improve productivity, enhance quality of life for
patients and their families, avoid unnecessary healthcare expenditures, and save
lives.

The proposed project seeks to develop a breathalyzer prototype to detect ammonia
in exhaled breath. The device is expected to provide clinically-accurate, real
time information to patients and clinicians. Ammonia occurs naturally as a by-
product of protein metabolism but, at elevated levels, it is indicative of
disease and can have very serious consequences. Contemporary research has
identified roughly 250 common volatile organic compounds in exhaled breath, many
associated with specific diseases. Small concentration differences can detect
whether someone is healthy or ill. This requires highly sensitive, selective and
durable sensors that can perform in high humidity. The core platform is a
Reactive Spray Deposition technology, a proprietary sensor manufacturing
technology that creates a porous nanostructure metal oxides grains layer, and is
able to provide results with a fast response time at a low cost. This results
from the ability to easily and inexpensively produce different morphologies of
materials from the vapor phase in the open atmosphere in a one-step process. The
end-product of this project will be a prototype utilizing a single sensor for
detection of NH3. It will include a novel breath delivery system and associated
signal processing algorithms for quantification of the gas concentration in
breath, based on the sensor response.