* 1721562
* SBIR Phase I:  Fully-Automated Non-contact Probe System for On-wafer MillimeterWave and THz Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2018
* NIRU NAHAR, TeraProbes Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel,
fully-automated, non-contact metrology system that is accurate, repeatable, and
cost-effective for comprehensive characterization of high-performance
electronics, photonics, micro-fluidics, and biomedical device technologies. The
innovative non-contact solution is free of the conventional wear and tear issues
plaguing contact-based probing systems. The proposed technique could open up new
research areas and directions that could have an immediate benefit to the entire
semiconductor industry, thus broadly impacting all areas of our "information-
driven" society. In particular, millimeter-wave and terahertz frequency bands
(30-3000GHz) offer unique solutions to address key problems in sensing and
spectroscopy, medical, pharmaceutical and security imaging, as well as
extremely-high-data rate, ubiquitous communications. All-electronic integrated
systems are badly needed for compact and cost effective applications in the
above-mentioned areas. More importantly, testing and characterization of these
new high-performance devices has been a challenge at their intended operation
frequencies. Thus, there is ample need for comprehensive, high-performance
metrology systems for characterizing entire electronic wafers automatically and
without making physical contact. The automated probe system proposed here
enables, for the first time, fast and accurate device and chip characterization,
without making physical contact with the test wafer.

The intellectual merit of this project is a novel non-contact probe system,
based on wireless coupling of the test signals onto the test wafer, through on-
chip antennas that are monolithically integrated with the test device. Since the
physical contact to the test wafer is eliminated, there is no wear & tear to the
chip or the test-bed, significantly improving reliability and repeatability as
well as eliminating much of the associated testing costs. This innovative
solution is scalable, and offers a comprehensive, elegant and cost-effective
solution for single or differential-mode on-wafer characterization for the first
time. Although the physical size of the on-chip antennas are slightly larger
than typical contact-probe landing pads, the overall cost-savings in operation,
labor, and maintenance offered by this innovative approach readily outweighs the
on-chip real-estate occupied by the integrated antennas. Perhaps more
importantly, this novel test-bed enables fully-automated, unattended testing of
every single chip on an entire electronic wafer, even enabling continuous
processing of multiple wafers without user involvement, thus providing
significant savings in overall testing costs for high-speed electronic devices.