* 1721809
* SBIR Phase I:  Porous Cyclodextrin Polymers: A Sustainable and Highly Effective Platform for Water Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Gokhan Barin, CycloPure, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to remove organic pollutants using newly developed
adsorbent materials derived from cyclodextrins. The chemical contamination of
water resources due to agricultural, industrial, and human activities is known
to have adverse effects on the environment, especially aquatic ecosystems, and
human health. Currently utilized adsorbents, particularly activated carbons,
typically have limitations in removing micropollutants effectively at
environmentally relevant concentrations, ranging from parts per trillion (ppt)
to parts per billion (ppb). This project will focus on the fundamental
development and manufacture of polymer adsorbents from building blocks derived
from corn starch that rapidly sequester many pollutants more effectively than
activated carbons. These polymers exhibit tiny pores and high surface areas, and
are structurally programmable to target specific contaminants and separation
challenges. Current water filtration systems found in homes, hospitals,
industrial settings, and municipal wastewater treatment sites will benefit from
these activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will develop a
sustainable materials solution to address the problem of emerging organic
contaminants in water. Promising materials are derived from a cyclodextrin
monomer and a crosslinker, which react to provide a rigid porous network.
Materials derived from this approach remove contaminants from water more
effectively than leading adsorbents, such as activated carbons. Previously,
initial polymers were prepared at laboratory scales in relatively low yields.
The objective of this proposal is to develop polymerization conditions that
provide high yields and are amenable to large-scale manufacturing processes,
while maintaining the pollutant removal performance of the polymer. This
objective will require a systematic study of reaction conditions to minimize
side reactions and maximize polymerization efficiency. Structural
characterization using various spectroscopies and porosimetry will be used to
evaluate the polymerization process as a function of the reaction conditions.
The polymer's ability to bind pollutants will also ensure that improved yields
still maintain performance. Determining the optimal polymerization conditions
and processing protocols will be critical for validating the technical
feasibility of the proposed porous cyclodextrin polymer and will also be
criteria for the success of this SBIR Phase I project.