* 1721296
* SBIR Phase I:  Medical Devices for Real-time Radiation Dosimetry at Sub-millimeter Spatial Resolution
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,11/30/2018
* David Lewis, eBeam Film LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks development of a
novel dosimeter for 2-D mapping of radiation dose in real-time at sub-millimeter
spatial resolution. The high spatial resolution of the dosimeter is essential in
supporting stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) and stereotactic body radiation
therapy (SBRT) treatments. These rapidly emerging modalities deliver precise
doses of radiation to small, well defined treatment sites while minimizing
exposure of critical neighboring anatomy. With the annual number of SRS/SBRT
treatments approaching 1,000,000 and growing 5-10% annually there is a market
need for a dosimeter with sub-millimeter resolution and the capability of
measuring in real-time. The routine pre-treatment verification of each patient
therapy plan becomes a target application. The value of the market for the
dosimeter alone exceeds $10 million annually. The value is amplified through
enablement of the safe and efficacious delivery of SRS and SBRT treatments. Use
of these modalities greatly impacts the efficiency of radiotherapy by
substantially reducing the number of individual sessions in a course of
treatment. The net result is lower cost for the treatment course, an increase in
the number of patients/year for each linear accelerator equipment unit and a
large reported improvement in patient outcomes.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in combining and adapting key
elements of two well-established commercial technologies, piezoelectric polymers
and radiochromic film, to produce a hybrid dosimeter. This dosimeter preserves
the high spatial resolution of radiochromic film while improving its usability
by making the changes caused by radiation exposure to become detectable by
electronic means in real-time. During use, the flexible, single-use
piezoelectric array dosimeter (PARD) fits into a re-usable data acquisition
electronics module that transmits a map of measured doses to a Medical Physicist
outside the radiation cell. Radiochromic film, the only current dosimeter with
sub-millimeter spatial resolution, is inconvenient owing to the long delay
between exposure and measurement as well as the extra time and effort in
facilitating the measurements. This drawback adversely impacts its usefulness in
the day-to-day verification of patient treatment plans. The hybrid PARD product
provides a dense, flexible array (0.1 mm spacing) of detectors with the unique
ability for dose measurement at sub-millimeter resolution in real time. This
overcomes key drawbacks of existing electronic array devices which are incapable
of spatial resolution below 5 mm and unsuitable for the small radiation fields
associated with SRs and SBRT treatments.