* 1721342
* SBIR Phase I:  Metal Additive Manufacturing Simulation on a Desktop
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Praveen Yadav, SciArt LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2018
* USD 223,007.00

This SBIR phase I project will provide a unique computational capability to
additive manufacturing (AM) designers, engineers, and technicians for making
better decisions with regards to metal 3D printing. Through AM, one can
fabricate complex parts that were previously impossible to manufacture.
Perfecting an AM process is however non-trivial, entailing time-consuming and
expensive shop-floor experimentation. For example, fabricating a typical hand-
sized component on a metal AM machine can take several hours to complete,
costing thousands of dollars. Consequently, there is significant interest today
to replace experiments with computer simulation. But AM simulations today
require massively parallel computer clusters, such as those available only at
national labs. This has largely deterred industrial progress and innovation. The
proposed research has the potential to yield an algorithmically advanced AM
simulation program that can run on standard desktop workstations without loss of
accuracy. An environmental impact of this SBIR proposal is that by promoting
virtual simulation of AM, the amount of wasted material will be minimized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research lies at the intersection of
computational mechanics, and manufacturing. It proposes to develop a novel
computational approach to additive manufacturing simulation that bypasses the
memory bottleneck observed in traditional finite element analysis (FEA). By
using a voxel representation where all elements are congruent (i.e. possess a
rigid transformation symmetry) and have identical material properties, the
memory requirements can be reduced dramatically and thereby speed up the
simulation by orders of magnitude compared to traditional FEA software. Similar
approach has been successfully demonstrated for problems in structural mechanics
and topology optimization. The proposal aims to extend the approach to in-
process AM simulation where G-code will be used to identify elements in a heat
affected zone for laser and electron beam based processes, and the congruent
elements will be identified for each phase in the process to reduce simulation
time.