* 1721773
* SBIR Phase I: An additive method for manufacturing customized textile products
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Elizabeth Esponnette, unspun, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will demonstrate a novel method for additively
manufacturing textile products. Presently, the clothing manufacturing industry
still relies on manual sewing machines that were invented over one hundred and
seventy years ago. This system limits the manufacturing process and textile
capability; an abundance of steps leads to waste, inefficiencies, and segmented
products. Further, due to the low cost of foreign labor, the US textile industry
has essentially stalled, as 97.3 percent of all clothing sold in the United
States in 2015 was imported. This project seeks to develop a novel method for
manufacturing textile products by employing additive manufacturing methodologies
to automate the production process, while simultaneously enabling complete
customization and on-demand production. This technology will enable premium and
competitive textile manufacturing to return from overseas, creating high value-
added jobs and a designer community in the United States while also generating
tax revenue. In the same way that 3D Printing technology has revolutionized the
hard goods manufacturing process, this project seeks to create an entire new
industry of additively manufactured textile products, enabling significant
opportunities for future innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
a novel technology to manufacture near-net-shape three dimensional textile
products. To develop this technology, this project will first prove feasibility
through creating constituent textile panels of non-standard shapes with 3D
topography, laying the foundation for continued development into fully three-
dimensional, seamless, finished products produced in-situ. By additively
producing garments from a unique 3D model, complete customization to each
individual consumer is possible on a large scale- though this has never before
been accomplished. Further, through the on-demand production of clothing
customized to individual consumers, the need for substantial inventory buildup
is eliminated. In this way, additively manufactured textile products are both
more desirable to consumers and more economical to producers. As such, the
societal and environmental benefits of automated and on-demand textile
manufacturing within the United States are significant, including eliminating
massive amounts of waste from typical cut-and-sew manufacturing techniques,
revamping a struggling American manufacturing industry, and minimizing the
economical, environmental, and geopolitical implications of the United States'
current dependence on a convoluted global supply chain.