* 1721243
* Understanding Huckleberry Pollination With Research Designed for Student Participaton
* EDU,EES
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Janene Lichtenberg, Salish Kootenai College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2021
* USD 198,806.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project,
entitled "Understanding Pollination With Research Designed for Student
participation (UPWRDS)," aligns directly with that goal, and moreover may prove
to be a model for similar engagement at other small community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to provide an
opportunity for SKC faculty and students to conduct original and community
relevant research that contributes to scientific knowledge, benefits education,
and leverages support for continuing research opportunities. UPWRDS specifically
addresses the following: 1) Does the exclusion of pollinators significantly
influence huckleberry productivity on the Flathead Reservation?; and 2) Which
organisms are the primary probable pollinators of huckleberry plants on the
Reservation compared to the overall active pollinator community? The work will
be pursued through pollinator exclosure experiments, direct netting of
pollinators observed visiting huckleberry flowers, time-constrained net sweeps,
berry productivity counts, and berry seed counts. Time-lapse cellular cameras
will be employed to track huckleberry phenology to assist researchers in
determining the timing for data collection during flowering and peak berry
ripeness.