* 1721384
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Mechanical-Optical Patient Tracking for Robotic Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Alon Mozes, Neocis Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to innovate a
novel patient tracking system, which will improve robotic surgery usability in
an intra-operative environment. Robotic surgery is becoming ubiquitous across
various medical procedures, and data continues to show improved clinical
results. However, usability challenges impede broader adoption. This project
will combine multiple tracking modalities, including mechanical and optical
tracking, to create a hybrid tracking technology that allows for the advantages
of each modality. This will optimize patient range of motion while minimizing
line-of-sight challenges. This patient tracking technology can be used in
conjunction with an existing robotic surgery system for dental implant
procedures, which comprise a significant market opportunity. Dental implants are
the standard of care for tooth replacement, and the dental implant market in the
US is over $1 billion and growing nearly 8% per year with more than 14 million
implants being placed annually worldwide. This technique can be used not only to
revolutionize dental implant surgery, where the system is currently applied, but
also to potentially create opportunities in other cranial procedures, which are
otherwise burdened by invasive, cumbersome tracking technologies that impede
intra-operative usability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of the first
hybrid patient tracking device that combines mechanical and optical tracking
methods. Optical tracking systems require that cameras have direct line-of-sight
to several tracked markers in the surgical field, which poses a significant
challenge to the surgeon and assistants that have to carefully avoid blocking
the camera's field-of-view. Mechanical tracking systems limit a patient's range
of motion and can be bulky. The success of this project will lead to the
development of a robotic surgery system for dental implant procedures that
encompasses: 1) pre-operative CT-based planning software, 2) a visual guidance
system that provides on-screen graphics like a GPS system, 3) a hybrid optical
and mechanical tracking system that monitors the patient position, and 4) a
robot arm that physically grasps the drill at the same time as the surgeon in
order to provide haptic feedback, constraining the surgeon to match the planned
osteotomy. This system enables minimally invasive, flapless surgery that is
shown to result in less pain for the patient and faster surgery. It is designed
to be easy to use and seamlessly integrate into the surgeon's workflow.