* 1721692
* STTR Phase I:  Utilizing Natural Variation to Increase the Antioxidant Carotenoid Content in High Yielding Corn Varieties
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Torbert Rocheford, NUTRAMAIZE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development and commercialization of a novel
variety of corn that is high in carotenoids and orange in color, and with yields
that are competitive with today's commercial hybrids. In the diets of Americans,
two important antioxidant carotenoids, lutein and zeaxanthin, are in low
abundance. This deficiency has been associated with higher risk for degenerative
diseases such as Age Related Macular Degeneration, and potentially, dementia.
The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to get American's to consume more
lutein and zeaxanthin, which will be achieved by increasing significantly the
levels of these antioxidants in the most widely grown staple crop: Corn. Since
corn is used in a wide variety of popular processed food formats, improving the
carotenoid content of corn provides an opportunity to significantly increase the
amount of health benefiting antioxidants that Americans consume, without
changing consumers eating habits. However, in order for this strategy to be
economically feasible, corn varieties that are high in carotenoids must be
developed that are also high in grain yield. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I project proposes to develop genetic markers for favorable alleles of
genes associated with carotenoid biosynthesis and stability. There is
considerable genetic variation in genes associated with carotenoid biosynthesis
and stability, however, the most favorable alleles are typically not found in
varieties that are commercially relevant to US corn production. Thus, the
development of genetic markers will enable favorable alleles to be moved from
lower yielding germplasm that is not well adapted to the US Corn Belt into elite
inbreds suitable for the production of yield-competitive commercial F1 hybrids
for the US market. The primary goal of this Phase I research is to create user-
friendly genetic markers associated with favorable alleles for 12 key genes
associated with carotenoid biosynthesis and stability. These markers will then
be validated for efficacy by testing their ability to create progenies with
higher carotenoid production, particularly lutein and zeaxanthin. This will
result in a set of markers and experimental breeding materials that can be used
to rapidly develop fixed inbreds for use in the production of yield-competitive
high carotenoid F1 hybrids.