* 1721290
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Water Flooding Technique to Enhance Oil Recovery
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Teresa Nealon, ESal
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2018
* USD 224,740.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR Phase I project is to
develop a new water flood technology to increase oil recovery. The best current
technology is limited to 30 - 50% recovery leaving significant resources in the
ground. The available methods to further increase recovery are expensive, have
limited application and can cause environmental damage. The proposed method is
much lower cost and has minimal environmental impact. Our technique does not use
chemicals or additives thus avoiding the risk of contaminating ground and
surface water resources. Rather than drill thousands of new wells, our approach
revitalizes old fields and requires little modification to the existing
infrastructure and operational procedures. It would allow older fields to
continue to operate, providing revenues, jobs and taxes while increasing and
further diversifying our domestic oil reserves. Development of these currently
unrecoverable oil resources could enable long-term stabilization of oil prices
at reasonable levels and offer new business opportunities for small operators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to measure the
wettability in several petroleum reservoirs and to determine the equilibrium
constants required to better describe the interaction between mineral surfaces
and surface-active components of crude oil. These constants will be added to a
geochemical model to evaluate the capability of the models to predict
wettability. Wettability in petroleum reservoirs is poorly constrained, and
current formulations that depend on interfacial energy cannot accurately portray
the observations and offer little predictive capability. The current wettability
measurement methodologies rely on flow properties to infer interfacial energy
because it is difficult to directly measure the interfacial energy between rock
and oil. Using a geochemical approach, we can explicitly represent the
electrostatic and van der Waals force that make up the interfacial energy. This
approach will produce quantitative formulations of wettability that can be
implemented in standard geochemical models. Our goals are to demonstrate that we
can measure the important reactions using standard chemical methodologies, that
these measurements can be used in geochemical models to calculate wettability
and that the models can be used to predict wettability as a function of water
chemistry, for enabling techniques for more effective water flooding and
enhanced oil recovery.