* 1721266
* SBIR Phase I:  Augmented Reality for Arm and Hand Rehabilitation Post-stroke
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Omer Turkkan, Motion Scientific
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,916.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in line with the
grand challenge of developing teaching methods that optimize learning given the
diversity of individual preferences and the complexity of each human brain.
Because there is a great variability in stroke-induced lesions that result in
marked differences in impairment and responsiveness to motor therapy, there is
even a greater need to personalize motor training in post-stroke patients. The
commercial impact of the personalized e-rehabilitation system, which will be
developed and tested, derives from its value for patients, clinics, and
insurers. For patients, the system will provide personalized training, and,
because it will encapsulate research-based principles for effective and
efficient neurorehabilitation of the upper extremity, it will largely improve
patients' outcomes. For clinics, the system will increase revenues by increasing
the number of visits per patient due to better outcomes and compliance, as well
as the number of patients trained at once in clinic gyms. For insurers, the
system will generate reports showing therapy effectiveness and, thus, validate
reimbursements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project is improving functions of the upper extremities following
neurological disorders that affect the motor system, in particular stroke, but
also Parkinson's disease and traumatic brain injury. Because therapists treating
patients with these disorders only have the time to deliver about a 1/10th of
the necessary dose of motor training in the clinic, patients are requested to
perform most of the training at home. A novel augmented reality training system
will be developed and tested. The system will automatically deliver high doses
of functional tasks via presentations of virtual targets or objects in the real
world. Using state-of-the-art motion sensing technology, the system will
accurately and precisely measure upper body movements, including hand opening
and closing. Based on these measurements, it will maximize recovery by providing
adaptive training. It will maximize patient engagement and motivation by
providing real-time and summary feedback for task success and improvements.