* 1721739
* SBIR Phase I:  IoT Smart Water Management System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Matthew Cusack, Mobius Labs, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 05/31/2018
* USD 224,949.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a simple to use "smoke alarm" for
water appliances coupled with a level of insight into water consumption and
failures that has never existed before. What was once a reliance on water meter
data for the sum of all appliances is now a detailed understanding for each
individual water fixture. This unprecedented access to water usage data at an
individual appliance level will provide the opportunity for increased data
analytics research, predictive analytics for failure modes and maintenance
scheduling, and better understanding of human consumption habits to identify and
solve problems that allow organizations to meet aggressive sustainability goals.
Only recently has there been an ability for hospitals to aggregate their medical
information to aid research efforts to treat and cure chronic diseases and
illnesses. Mobius is looking to do the same for any building owner for water, as
the growing concern to continued, reasonable costing fresh water becomes even
greater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide the opportunity
for the development of an IoT Smart Water Management System (SWMS). It will use
artificial intelligence and machine learning to both identify leaks so they can
be corrected before wasting precious water and energy, and provide predictive
analytics for actionable insights. This will significantly improve water
appliance maintenance and prevent costly water damage to properties. Further, at
a macro level, it provides municipality level insight for maintenance and crisis
management. The vision is to easily install these SWMS devices into any existing
water fixture. It will take less than 60 seconds to install and connect to the
Internet. The design goal is to be cost-effective from the start. The SWMS
provides an affordable and easy way to adopt data driven decision making into
current operations. The critical objectives set forth in this proposal are
centered on achieving a simple "smoke alarm" like warning of a fault coupled
with a robust analytics platform. Finally, these will be designed as highly
durable IoT devices that require little or no maintenance.