* 1721069
* I-Corps: Probabilistically Detecting Controversy
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* James Allan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 02/28/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in leveraging
past research on detecting controversy and bringing this technology to a
commercial setting. The project provides actionable insights to organizations
interested in securities trading, through the usage of sophisticated machine
learning and information retrieval techniques for controversial topics. The
project will initially explore markets in the financial services sector that
derive some portion of the value for their clients from acquired data streams.
Besides the financial industry, there are applications of the technology in
reputation and crisis management, as well as scope for social impact by opening
analysis and explanatory power of controversies to individual users. The project
has the potential to help users become better informed and more capable of
critically evaluating the often-overwhelming stream of content.

This I-Corps project technology relies on sophisticated machine learning and
information retrieval techniques in order to automatically detect controversial
topics. The enabling NSF-supported research recognized controversy by mapping a
webpage to algorithmically-identified controversial topics. The proposed
commercialization effort is unique because it addresses controversy and crisis
situations. The project's hypothesis is that this technology can be successfully
commercialized to the financial, equity-trading industry given their revenue
model and cost structure. The project will use the lean startup method to
perform customer interviews and explore the viability of a scalable business
model.