* 1721975
* SBIR Phase I:  MetaMaterial for Seismic Energy Absorption
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Noemi Bonessio, MetaSeismic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate
isolation pads made of a novel class of metamaterials to reduce seismic
vibrations of equipment and buildings. Use of traditional seismic isolation
materials often leads to restricted design spaces and needs expensive full-scale
device testing, which make the technology unfeasible for extensive application.
The internal architecture of the high-performance materials to be studied and
optimized in this work can enlarge the design space to embrace objects as small
as an expensive equipment and as large as a major bridge. Simplification of
testing protocols due to the shift of the isolation property from the device to
the material level adds to the Broader Impacts by making seismic isolation
accessible for a wide range of applications. The high level of seismic
protection provided by this technology constitutes an immediate value for
commercial activities that require continuity of operations after earthquakes.
The initial target is the fast growing market of data centers, with the
potential for follow-on market in residential housing construction. The
extensive application of the innovation has the potential of increasing the
resiliency of communities in areas prone to seismic activity and reducing
related direct and indirect losses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project derives from the development of an optimization framework for
the internal architecture of metamaterials for enhanced seismic protection.
There has not been a fundamental study to optimize metamaterials based on
manufacturing tolerances, costs, and performance for seismic applications. This
work will contribute to developing a set of design principles for optimized
internal material architectures depending on desired seismic performance.
Experimental investigations will be carried out to validate the methodology and
to prove the feasibility of replacing device testing with material coupon
testing to certify metamaterial pads for seismic isolation. This will include
the investigation of processing methods to manufacture material assemblies with
uniform mechanical properties, and will involve both static and dynamic testing
of the material. The key technical objectives of the project are 1) the
development of the optimization design framework based on manufacturing and
seismic performance constraints, and 2) the material testing protocol to verify
scalability and defect insensitivity of the material property. It is anticipated
that the metamaterial architecture can be modulated to provide seismic isolation
property beyond state of the art seismic isolation devices, and can be scaled
from material coupons to large assemblies without significant property
modification.