* 1721502
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and testing of a dry fracture technique to reduce water use and increase life cycle yield in oil and gas extraction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Preston Grounds, Highland Light Management Corp
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2019
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to significantly increase recovery efficiency
and decrease ecological footprint. The ecological footprint is decreased by
reducing the amount of water required to produce oil and gas from many low
permeability U.S. unconventional plays. Further, it will provide access to the
vast reserves of potential oil and gas (estimated at greater than 2 trillion
barrels) stored as immature organic material helping to enhance energy
independence for the US. The new methods will enhance production of oil and gas
from a controllable volume surrounding development wells. The proposed methods
will replace the rapid declines in well productivity of fracked wells, and the
accompanying typically less than 10% recovery of hydrocarbons in place, by a
strategy which will construct multi-year oil and gas "factories" which will have
continuous, predictable, twenty year production lifetimes. Increased recovery
factors through increased efficiency will enhance the value of existing plays
and provide a step-change in sustainable energy production while lowering
environmental impact through reducing surface disruption and minimizing water
use and disposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop the models necessary to simulate&lt;br/&gt;the Radio Frequency (RF)
waterless stimulation process, and to provide laboratory and numerical data to
support that model. A self-consistent model of the RF system and its downhole
environment, is required to define the conditions for which RF stimulation makes
economic sense, and to optimize system design for a given target play. Project
objectives are to 1) demonstrate design of a RF system which mitigates the
previous problems found with RF heating, 2) test in the laboratory the effects
of RF heating on reservoir rock subject to realistic in situ conditions to
understand the resultant crack field and accompanying permeability enhancement,
including the impact of RF heating on immature kerogen, 3) model the resulting
stress and fracture fields with sufficient fidelity to make predictions for oil
and gas recovery, and 4) use this information to form a self consistent model of
the process so that various shale plays can be evaluated. A commercial
multiphysics numerical modeling approach will be used to simulate the physical
processes that occur including feedback to account for temperature increases and
the impacts of in situ stress and structural complexity.