* 1721574
* Transforming RMBL's Year-Round Housing
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) has established itself as a
leading institution for studying the biological responses to a changing climate.
RMBL's ability to support year-round research will be transformed by building
the laboratory's first fully four season housing dedicated to scientists and
students. A changing climate, combined with rapid technological advancements,
including in genomics, the microbiome, and sensing, has significantly increased
demand for RMBL facilities outside summer. RMBL is intensively used; more than
175 scientists from 76 institutions have had research projects at the laboratory
during the last 6 years. Year-round housing will allow scientists to track
important biological activity that now happens outside summer, as well as
applying the full range of genomic, microbiome, and sensing tools available to
understanding and predicting biological systems. The new cabin will also create
unique opportunities for winter programming. RMBL works with the Crested Butte
Adaptive Sports Center, whose mission is to enhance the quality of life of
people with disabilities through exceptional outdoor adventure activities, to
provide unique opportunities to individuals with disabilities. Additionally,
RMBL works with a local school to provide K-12 science education in the
backcountry. Finally, this project will relieve housing pressure in the summer,
which will support our undergraduate research program, as well as the
scientists' research programs.

This grant would fund the first fully four season housing dedicated to
scientists year-round. Construction of this cabin would reflect the need of the
nation's scientific infrastructure to adapt to a changing climate. Over the last
35 years mean temperature has increased approximately 0.73° C and snow melt date
has advanced approximately 11 days. This has translated into biological activity
over longer parts of the year. Marmots are emerging almost 40 days earlier than
they were in the 1970's, first flowering has advanced 11 days over the last 35
years while last flowering is happening 5 days later over the same time period.
Changes in science are also driving increased demand for RMBL outside summer.
Field scientists have access to a rapidly expanding range of techniques and
tools, many of which are best utilized outside summer. We now have fall and
spring visitation associated with maintaining sensors, conducting experiments
involving the microbiome, and applying genomic techniques. RMBL's scientific
community, and our governing Board, have identified adding year-round housing as
a top priority. Despite growing demand, RMBL currently has no four-season living
facilities that provide all basic amenities to scientists. Construction of the
cabin will transform RMBL's ability to support science outside summer, leverage
a large existing investment in science by increasing access to research
equipment, and enhance RMBL's sustainability by allowing it to generate revenue
outside summer. Numerous federally funded research groups would be supported by
this project covering questions on plant population genomics, fungal-plant
associations, and biogeochemistry. These teams have struggled to maintain
productivity outside summer because of housing. This project would also support
a unique collection of long-term research and the insights they offer into a
changing world. RMBL hosts 17 long-term research programs, several extending 50+
years, which RMBL supports. Year-round housing will allow scientists to take
full advantage of this wealth of knowledge, tracking important biological
activity that now happens outside summer, as well as applying the full range of
genomic, microbiome, and sensing tools available to understanding and predicting
biological systems. More information about the Rocky Mountain Biological
Laboratory can be found at www.rmbl.org