* 1721476
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid Blood Cleansing Device to Combat Infection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Todd Giorgio, PATH EX
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a dialysis-like platform for
selective bacterial separation and removal from blood. This technology could
potentially serve as a novel blood cleansing therapy for the treatment of
disease, including sepsis. Sepsis, a life threatening organ dysfunction caused
by infection, is a condition where the risk of death is extremely high
(25%-72%), yet no effective treatments exist. In the US, over 1M people suffer
from sepsis annually. Sepsis is the most expensive condition treated in U.S.
hospitals, costing more than $20 billion per year. There are currently no
approved therapies in the US to treat sepsis. This developing technology will
serve as an effective, next-generation sepsis treatment through the direct
removal of pathogens and associated toxins from blood. The technology in this
project holds many advantages over competitors, including increased
effectiveness, hemocompatibility, elimination of pore size limitations, and
elimination of clogging issues. Commercialization of this innovation may reduce
sepsis-associated length of stay, decrease mortality rates, and potentially
reduce the current $23.7B annual US expenditure for sepsis. Fundamental
understanding generated by this work has alternative applications, including the
development of diagnostic devices for rapid infection
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to leverage the
unique properties of a novel, fluidic platform to provide a more effective and
rapid method of bacterial and endotoxin removal from circulation for the
treatment of sepsis. Sepsis is one of the leading causes of death worldwide and
no effective therapy exists for the syndrome. The anticipated research involves
1) scale up of the device for operation at flow rates suitable for humans, 2)
developing features for bacteria and endotoxin capture, and 3) evaluation of the
rate of bacterial and endotoxin capture from fluid circulating through the
scaled-up fluidic platform. It is anticipated that this work will result in a
fluidic platform capable of removing pathogens and associated toxins from blood
at a clinically translatable flow rate. The goal of this work is to provide an
easy to use, cost-effective fluidic platform for separation and capture of
bacteria and associated toxins from circulating fluid and to facilitate the use
offluidic platforms as research tools. Successful completion of these studies
will establish the commercial viability of the fluidic platform and enable the
subsequent development of a prototype device for field testing.