* 1721400
* SBIR Phase I:  Dual suppression of VEGF-A and PDGF-B with extended gene therapy for neovascular AMD
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Sarah Molokhia, iVeena Delivery Systems
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,994.00

This SBIR Phase I project will determine the feasibility of a new high risk
technology for treatment of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The
technology is an AAV2-mediated concurrent expression of recombinant proteins to
intracellularly suppress the critical growth factors VEGF-A (vascular
endothelial growth factor A) and PDGF-B (platelet-derived growth factor) in a
single injection. AMD is the leading cause of blindness in the US. The standard
of care intravitreal anti-VEGF (anti-vascular endothelial growth factor)
injections (injected monthly) achieve an initial improvement in visual acuity in
the first 3 or 4 months of treatment is followed by a plateau that persists for
2 years, followed by visual decline over the subsequent 5 years. Studies
examining retinal remodeling provided initial clues as to the importance of VEGF
and PDGF in wet AMD, while work in cancer models provided an impetus to pursue
anti-VEGF/PDGF combination therapy for the treatment of wet AMD. This project
will lead to an effective product for the treatment of wet AMD and related
diseases. A long-term VEGF inhibition and PDGF suppression without repetitive
intravitreal injections would significantly reduce the number of intraocular
injections and the risks of infection, bleeding, retinal detachment, fibrosis,
and pain for the patient.

This project proposes an AAV2-delivery vehicle for expressing intraceptors which
sequester VEGF-A and PDGF-B. The primary innovation is the development of a
novel gene therapy to concurrently suppress VEGF-A and PDGF-B, using a
bicistronic AAV2 vector. The proposed studies in mice will determine feasibility
for potential commercialization of this alternative which would be injected
annually and provide long-term sustained suppression of the two key mediators of
neovascular AMD, including the potential for reduced fibrosis (scarring) with
PDGF-B blockade. Further, this therapy?s ability to block intracellular
autocrine loops may complement or improve upon the efficacy of current
extracellular treatments, while avoiding neurotoxicity of diffuse extracellular
VEGF suppression. This project?s innovations earned a patent in 2012 (US Patent
No. 8,211,864 B2). The proposal will refine the product and develop a modified
AAV virus with selective tropism for CNV and minimize off-target side effects.
The proposed feasibility studies Aims 1 and 2 will establish a baseline for
future safety and efficacy studies in non-human primates which is a key mile
stone for investors. Aim 1 will involve AAV2 manufacture, while Aim 2 will
evaluate safety and efficacy, using histology, fluorescein angiography, and
optical coherence tomography.