* 1721652
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Throughput Nanoparticle Characterization for Life Sciences Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* David Freedman, nanoView Diagnostics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a detection technology that enables
scientists and researchers to better understand biological particles circulating
in biofluids. This improved understanding would lead to new disease diagnostics
that could improve patient outcomes and reduce healthcare costs. The technology
being developed allows high-throughput detection and characterization of
exosomes, which are nanovesicles produced by cells and released in all
biological fluids (e.g., blood, saliva, and urine). Exosomes are being
investigated for early detection of diseases, including cancer, cardiovascular,
and neurodegenerative disorders, from biofluids without the need of invasive
tissue biopsies. Early detection of disease from a simple blood or urine test
allows discovery of disease at an earlier point making treatments more effective
and reduces the need for costly and invasive procedures that could cause further
complications. Furthermore, the same technology being developed also may be used
to aid in the manufacturing of next-generation therapeutics that use exosomes to
combat cancer, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a customer-configurable
cartridge that will allow customization of biological probes to identify and
measure specific populations of exosomes based on their surface markers.
Exosomes, which are nanoparticles (50-200 nm) shed by cells into biological
fluids, are being investigated for early detection of diseases, including
cancer, cardiovascular, and neurodegenerative disorders. Exosomes, which are
biologically active, may be found at high concentrations compared to other
biomarkers, but their small size makes them very difficult to characterize with
current techniques. This proposal is to create a high-throughput platform to
address exosome characterization requirements through two development aims: 1)
Develop, validate, and demonstrate a disposable microfluidic device that will
allow customers to configure the assay for characterization of specific
populations of exosomes, and 2) enable robust detection and identification of
the smallest populations of low-index exosome nanoparticles, down to 50 nm,
allowing complete exosome sizing in a high-throughput platform. The completion
of these objectives will result in a product to be sold to researchers working
on nanoparticle-based diagnostics and therapeutics.