* 1721898
* SBIR Phase I:  A multi-omics data integration approach for precision medicine and improved clinical trial success
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Calin Voichita, Advaita Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to develop an analysis software package to
significantly reduce health care costs while simultaneously improving patient
care by helping select the correct treatment for each patient. Every year an
estimated of 1.4 million women undergo unnecessary treatments at a cost to
society of $32.2 billion for breast cancer. At the same time, some patients do
not receive the treatment they need. For instance, chemotherapy is not routinely
recommended after surgical tumor removal for patients with early stage lung
cancer, even though the disease will recur in a large number of them. The
ability to correctly identify disease subtypes and patient subgroups is a pre-
condition to the ability to distinguish between patients that need the most
aggressive treatments, and those who will never progress or recur. Further, the
proposed approach can improve the results of clinical trials. With an estimated
2,300 Phase III clinical trials per year in the US, a full 50% of them are
destined for failure with a loss of $1 billion/year. This can be avoided if the
correct inclusion criteria are defined, and the drug is administered only to the
people most likely to respond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to develop a novel software package able to identify subtypes of
disease based on the integration of multiple types of omics data. Many drug
candidates fail and many patients receive inappropriate treatment because of the
current inability to distinguish between subgroups of patients and/or subtypes
of disease. Many attempts to achieve this based solely on gene expression
signatures have been undertaken but yielded only modest success so far. In
addition, very few approaches are able to combine multiple data types and most
of the time the analysis of each data type leads to different subgroups that are
very hard to interpret. The technology proposed here will be able to discover
clinically relevant disease subtypes by integrating multiple types of high-
throughput data such as mRNAs, miRNAs, methylation, etc. The goal of this
project is to implement this technology as a software package that will
facilitate its application in large scale consistent with real-world use. In
addition, the plan is to assess the feasibility of this technology by performing
an extensive comparison with the top three existing approaches: Consensus
clustering, similarity network fusion, and iClusterPlus using over 1,800 real
patient data from 12 different studies.