* 1721596
* SBIR Phase I:  Emissions Assessment For A Natural-Gas Fired Furnace For Melting Iron
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Abulnaga Abulnaga, Mazdak International Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 04/30/2018
* USD 224,980.00

The broad impact of this SBIR Phase I project is in the development of a new
cokeless process to melt iron and scrap steel while meeting stringent
environmental regulations. The process being investigated will potentially shift
the paradigm of difficult pollution control to the use of a clean fuel, such as
natural gas. It has the potential to cut down 75% of the greenhouse gas
emissions by comparison with coke fired cupolas that continue to cover 70% of
the world production of castings. By leveraging the existing network of natural
gas pipelines, it intends to put back the US at the forefront of developing
clean technologies for metal casting and provide opportunities to expand to new
foundries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on a specially designed
furnace that primarily incorporates two interconnected chambers with two
different zones of melting and superheating. This design is aimed at overcoming
the limitations of natural gas fired cokeless cupolas and rotary furnaces,and
rapidly dwindling coke-fired open hearth furnaces. The key objective of this
project is to demonstrate that the innovative furnace can melt pig iron at the
required rate, but with lower pollution emissions than competitive technologies,
and in compliance with stringent environmental regulations. In particular
emissions of CO2, lead, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and particulates will be
lowered by finding a range of favorable operating conditions through systematic
experimentation. Slag damage to furnace lining will also be managed.