* 1721512
* Nanoparticle Dynamics in Polymer Solutions and Melts
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Venkat Ganesan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 303,869.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on the motion of small particles, drug molecules and
proteins in environments crowded with polymers, long chain-like molecules, such
as may be realized in cell interiors and tissue networks. Increasing evidence
suggests that the influence of cell crowding on the motion of small particles
and proteins indirectly influences a number of biomolecular phenomena, including
protein stability and aggregation, and enzymatic reactions. Unfortunately, the
typical cell environment consists of a soup of a vast number of different
components, such as long-chain polymers, genomic DNA, and metabolites, rendering
it difficult to quantify the features responsible for protein or particle motion
in such matrices. This research is aimed to develop and use computer simulations
to study the motion of small particles in a model, representative system of
polymeric solutions, to identify the influence of (a) crowding, as quantified by
the relative size of the particle/protein to environmental dimensions; and (b)
the interactions between the particle/protein and the environment. The
understanding derived in this project can have impact on both fundamental
understanding of cellular processes and the design of new nanoparticle
therapies. The project will include opportunities for graduate, undergraduates
and high school students to pursue research in an area at the crossroads of
biology and polymer physics. The outcomes of the research will also be used to
develop computer-based educational modules to illustrate the physics
accompanying motion of small probes and proteins in crowded environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computation research and education on the fundamental physics
underlying the movement of nanoparticles in polymeric fluids. Recently,
sophisticated experimental studies have accessed the dynamics of particles whose
sizes are comparable to the polymer solution correlation lengths, and have
unearthed a number of intriguing behaviors which are distinct from the continuum
characteristics exhibited by colloidal particles. The PI aims to develop and use
coarse-grained computer simulation methodologies to identify the fundamental
physics governing the mobility and rheological properties of nanoparticles in
polymer solutions ranging from dilute to concentrated conditions. More
specifically, this research will use computer simulations and models to address
two broad issues: (i) The influence of noncontinuum, scale-dependent rheological
properties of the matrix upon the dynamics and rheological properties of
nanoparticle suspensions in polymer matrices; (ii) The influence of polymer-
nanoparticle interactions upon the mobilities and suspension rheologies. This
project will include: research opportunities for graduate, undergraduates and
high school students; development of new simulation and educational modules
targeting undergraduate, graduate courses and K-12 outreach activities; and
synergistic activities involving the organization of colloquia designed to serve
as a forum for confluence of research in polymer physics and continuum
mechanics.