* 1721878
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Editing Through Semantic Alignment with Deep Learning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jonathan Herr, BlackBoiler, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to render the tedious, time-consuming, and
expensive manual process of contract review and negotiation as archaic. The
outcome from the proposed research will accurately review and negotiate in-bound
contracts based on a user's history of reviewing and negotiating just a handful
of similar contracts and will result in (a) a 50-90% reduction in companies'
contract review and negotiation time and (b) standardized risk across all
contracts within an organization. Furthermore, the proposed research will
provide small and medium-sized businesses with the ability to afford and obtain
the same quality of legal review of in-bound contracts as the largest and most
sophisticated companies in the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I Project will develop the first system to automate
edits in contracts through semantic sentence alignment with deep learning
techniques. The proposed research will expand upon state-of-the-art
methodologies for unsupervised learning of distributed representation of various
length text segments and then launch the first and only machine learning
platform that automates contract review and negotiation with semantic editing
capabilities.