* 1721141
* Integration of Engineering Design and Life Science: Investigating the influence of an Intervention on Student Interest and Motivation in STEM Fields
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kari Clase, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,838,015.00

This project will investigate the integration of engineering design, practices,
and thinking into middle school life science curriculum while providing
opportunities for students to foster knowledge of and increase interest in life
and biosciences. The project will specifically respond to the need to create,
implement, and evaluate a model intervention that will advance the knowledge
base for establishing and retaining underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.
Specifically, the project will partner with middle school science teachers from
two local school corporations, STEM university faculty members and undergraduate
engineering students, and university-based outreach coordinators from a
minorities engineering program, the office of future engineers, and women in
engineering program. Through this combined effort, both school corporations that
serve underserved, culturally diverse, and socioeconomically disadvantaged
students in rural communities; will have broad-based support for engaging 36
teachers and 3000 students in integrated life science with engineering design.
The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a mixed methods research
design incorporating both qualitative and quantitative approaches for data
collection and analyses. The research team will conduct quantitative analyses by
using Hierarchical Linear Modeling to determine the extent to which integrating
life science with engineering design and thinking impact student learning of
life science concepts and interest in life and biosciences. Qualitative
approaches, including discourse analysis, will be used to delve deeper into
student learning of the targeted life science concepts. Through this research,
the project will advance evidence-based understanding of learning, enhance the
theoretical models of student life science learning, and merge and extend the
successes of previous studies by using the faculty expertise in effective
approaches in engineering integration in K-12 science classrooms. Specifically,
concept assessments, interest surveys, recordings of classroom discourse,
student artifacts (e.g., design reports), interviews, and classroom observations
will be used as data sources. Outcomes from the project will advance the
knowledge base for establishing and retaining underrepresented minorities in
STEM fields. The life STEM focused design tasks will be disseminated through an
online peer-reviewed digital library available for use across the U.S. and
beyond. Along with the design-based tasks on this website; results from the
intervention model will be disseminated through electronic and print media to
inform researchers, educators, administrators, and policy makers who play
critical roles in enhancing student learning of and interest in STEM, about
pathways to broadening participation in STEM.