* 1721285
* Identifying microcystin toxins at the land-sea interface in Lummi Bay and Bellingham Bay, Washington
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Melissa Peacock, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2020
* USD 199,908.00

The Tribal Colleges and University Program is designed to support improvements
in the science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) education and research
capacities of colleges and universities that serve significant numbers of Native
students in the United States. Strengthening these educational opportunities
serves to increase the number of Indigenous people attaining STEM degrees and
thereby diversify the STEM workforce in the United States. The project titled
"Identifying Microcystin Toxins at the Land-Sea Interface in Lummi Bay and
Bellingham Bay, Washington", aligns with these outcomes through its
investigation of the water quality in the bays surrounding the Lummi Indian
Reservation. The team conducting the research project is comprised of highly
qualified faculty members and STEM students from Northwest Indian College
(NWIC). Microcystin toxins, produced by a group of cyanobacteria known as
Microcysts spp., are a recognized water contamination threat in the coastal
waters of the northwestern United States that pose considerable risks to the
health of humans and other animals who eat contaminated shellfish. Through this
research study, the research team from NWIC systematically monitor water quality
at seventeen identified sites in the bays to 1) delineate the pathways leading
to microsystin contamination in Lummi and Bellingham Bays, 2) detect local "hot
spots" for Microcystis spp. in freshwater tributaries that feed into the bays,
and 3) identify environmental conditions that may be influencing toxin
production. Native student interns will be engaged in every aspect of this work
and through coursework and fieldwork will build their knowledge and skills as
developing researchers. A rigorous monitoring system will be developed to enable
regular comprehensive study of the waters around the Lummi Reservation. The
potential contamination of the marine ecosystem is an issue of health, economic,
and cultural significance to the Lummi people and the larger community living in
the northwest coastal region. Results of the study will be shared widely with
the scientific community and area citizenry. Findings will be valuable in
informing resource management decisions and guidelines for safe shellfish
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing occurrence of harmful algal
blooms (HABs) contaminating the marine food web in the coastal waters of the
western United States portends the rise of serious health and economic issues
related to cyanotoxin bioaccumulation in shellfish. Active monitoring of
Washington's inland waters is lacking even as this area has experienced repeated
events of unacceptable microcystin toxin levels in recent years. This emerging
threat is addressed in the project through the development of a comprehensive
monitoring system for the watersheds that feed into Lummi and Bellingham Bays on
Washington's western coast to identify the sources of and environmental drivers
associated with microcystin transfer from freshwater to marine environments in
those waters. Faculty members will work with Native students from Northwest
Indian College (NWIC) in conducting the study. Weekly water samples will be
collected using Solid Phase Adsorption Toxin Tracking (SPATT) bags at seventeen
sites predicted to be involved in or at risk for contamination. Samples will be
analyzed to measure toxin levels using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
(LCMS). Temperature, cell count, and nutrient measurements will also be
recorded. Findings will be valuable in developing water quality forecasting
models and resource management plans for west coast freshwater and marine
environments. Results will be shared widely through publication in peer-reviewed
journals and community forums, and data will be accessible to researchers and
citizens. NWIC students will gain knowledge and skills in conducting research
through the courses, field work, and bench work they complete while engaged in
this project, while the college will build research and curricular capacity.