* 1721330
* SBIR Phase I: Multi-Sensory Therapy Program for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Andrea Johnson, Teaching It Right, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2018
* USD 224,988.00

This project will develop a multi-sensory therapy program for children diagnosed
with Autism Spectrum Disorder by improving eye contact. Children with Autism
Spectrum Disorder do not make eye contact readily and eye contact is a key
component in progressing social behavior. Current methodologies to assist these
children in maximizing their capabilities are out of reach for many, costing
families thousands of dollars a month, requiring 25-40 hours per week and offer
measureable improvements at less than 47%. This project has shown positive
results in preliminary testing and is expected to result in an affordable,
practical solution to the challenges children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and
their families encounter. As their social skills improve, children with Autism
Spectrum Disorder will be able to build and maintain friendships, become more
fully engaged in society, prepare them to become self-sustaining adults, and
increase their employment opportunities. Additionally, this program can also be
expanded to children with other disabilities or children without disabilities,
resulting in increased ability to also build and maintain friendships, become
more fully engaged in society to prepare them to become self-sustaining adults,
and increase their employment opportunities. Potential customers will include
parents, school districts, and other professional and nonprofessional
caregivers. The high need for this program will create market growth, creating
new jobs and generating tax revenue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal for this
project is to develop a multi-sensory program, developed for smart mobile
devices, that improves children with Autism Spectrum Disorder?s social skills so
they can function as their typical peers who do not have Autism Spectrum
Disorder. This goal is accomplished by developing an interactive program that
teaches the social skill, making eye contact with individuals the child does and
does not know, by improving sensory integration and regulating the overactive
amygdala. Funding would allow for the development of the program to test,
measure and quantify sensory integration and eye contact improvement for
children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Analyses will reflect the interpretation
requirements of a Pre vs. Post, Intervention versus Control design. All
statistical analyses and tests will be conducted using the widely used program
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 17 or higher and will be
verified with Statistical Analysis System when appropriate or marginal findings.