* 1721610
* SBIR Phase I:  Point of Care Device for High Frequency Stratification of Patient Populations at Risk of Sepsis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Bobby Reddy, Prenosis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a device for better, early
screening of sepsis. Sepsis costs the U.S. health care system over $24 billion
every year, with as many as 3.1 million cases that claim over 300,000 lives
annually. One out of every two to three hospitals deaths in the U.S. is due to
sepsis. There are an estimated &gt;19 million cases worldwide, and some reports
have estimated that 1 person dies from sepsis every 4 seconds. Mortality rates
due to severe sepsis are between 20% and 50%. The most urgent problem is a lack
of accurate early screening methods. Survival rates drop by 7.6% per hour
treatment is delayed. Current screening for sepsis utilizes the SIRS criteria,
which include temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and total WBC count.
These parameters have very low specificity for early screening of sepsis. This
project will replace these parameters with a panel of cell and protein
biomarkers to provide highly specific and sensitive detection and stratification
for sepsis. A hand-held point-of-care device and a one-time-use cartridge
capable of providing total white blood count, lymphocyte, granulocyte/monocyte,
and CD64 Neutrophils all from one drop of blood in a single cartridge will be
developed. Such a system could save hundreds of thousands of lives and billions
of dollars in healthcare costs every year in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a point of care sensor
that can measure cell counts and proteins from a drop of blood. The technology
combines the power of microfluidics, microfabrication, and on-chip electrically
based cell and particle counting to develop a revolutionary new technology that
combines electrical coulter counting with immuno-capture of cells and particles.
The developed device would be the only one with the capability to offer in a
single device the critical information of hematology analyzers, flow cytometers,
protein, and DNA assays. This project enables the power of all of these tools to
be harnessed from a single inherently simple, powerful, and scalable, platform.
Such a device could dramatically increase both the frequency and the
multiplexing of sampling of biomarkers from patient populations. In this
proposal, commercial grade cartridges will be used to develop protein
measurements for procalcitonin, an FDA approved biomarker for sepsis, in
addition to cell counting, from drop of blood of healthy and sick patients from
hospital settings. &lt;br/&gt;