* 1721664
* SBIR Phase I:  The Data Context Map
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Eric Papenhausen, Akai Kaeru, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it makes high-dimensional data
visualization more accessible to mainstream users. An interactive multivariate
visualization framework will assist users in the understanding of complex
phenomena and help with decision making in the presence of multiple factors. It
uses a map-like layout of factors and data that naturally appeals to a
mainstream user's innate visual literacy, making it easy to learn and use.
Through a variety of interaction facilities, users can define areas in this
layout that indicate parameter values of their interest. This then enables them
to make informed decisions within a single visual interface and balance among
the diverse impacts the various factors have on the decisions. Given the massive
growth in the availability of multivariate data, the unique capabilities that
the proposed framework provides are expected to have a strong impact on society,
in many application domains and at many different levels - personal, business,
finance, scientific, medicine, and so on. In short, this project will have a
significant societal impact by allowing users to make better decisions in less
time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project makes several intellectual and scientific contributions. A core
contribution is the ability to embed high dimensional points and factors into a
2D plane or map, such that the distance between points has contextual meaning.
This allows a single visualization to convey what currently takes a dashboard of
several bivariate plots to show. The inherent mechanisms that create the
combined map-like layout of data and factors are novel and open new
opportunities to understand multivariate data. The same is true for the
interactions defined on the layout, in particular those that allow users to
derive the areas of influence of the various factors. Another intellectual
contribution is the interface that allows users to focus their attention on
specific attributes and deals with the mental and cognitive overload that may
arise in users in the presence of too many factors and attributes. The proposed
system constructs a meaningful hierarchical representation of the attributes
that can be navigated within a novel space efficient visual interface. Using our
design tools, anyone with an internet connection and a modern web browser will
be able to create these layouts from multivariate data.