* 1721833
* STTR Phase I:  Microfluidic quartz resonator based blood plasma coagulation monitors
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Zehra Parlak, Qatch Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project aims to develop a novel microfluidic sensor technology
that can measure blood coagulation times (specifically prothrombin time-PT,
measured in international normalized ratio-INR) at point-of-care (POC). PT/INR
has to be monitored frequently for millions of patients on oral Warfarin (an
anticoagulant that prevents clotting) to keep them in a safe therapeutic range.
The POC sensor developed in this project is expected to provide PT/INR
measurements independent of factors influencing the blood counts of the
patients, making it safer and more accurate. The technological foundation of the
proposed research is to combine acoustic sensing with microfluidics. The
preliminary data demonstrates that the proposed sensor can measure viscosity and
density of extremely small liquid volumes (~ 10 nL) accurately. The successful
implementation and commercialization of this innovation will result in a big
market share in the rapidly growing POC coagulation test market and create
hundreds of jobs. The research and development process during this STTR will
also contribute to the full understanding of this technology?s potential, which
can result in other self/home testing instruments for patients.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed novel coagulation monitor is based on
microfluidic quartz resonator sensors. Quartz resonator sensors can be used to
measure changes in fluid viscosity or mass coupled to their surfaces (both of
which occur during coagulation of blood) by monitoring the associated changes in
the resonance frequency. The technology underlying quartz resonators is well
established, simple and robust, and amenable to provide portable and compact
instrumentation. The innovation here is the integrated microfluidics, which will
bring the benefits of extremely low liquid volume requirements, control over how
liquid is observed by the sensor (which can be used to enhance sensor output due
to the coagulation), and on-chip blood plasma separation. The key objectives of
the proposed research are to determine the microfluidics design and the surface
functionalization that will optimize a microfluidic quartz resonator sensor?s
coagulation measurement sensitivity, and to implement on-chip blood plasma
separation for PT/INR measurements.