* 1721433
* SBIR Phase I:  Spatial Light Modulator for long wavelength imaging
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Charles Partee, Steel City Optronics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a vastly increased
market for millimeter wave imaging products due to the disruptive price and
performance of this camera. This sensors technology project will demonstrate the
first cost-effective video-rate millimeter wave camera that can image and
resolve moving objects from 1-300 meters away. Millimeter wave light is often
used for security screening because it is safe to use on people and can
penetrate packaging, bags, and clothing to identify both metallic and non-
metallic objects. The technology developed in this project makes this
revolutionary security screening capability accessible to hospitals, schools,
commercial buildings, and public spaces. While it is impossible to put a
monetary value on tragedies averted and lives saved, improved public safety will
reduce the effects of the fear these actions create on society and on economic
growth. Market growth in people screening and security, as well as navigational
assistance, is already proven (40+% annual growth rate) but is constrained by
the size, cost, and slow speed of existing solutions. The portability, cost, and
video-rate capability of this camera will expand the markets as well as enable
new markets not yet served. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a demonstration of a novel component that
enables video-rate millimeter wave imaging. Multi-pixel imaging in millimeter
wave is cost-prohibitive since each pixel costs hundreds of dollars. This device
enables the application of proven optical single-pixel technologies to
millimeter wave imaging, thereby greatly decreasing the cost and increasing the
accessibility of this technology. The research objective is to fabricate and
test a series of designs that vary around the optimum design defined by the
modeling, to refine the modeling, and then to repeat the fabrication, in a
tighter range of geometries, around the new optimum. The result of this SBIR
Phase I project will be a working prototype that can be integrated into an
existing still-frame millimeter wave camera to create a millimeter wave video
camera.