* 1721055
* STTR Phase I:  On-demand optical printing of high-performance personalized eyeglass lenses
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Jacob Kuykendall, Zenwa Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of producing
ophthalmic lenses utilizing a low cost optical printer that will enable the
fabrication of superior quality lenses with a low cost optical printer. The
result is development of a business model where an eye exam is administered,
prescription lenses are printed and glasses assembled and dispensed in a single
visit. Upon completing the refraction portion of the eye exam, the lens
prescriptions will be electronically transferred to the optical lens printer.
The lens blanks, pre-treated for UV and anti-scratch protection, will contain a
laser writable photopolymer layer that accepts and freezes the personalized
prescriptions. Eyeglasses produced with this method will be of equal or higher
in optical quality compared to traditional lenses and can be produced at a
fraction of the cost of conventional lenses. This method of producing ophthalmic
lenses both reduces the turnaround time for securing eyeglasses but equally
important, will significantly reduce the cost for producing eyeglasses
translating to lower the retail prices. Considering that over 60% of the US
population wears glasses and a much high percentage of families have members
that depend on glasses, this project will benefit the vast majority of US
taxpayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this STTR Phase 1 proposal is to
demonstrate the feasibility of three coupled innovations: 1) a high-speed
optical printer for 2) photosensitive ophthalmic lens blanks that record 3)
novel gradient-index diffractive optics which provide dramatically improved
fabrication cost, visual performance and lighter weight over existing lens
making technologies. The target application will be low cost, low and higher
order aberration correcting eyeglass lenses fabricated with a compact,
inexpensive optical printer. Lenses produced with this light based process will
match or exceed the optical quality of current free form lenses made with
computer numerical controlled milling machines costing in the range of $250k to
$500k. This proposed lens making innovation enables the development of an
eyeglass dispensing business model that could eliminate the need for
conventional centralized eyeglass labs, the associated distribution networks, a
comprehensive inventory of lens blanks and the long wait times for procuring
prescription eyeglasses. The developments of this STTR will allow ophthalmic
practices to better serve their patients, enabling on-site fabrication of
superior corrective lenses that more closely match eye deficiencies. By the end
of phase I, the goal is to optimize the photopolymer materials, refine the light
sources and complete an engineering model of the optical printer.