* 1721733
* SBIR Phase I:  User Application and Backend Portal to Enhance and Measure Addiction Treatment and Recovery Efficacy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Christopher Pesce, Sober Grid, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to investigate the feasibility of enhancing
the core individual user application and commercial backend portal products as
required to enhance and measure the efficacy of innovative addiction treatment
and recovery support tools. If successful, the investment will enable healthcare
stakeholders (e.g., individuals, addiction and mental health institutions and
providers, health researchers and universities, government agencies, and payers)
to leverage technology-enhanced addiction treatment innovations such as
mindfulness training, contingency management, medication-assisted treatment,
peer support, and adaptive interventions that show promise for improving health
outcomes and delivery efficiencies. The proposed innovation will help to
determine the feasibility of developing, testing, and commercializing innovative
technologies that improve the efficacy of existing health IT solutions and to
create new solutions for the range of stakeholders exhibiting increasingly high
demand for effective interventions and tools required to develop, provide, and
assess effective addiction treatment and recovery support services in a mix of
research and delivery settings and the ability to generate significant revenue
across the mix of public and private addiction recovery delivery
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will entail rapidly
assembling the technical foundation and then testing the feasibility of
supporting deployment and assessment of novel, evidence-based addiction
treatment strategies and recovery interventions. There are four key research
objectives: (1) design, develop, and test a mechanism to create statistically
significant cohorts; (2) discern and test methods to measure participant
recovery and sobriety success; (3) conduct internal treatment campaigns; and,
(4) create a researcher application program interface to enable addiction
researchers to connect with the system. Currently, there is no commercially
viable platform for surfacing, implementing, and tracking the efficacy of
optimal therapies and tools in an application environment. Phase I will focus on
determining the feasibility of this technology for unlocking scientific
interventions that can be clinically validated as successful in order to expand
work in phase II to prove the capacity of this system to deliver single or
bivariate therapy campaigns to users while also establishing the clinical
efficacy for improving health outcomes sufficient to support interventions
nationwide through cost-effective treatment solutions.