* 1721831
* SBIR Phase I:  A UAV Mounted Frequency Domain Terahertz Spectrometer for Real-Time, Location Specific, Pollution Detection
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Joseph Demers, Bakman Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2018
* USD 224,601.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create an economical, high performance
Terahertz (THz) spectrometer mounted to a consumer drone or Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV) to allow testing of air for the presence of harmful compounds over
a specific geographical location. A frequency domain THz spectrometer is capable
of characterizing many different molecules and chemicals in a gas sample.
Historically these spectrometers have been relegated to the laboratory because
of their size and complexity. However, recent advancements have made it possible
to build a lightweight spectrometer that can be mounted to a drone. This is
significant because the ability to analyze samples locally removes the time and
expense of collecting and shipping potentially dangerous compounds (i.e.
chemical warfare agents or pollutants) to a laboratory for analysis. It also
allows detection and classification to occur on short notice and without the
need to subject personnel to the local environment. The THz Drone will allow
immediate and accurate detection of many harmful compounds in the
air.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will demonstrate a compact,
battery operated, frequency domain THz photomixing spectrometer that is capable
of Doppler limited molecular spectroscopy and is constructed predominantly from
economical off-the-shelf fiber optic components in a highly compact, light-
weight form factor. The brass-board instrument will incorporate an optical
phase-modulation technique to remove the effects of coherent detection and it
will have a greater than 2 THz bandwidth with a spectral purity of better than
100 kHz. After construction, the instrument will be employed to measure Doppler
limited molecular transitions of carbon dioxide mixed with water vapor. Upon the
successful demonstration of the capabilities of the instrument, a first-draft
design for an integrated system weighing less than 3 kg and capable of being
carried with a consumer drone will be generated as will a larger laboratory
version of the instrument.