* 1721737
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Machine Learning Platform to Predict Surgical Complications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Bora Chang, kelaHealth Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to create a personalized, precision-based
practice paradigm for surgery that improves surgical outcomes and reduces the
cost of healthcare. This paradigm utilizes individual patient characteristics
with machine-learning algorithms to accurately predict the risk of post-surgical
complications. Additionally, it offers the possibility of enacting impactful
interventions among high-risk patients, while reducing unnecessary therapies
among low-risk patients, thereby improving surgical outcomes, maximizing the
efficiency of healthcare, and minimizing cost. In a value-based care model, this
paradigm aligns the goals of health systems, surgeons, and
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project combines individual patient
data with machine-learning algorithms to effectively predict surgical
complication risk and improve surgical clinical outcomes. Currently, 13% of 50
million surgical procedures performed in the United States annually result in a
surgical complication, half which are potentially avoidable. A primary cause of
avoidable complications include significant variable in risk assessment and
standardized preventative practice. Therefore, the principal objective of this
proposal is to develop machine-learning predictive models of various surgical
complications (wound, cardiac, respiratory, renal, etc.), which provides an
objective risk assessment for surgeons. Additionally, this risk assessment
platform will allow stratification of patients into high- vs. low-risk
categories and link patients with risk-appropriate preventative interventions at
the point-of-care.