* 1721708
* SBIR Phase I:  Water potential probe for real-time, spatially resolved measurements of water potential in precision agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Michael Santiago, FloraPulse Co
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,766.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will provide farmers
with water status measurements that are unprecedented with respect to spatial
and temporal resolution, cost, and ease-of-use. In a first market - precision
agriculture - the hardware and associated services will provide an invaluable
guide to agronomic practice, from site selection and the definition of cropping
strategies, to the management of irrigation, and through to the timing of
harvest. Domestically, water sensing for precision agriculture represents a
potential market of $1 billion. The technology and methods developed under this
award will create value for the customer by reducing the cost of inputs (water),
by maximizing product yield and quality, and by improving reliability. The
technology developed under this program will be ready for beta-testing and
initial sales. Further, it will provide a foundation for the development of a
suite of services tailored to support the decision-making of the customer with
respect to water management. On a societal level, this technology will help
customers improve food security, manage water resources with respect to both
consumption and pollution, minimize the impacts of weather and climate
variability, and improve the economics of their businesses and regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project leverages a
laboratory breakthrough: the ability to manipulate liquid water at negative
pressure as plants do to form a sensor of drought stress. This biomimetic
approach builds on a series of innovations in material science,
microfabrication, and micro and nano-fluidic design by the investigators. This
project will address outstanding design and manufacturing challenges to optimize
the sensor for use across all agricultural contexts. The key advances relate to
microelectromechanical design and the engineering of nano-structured materials
within an integrated sensing platform. Additional challenges that will be
addressed relate to understanding the physics of water transfer and uptake from
soils in order to define best practice in the evaluation of water stress for
irrigation management. Successful completion of these tasks will allow for
commercialization of the sensor and build a foundation for continued innovation
in tools and services for water management in agriculture and other markets. The
new tools and understanding generated under this award will also support
developments in plant science, ecophysiology, geotechnical engineering, and
industrial processes related to food, advanced materials, and biotechnology.