* 1721719
* SBIR Phase I:  Spatially-heterogeneous modulus substrates for stretchable electronics fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Radu Reit, Ares Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will assess the
commercial viability of a new substrate material specifically designed for
reducing the manufacturing complexity of stretchable electronics. Currently a
$1.6 million market, stretchable electronics are expected to grow at a
cumulative annual growth rate of 101.3% to reach $412 million in sales by 2023
due to the surge in wearable technologies, structural health monitoring devices,
and medical diagnostic tools. In part, the current market size for stretchable
electronics is limited by the immature manufacturing tools and techniques
required, such as transfer- and nano-printing. The research and development
funded by the Phase I SBIR could lead to a drastic reduction in manufacturing
complexity, allowing stretchable electronic devices to be manufactured using
current industry standard photolithographic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the ability to create electronic
substrate materials with intrinsic stiffness differences (those without
laminated layers, patterned fillers, etc.) that are defined using standard
lithography techniques. Specifically, these substrates can be spatially
segregated into regions of low Young's modulus (the soft matrix) and regions of
high Young's modulus (the stiff islands) with a difference in modulus between
these two regions reaching ratios of 1000:1 (stiff:soft). In the initial work,
demonstrations of these spatially-heterogeneous modulus substrates show that
spatial resolution can be achieved at the millimeter scale, and can introduce
localized strain across the substrate as a function of the patterned stiff
regions. The objectives for this project are focused on (a) engineering an
optimal starting substrate material with the desired properties for the soft
region and (b) demonstrating microfabrication of micropatterned thin-film
components (feature sizes &lt; 20 microns) of stiff regions introduced into the
material. This Phase I grant will culminate in prototype thin-film electronic
components which maintain electrical performance at high global strains, while
also showing the capacity of the substrate materials to withstand the harsh
thermal and chemical conditions observed during microfabrication.