* 1721025
* Examining Relationships Between Flipped Instruction and Students' Learning of Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Zandra de Araujo, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 07/31/2021
* USD 539,011.00

Instead of presenting new material in class and then assigning problems to be
completed outside of class, flipped instruction involves students watching
videos or reading new material outside of class and then completing their
"homework" in class. Teachers' implementation of flipped instruction has
increased dramatically in recent years, with more than two-thirds of teachers
now reporting flipping a lesson, if not an entire course. Although popular media
and philanthropic organizations have given a great deal of attention and
financial support to flipped instruction, little is known about how teachers
implement it and what benefits and drawbacks flipped instruction has in contrast
with non-flipped instruction. This study can provide a basis for design research
focused on developing effective materials and programs for flipped instruction
in secondary mathematics. This design and development is already occurring at an
increasing rate, but it is not yet informed by empirical evidence. This project
will result in a framework for flipped instruction robust enough to be useful at
a variety of grade levels and contexts. The framework will provide a better
understanding of the relationships among various implementations of flipped
instruction and student learning. These findings can inform teacher educators in
better aligning their instruction to instructional formats that correlate with
increased student learning outcomes. The Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of STEM innovations and approaches. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using mixed-methods
techniques, the study will look at the nature of the activities and interactions
occurring in mathematics classrooms and assess their quality so that the
researchers may distinguish high-quality from low-quality univocal discourse,
high-quality from low-quality dialogic discourse, and high cognitive demand from
low cognitive demand tasks. Working in 40 algebra classrooms -- 20 implementing
some form of flipped instruction and 20 serving as a non-flipped basis for
comparison -- the project will address the following research questions using a
correlational design and multilevel modeling techniques: RQ1. What are salient
factors entailed in flipped instruction in secondary algebra? RQ2. What
associations, if any, exist among factors entailed in teachers' implementation
of flipped algebra instruction and students' learning of algebra as measured on
a state-mandated end-of-course assessment and on a concept-of-variable
inventory?