* 1721879
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Biomimetic Production of Broad-Spectrum Fungicide BioSurF-I
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Nadia Adam, Biomineral Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,911.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development of a biofungicide for
application on organic farms as well as conventional farms and home and lawn
care as an alternative to chemical fungicides. More than 70% of all major crop
diseases are caused by fungi. Despite intensive disease control practices, these
pathogens are still causing crop losses averaging 13% with economic losses up to
$100 billion annually. The proposed research will address the need for
sustainable food production by development of methods/technologies to reduce or
eliminate the usage of chemical pesticides. It will reduce the impact of plant
pathogens, insect pests, and abiotic stresses on crop plants by inducing
systemic resistance in crops. Unlike chemical fungicides, it will be eco-
friendly and will prevent development of anti-fungal resistance in plant
pathogens. Furthermore, reduction in chemical fungicide usage (produced using
fossil fuels) will reduce US dependence on fossil fuels and promote
environmental sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to develop a novel, broad spectrum, biofungicide for crop protection as
an alternative to chemical fungicides. The novel broad spectrum fungicide is
based on a fermentative strategy utilizing non-pathogenic microorganisms and
low-cost carbon substrates. Antifungal activity testing in in vitro and in vivo
assays demonstrated broad spectrum fungicidal activity against multiple fungal
pathogens that cause diseases in cereals, fruit, and vegetable crops. The use of
chemical fungicides produced from fossil fuels has been shown to have adverse
environmental effects on non-target organisms, and mammals. In addition,
combinations of chemical fungicides are required to attain crop protection, yet
fungal pathogens quickly become resistant to chemical fungicides. The proposed
broad spectrum biofungicide has no mammalian toxicity, and has been shown to be
safe for non-target anthropods like honey bees. It also has been shown to not
inhibit the growth of beneficial fungi. As part of the Phase I research plan,
the aims are to scale up production and test the biofungicide under development
in small plot trials.