* 1721411
* SBIR Phase I:  Transparent Flexible Quasi-Ceramic Intelligent Multifunctional Coatings for Corrosion and Biofouling Protection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* ANUPAMA CHATURVEDI, FLORA COATINGS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 12/31/2017
* USD 224,901.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase-I project employs the development
of intelligent and sustainable coating technology to present a game changing
option to the corrosion protection coating industry. The annual global cost of
corrosion is estimated to be US$2.5 trillion while USA alone has to lose more
than $1 trillion. The global anticorrosion coating market has been valued for
more than US$14 billion in 2015 and is expected to reach beyond US$26 billion in
2022. Apart from inferior performance, currently available corrosion prevention
coatings pose significant threat to the environment and human health. It is very
hard for the poor and developing countries to bear the related costs.
Development of this multifunctional coating will afford them a safer alternative
for protecting their assets. In preliminary experiments, this coating innovation
has shown significant potential in preventing corrosion and biofouling activity
on the treated surface. The thermal analysis and nanomechanical analysis have
indicated that these coatings have exceptionally high thermal and mechanical
stability approaching that of ceramic materials. Based on the preliminary data,
it is safe to state that these coatings present a breakthrough in the area of
surface protection through barrier coatings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project includes the development of user friendly
multifunctional coating for wide variety of substrates. Historically, chromate
conversion coatings (CCC) have been extensively used in preventing metals from
corroding. However, there are serious concerns over the use of CCC as it poses
human health risks. Carcinogenic hexavalent chromium ions used in coating
technology for the corrosion protection of metals are being phased out by
Environmental Protection Agency in USA and Registration Evaluation Authorization
and Restrictions of Chemicals regulation in Europe. The key innovation of this
project is the development of a liquid precursor to a transparent strong
ceramic-like coating that can protect substrates from harsh environmental
conditions. This ready to use thin coating, suitable for application in the
automobile and aerospace industries, adheres strongly to most substrates, adds
minimal weight and can be transparent or pigmented. Besides corrosion
protection, the coating can also provide scratch resistance, oleophobicity, and
possibly anti-microbial properties to numerous surfaces.