* 1721450
* SBIR Phase I:  Development, Optimization and Analysis of Poly (Carboxy Betaine) Bio-conjugates to L-Asparagianse as PEGylation Alternatives
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2018
* George Sellhorn, Furtim Therapeutics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop a superior alternative to the current
frontline treatment for children?s Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL). The
primary treatment option has a host of negative side effects resulting from the
use of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) conjugated to the L-asparaginase enzyme.
Antibodies made against this drug can cause the body to eliminate it rapidly or
result in a severe allergic reaction and even death, particularly after multiple
injections (induced immunity). PEG has been utilized extensively in the food,
cosmetics and agricultural industries. As a result, the majority of healthy
people test positive for anti-PEG antibodies (pre-existing immunity), causing
the elimination of PEG-modified drugs before their action. The technology
proposed here utilizes the non-essential amino acid, glycine betaine, to
construct a new poly(carboxybetaine) (PCB) polymer for conjugation that is not
recognized as a foreign molecule by the immune system. Therefore, it will
maintain function and mitigate the negative side effects associated with the
immune system that are attributed to the current therapy. Additionally, therapy
with PCB conjugates avoids pre-existing immunity to PEG and ensures treatment
efficacy. The primary goal of this work is to show that the technology is
superior to and safer than the current PEG technology.

The technical innovation at the foundation of this work is the zwitterionic,
poly(carboxybetaine) (PCB) polymer and its use as a bio-conjugate to replace the
widely used poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) for the treatment of children?s Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL). The unique properties of the zwitterionic polymer
impart remarkable characteristics to the bio-conjugate that truly eliminates
immunogenicity. The current frontline treatment suffers from Accelerated Blood
Clearance (ABC) in patients, which has been attributed to induced or pre-
existing anti-PEG antibodies. This Phase I project aims to demonstrate that PCB
is a preferable bio-conjugation polymer to PEG for the modification of
L-asparaginase with regard to extended half-life and decreased immunogenicity
after multiple doses in mice. To achieve the goals, an optimized PCB
L-asparaginase will be developed with regard to polymer length and conjugation
density and a multi-dose pharmacokinetic/immunogenicity study will be performed
to evaluate its half-life and immune protection in animals. All results will be
compared with those from its PEG counterpart. It is expected that PCB
L-asparaginase has great potential to eradicate the serious side effects
associated with the current therapy. If PCB L-asparaginase proves to be safe and
effective, this will lead to more successful outcomes for the treatment of ALL.