* 1721054
* Science and Engineering Education for Infrastructure Transformation
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Pankaj Sharma, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 2,899,395.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. The Concord Consortium in collaboration with Purdue University will
research and develop an engineering education technology and pedagogy that will
support project-based learning of science, engineering, and computation concepts
and skills underlying the strategically important "smart" and "green" aspects of
the infrastructure. This project will develop transformative technologies and
curriculum materials to turn the campus of a high school or a geographical
information system such as Google Maps into an engineering laboratory with
virtually unlimited opportunities for learning and exploration. The project will
deliver two innovations: 1) The Smart High School is an engineering platform for
designing Internet of Things systems for managing the resources, space, and
processes of a school based on real-time analysis of data collected by various
sensors deployed by students on campus; and 2) the Virtual Solar World is a
computational modeling platform for students to design, deploy, and connect
virtual solar power solutions for their homes, schools, and regions. Six
standards-aligned curriculum units based on these technologies will be developed
to guide student learning and support educational research. Approximately 2,000
students from rural, suburban, and urban high schools in Indiana, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, and Ohio will participate in this research. project products and
findings through the Internet, conferences, publications, and partner
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is designed to identify technology-
enhanced instructional strategies that can simultaneously foster the growth of
skills and self-efficacy in scientific reasoning, design thinking, and
computational thinking, all of which are needed to build the future
infrastructure. The focus on infrastructure transformation is aligned with NSF's
vision of smart and connected communities. Although this project will use the
context of smart and green infrastructure to engage students to solve real-world
problems, the skills of scientific reasoning, design thinking, and computational
thinking that they will acquire through meeting the challenges of this project
can be transferrable to other topics and fields. Using a design-based research
approach, a rich set of formative and summative data will be collected from
these students for probing into three research questions: 1) To what extent does
the integrated learning model help students develop and connect scientific
reasoning, design thinking, and computational thinking skills?; 2) To what
extent is students' interest in cognate careers affected by the authenticity of
engineering design challenges?; and 3) How do the variations in the solutions to
overcome the cognitive and practical difficulties of real-world problems impact
learning outcomes and career interest? The data sources include pre/post-tests,
process data, self-reports, observations, surveys, interviews, and participant
information.