* 1721797
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Dynamic Elastomer System for Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Cora Leibig, Chromatic 3D Materials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will create a novel set of materials for additive
manufacturing technologies. Additive manufacturing, or 3D Printing, is a rapidly
growing $5bn industry, which enables small and medium enterprises to
competitively manufacture new and innovative products. It is a key to
strengthening the US manufacturing economy. Continued growth and health of the
3D printing industry, particularly for manufacture of functional parts for
finished goods, will depend upon an expansion of the available material library.
3D printing materials are limited to a small segment of the plastics in common
industrial use today. This project will expand that material library with
development of printable polyurethane elastomers with a broad range of
flexibilities. These materials will be particularly relevant for markets that
demand personalization and customization, such as patient-specific medical
devices, sporting goods, and footwear. Manufacturers of flexible, durable
polyurethane goods for industrial and automotive products will also benefit from
low cost small-scale production of parts made from materials with performance
that match their product specifications. The printing system will enable
production of parts with user-specified geometry and flexibility, and will also
enable multi-material printing for novel product
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will produce
a set of reactive polyurethane precursor formulas which can be combined to form
printable, flexible polyurethanes with a broad hardness range. The materials
will be printed using extrusion 3D printing techniques, and customized to handle
liquid, reactive feeds. The research approach will include determination of the
starting materials to control reaction rates, rheology development, and part
solidification. Reaction kinetics control will be critical to develop a robust
printing process and to overcome issues with print-direction strength that are
common in extrusion printing processes. Raw material reactivity, catalyst
selection, and relative concentrations of formulation components will be key
experimental parameters. Accessing a range of flexibility will require building
formulas with varied molecular weights, and these formula variations will be
balanced with resin printability. This 3D printing technology will overcome
challenges in part durability and printing speeds that are common to photo-cure
approaches to produce flexible parts, and will greatly extend the part
durability and flexibility available to extrusion 3D printing.