* 1722935
* Collaborative Research: Relating Bulk Composition to Seismic Properties in Crustal Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Oliver Jagoutz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2021
* USD 304,959.00

The Earth's continental crust is a reservoir for minerals and other natural
resources. Moreover, the chemical composition of the crust controls its material
properties (e.g., strength), and thus influences the way in which the crust
deforms and evolves over geologic time. However, while crustal composition at
the Earth?s surface can be determined by direct sampling, at depth composition
must be inferred from indirect methods such as geophysical imaging. One of the
most common geophysical imaging methods employs seismic waves, which travel at
different speeds through different rock types. By measuring seismic wave speeds
the 3-D internal structure of the crust can be determined using an approach
similar to x-ray computed tomography (CT scan) in medical studies. In this
project, we will take seismic velocity models for the Earth?s continental crust
and invert them to infer crustal composition. These compositional models will
then be used to determine variations in crustal strength, as well as regions
with different natural resource potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past
decades a wealth of seismic data characterizing the continental crust have
become available through NSF programs such as Earthscope, GeoPRISMS, and the
Cascadia Initiative?including co-located P-wave data from controlled-source
experiments, VP/VS constraints from receiver functions, and S-wave data from
ambient noise tomography. These datasets provide the foundation for future
research on the nature and composition of the continental crust. However,
despite the abundance of information provided by the seismic data, a
quantitative relationship between rock composition and seismic velocity is
missing. In this project we will develop a new suite of tools to relate crustal
composition to seismic velocity. Our approach is divided into four steps: (1)
derive a representative database for crustal composition space, (2) perform
thermodynamic calculations of the equilibrating mineral assemblages for each
composition at various equilibrium P,T, H2O and fO2 conditions, (3) calculate VP
and VS for each phase assemblage for different in situ P,T conditions, and (4)
use the resulting dataset to establish forward relationships between crustal
composition and seismic velocity. These data will be compiled into a publically
available online database, which can be used by others to derive relationships
between major element chemistry and seismic velocity under a specified range of
crustal conditions. The project will support MIT/WHOI Joint Program student
William Shinevar. To maximize the utility of the compositional inversion to the
community we will develop a web-based Java applet to allow users to directly
invert major element compositions from their own seismic datasets.