* 1722994
* Constraints on crustal stress from fault slip data and topography
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Eric Hetland, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 198,031.00

Forces in the Earth's crust lead to ongoing deformation, and in most places,
crustal deformation results in destructive earthquakes. Crustal forces and
deformation are mathematically represented by stress and strain tensors,
respectively. Surface deformation is routinely measured through geodetic
techniques and gives insight into the crustal strain field. On the other hand,
measuring stress directly is difficult and costly. Hence, the crustal stress
field is poorly known compared to strain. In the case of earthquakes, strain
around faults that have not recently ruptured indicates the rates that those
faults are being loaded, while strain during earthquakes yields information on
how the faults slipped at depth. It is crucial to note, however, that
earthquakes are inherently stress phenomena, with faults continually loaded
until the built-up stress on the faults overcomes their strength. Therefore,
while monitoring surface strain provides some information on earthquake
potential, insight into seismogenic stresses can advance estimations of
earthquake hazard. Over the past several decades, progress has been made in
quantifying the orientations of the stresses that led to significant
earthquakes; however, quantification of the magnitudes of the stresses that
caused those earthquakes has been elusive. In places of high topographic relief,
topography itself results in significant stresses on faults. Although,
topographic fault stress is only one part of the total stress budget,
quantifying it allows the magnitudes of stresses that led to significant
earthquakes to be constrained. In addition to an understanding of earthquake
processes, this research will contribute to a broader understanding of active
tectonics and crustal deformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
researcher will constrain the orientations and magnitudes of seismogenic
stresses that are consistent with recent moderate to large, continental
earthquakes. The researcher seeks to answer three primary questions: 1) What are
the magnitudes and orientations of tectonic stress in the crust? 2) How do
seismogenic stresses compare to coseismic stress changes? 3) Are topographic
stresses correlated to coseismic slip? Answering these questions relies on
knowing both the topographic and tectonic stress tensor fields. Topographic
stresses are the heterogeneous component of stress that perturb a laterally
invariant lithostatic stress in regions of topography. Topographic stresses can
be quite heterogeneous across faults, adding shear stresses &gt;10 MPa and
normal stresses &gt;50 MPa onto a fault. Correlations between variation of
topographic fault stresses and coseismic slip across faults, suggest that the
topographic stress field modulates rupture patterns. In this study, a radial
basis function, finite difference (RBF-FD) method will be developed to calculate
topographic stresses. The RBF-FD method allows for heterogeneous elastic
properties and densities, holds for high topographic gradient, and computes
stresses throughout the subsurface. The study will use Bayesian methods to
estimate the tensorial tectonic stresses that when added to the topographic
stresses are consistent with known fault slip. To further constrain stress,
focal mechanisms and geologic observations nearby to the earthquakes will be
included. The researcher will further analyze the estimated stresses, including
investigating correlations between topographic stress and coseismic slip,
constraining mechanical fault parameters, and comparing inferred stress in
different tectonic regimes. Constraints on seismogenic stresses have the
potential to yield substantial insight into issues of earthquake mechanics and
active tectonics.