* 1722623
* Investigating the long-term spatial stability of LLSVPs
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Allen McNamara, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 213,618.00

The Earth's surface is highly dynamic, characterized by earthquakes, volcanoes,
and active faulting caused by the movement of tectonic plates at the surface. It
is well-understood that the driver of plate tectonics is convection within
Earth's mantle, the layer between the core and the crust. Over the past several
decades, there has been much advancement toward increasing our understanding of
how tectonic plates form, move about the surface, and sink back into the Earth's
interior; however, we still have fundamental, first-order questions regarding
how the mantle convects and drives plate tectonics. Seismology provides the best
clues to answer these questions, by using seismic waves caused by earthquakes to
generate a 3D image of the interior. One puzzling observation that we find from
seismology is the presence of 2 large structures in the lowermost mantle,
beneath Africa and the Pacific. These structures rest directly on the Earth's
core, and extend several hundred kilometers into the mantle. Seismic waves
travel slower than usual through these structures, and they seem to have sharp
boundaries, indicating that they may be composed of something somewhat different
than the surrounding mantle rock. Interestingly, these structures underlie a
large number of anomalous active volcanoes (called hotspots), such as Hawaii. By
reconstructing plate motions back through time, we find that many extinct,
ancient volcanoes were also formed above these same locations. Therefore, if the
large structures beneath Africa and the Pacific are the cause of these hotspot
volcanoes, they must have been in their present location for a long time,
perhaps for the past 500 million years. This is contradictory to computational
models of mantle convection that predict that such structures would be easily
moved by changing tectonic plate motions. The PI hypothesizes that these deep
mantle structures may have a different mineralogical grain size than the rest of
the mantle, which could cause them to have a higher viscosity. The team will
perform numerical fluid dynamics to examine whether the higher viscosity
associated with these structures could lead to a stabilizing of mantle
convection currents over geologic time to explain the long-lived creation of
volcanoes over these geographic areas. More importantly, the investigators will
examine how the dynamics of these African and Pacific structures can guide and
control the long term patterns of mantle convection. Results from this study
will provide critical insight into understanding how mantle convection causes
and controls plate tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic tomography reveals
the presence of large regions in the lowermost mantle (beneath Africa and the
Pacific) that exhibit lower-than-average shear wave velocity, commonly referred
to as the Large Low Shear Velocity Provinces (LLSVPs). It has been hypothesized
that they are caused by large-scale compositional heterogeneity (e.g.,
thermochemical piles). Discovering the properties and dynamical implications of
the LLSVPs has involved much active research in recent years due to their
critical role toward understanding large-scale mantle convection, heat
transport, and thermal and chemical evolution of the Earth. Interestingly and
somewhat paradoxically, recent paleomagnetic research has hinted that LLSVPs may
have remained in the same positions for hundreds of millions of years. This is
perplexing because dynamical calculations indicate that they should be easily
swept around by changing subduction patterns. This is a critically important
issue to address, and here, the following question is explored: Can a reasonable
dynamical/rheological conceptual model of thermochemical mantle convection
explain how LLSVPs could remain spatially fixed (or very slow moving)? Most
geodynamical calculations employ a temperature-dependent rheology, resulting in
LLSVPs being weaker (due to their high temperature) and therefore, easier to be
laterally pushed around by downwelling slabs. However, diffusion creep rheology
is highly sensitive to mineral grain-size (in a power-law manner), so small
changes in grain-size can lead to large changes in viscosity. If LLSVPs have
remained compositionally distinct from the background mantle over geologic
timescales, there is no reason to expect that they would have the same average
grain-size as the surrounding mantle. If the average grain-size of LLSVPs is
only slightly larger than that of the background mantle, LLSVPs would have an
increased compositional viscosity. Preliminary work has shown that when combined
with temperature-dependence of viscosity, this leads to a strong rind or
envelope surrounding the LLSVPs, producing unusual thermochemical structures
that dynamically behave quite differently than conventional, passive
thermochemical piles. This type of thermochemical convection has not been
explored, and the proposed work will test the hypothesis that grain-size induced
compositional dependence of viscosity can lead to LLSVP structures that are less
easily pushed around by subducting slabs and therefore, become more spatially-
stable over geologic timescales. An extensive geodynamical study (through
numerical modeling) will be performed to explore how grain-size dependence of
rheology influences the fluid dynamical properties of the system, compared to
traditional models. Additionally, grain-size evolution will be employed in a
subset of models, to examine whether it is feasible for LLSVPs to have larger
grain size than background mantle over the relevant geological timescales. In
summary, numerical experiments will be developed and performed to determine how
grain-size dependence of viscosity influences the spatial stability of
thermochemical piles and whether this is a dynamically feasible mechanism to
produce long-lived, stable positions of LLSVPs.