* 1722553
* Equipment to Enhance Ecological and Evolutionary Genomics Research at the Marine Science Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,965.00

Rapidly advancing genomic technology is giving unprecedented insight into
critically important problems in the coastal ocean, such as climate change,
biogeochemical cycling, fishing-induced evolution, eutrophication, and ocean
acidification. Faculty, students, and visiting researchers at Northeastern
University's Marine Science Center (MSC) have been using genomics to advance
knowledge in these areas, but their ability to do so is currently limited due to
outdated equipment and lack of some key pieces of equipment for genomics work.
This project provides funds to renovate an outdated shared laboratory space into
a new Genomics Core Facility and purchase new instruments that will dramatically
enhance the MSC's rapidly-growing program in marine genomics. The MSC is a
unique leader in advancing basic biological knowledge through the study of urban
coastal environments at local, national, and international levels through
collaborations with external researchers that are based in over 30 different
countries. The proposed improvements will further position the MSC to become a
global leader in applying genomics techniques to solve critically important
problems in coastal ecosystems. These improvements will continue to support the
research and training activities of a broad user community beyond the faculty
and students at the MSC, including visiting researchers, school groups, and
outreach programs. The Core Genomics Facility will maintain a website with up-
to-date protocols for all methods being performed at the Facility and a link for
all open-access data generated by the Facility. The decreasing cost of high
throughput sequencing has revolutionized the field of ecological and
evolutionary genomics. Northeastern University's Marine Science Center is
uniquely positioned to apply these tools to advance knowledge on key aspects of
marine science. Our success on this front will be enhanced with key equipment
upgrades. The proposed improvements will support a diverse array and significant
amount of current and future NSF-funded research including comparative genomics,
seascape genomics, ecology, evolutionary genomics, ocean acidification,
epigenomics, and microbiology. The new instruments will improve this externally
funded research conducted at the MSC by significantly expanding analytical
capabilities through the acquisition of several pieces of equipment to form a
Core Genomics Facility for the Marine Science Center. This includes a Covaris
ultrasonicator for DNA fragmentation, a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator to
concentrate nucleic acids, a fluorescent plate reader for high throughput
nucleic acid quantification and microbial cell culture work, a Nanodrop for
single sample nucleic acid quantification, a new transilluminator and gel
documentation system for gel imaging, and a large autoclave to facilitate proper
sterilization of materials. These new instruments will advance research and
training beyond current capacity, enabling new methods for ascertainment, and
increase the quality and the amount of data that can be collected. This grant
will broaden the accessibility of MSC research protocols and research products
through online protocols and open access to data generated by the facility.