* 1722651
* FSML: Single Cell Marine 'Omics at the Whitney Marine Lab for Bioscience
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Mark Martindale, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 293,924.00

Marine environments harbor by far the greatest range of biodiversity on Earth
and this diversity of life provides untapped opportunities to understand how
organisms "work" and how they interact with their natural environment. Recent
developments in molecular technology in including next-generation DNA sequencing
and functional genomics provide opportunities to build a new level of
understanding of the molecular basis of cellular regulation during development,
neurogenesis, cancer, adaptive resiliency, and regenerative biology. Marine
animals, particularly invertebrates, are ideal experimental systems for a
variety of investigations into fundamental properties of animals. This proposal
uses delicate marine organisms, collected and cultured at the Whitney Lab for
Marine Bioscience (http://www.whitney.ufl.edu/), to leverage these new
technologies for an unprecedented molecular understanding of a variety of
cellular behaviors related to the interrogation of gene expression at the
resolution of identified cells. This grant provides instrumentation for the
isolation of pure populations of identified single cells that can be used for
downstream molecular characterization (e.g. the construction of gene regulatory
networks involved in the establishment of stem cell or neural identity). This
equipment will be housed on site, and can be deployed for a wide array of
ongoing research projects of resident and visiting researchers. All research
groups at the Whitney Lab remain actively involved in the Lab's 32 year-old NSF
REU program, participate in K-12 STEM outreach programs (e.g. Scientist for a
Day and Whitney Lab's Traveling Zoo), summer camps for 3rd- 4th graders, and a
free public lecture series ("Evenings at Whitney"). Whitney recently opened a
Sea Turtle Rehabilitation Hospital that focuses on the surgical removal and cure
of debilitating fibropapilloma (FP) disease that affects all species of sea
turtle worldwide. Whitney faculty are periodically consulted on social and land-
use management issues, and share knowledge and expertise with the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous expertise to
utilize cutting edge, single cell omics techniques to understand the molecular
regulation of distinct cell types. A cell labeling facility (microinjection rig)
that can fluorescently label individual cells via a variety of molecular
techniques, and an efficient multiuser friendly small volume fluorescent cell
sorter (BD FACSMelody) will be deployed to address a wide array of ongoing
research projects of resident and visiting researchers. Fluorescently labeled
cells, whether it is a dextran lineage marker, nuclear markers of DNA content,
mRNAs for specific genes injected in to living cells, reporter genes driven by
endogenous enhancers, or CRSPR/Cas9 reporter gene knock-ins can be dissociated
into single cells and sorted using a FACS (Fluorescently Activated Cell Sorter)
machine. FACS machines were once large prohibitively expensive instruments
needing large numbers of cells (1 x 106-9 ) and only able to sort limited
wavelength channels. Newer generation FACS machines have become much more
powerful with the development of multiple solid state lasers and small volume
sorters (96 or 384 well formats). The capability to isolate single cells goes
hand-in-hand with the ability to sequence transcriptomes and genomes of single
or small numbers of molecularly identified cells, using Next Gen sequencing
technology.