* 1722246
* Statistical Methods for Discrete-Valued High-Dimensional Time Series with Applications to Neuroscience
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ali Shojaie, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The advent of high-dimensional time series from neuroscience, including EEG/MEG,
fMRI and spike train data, has sparked a new interest in the analysis of
multivariate time series data, particularly, to decipher the dynamics of brain
connectivity networks. Despite significant recent progress, the vast majority of
existing approaches for analyzing high-dimensional time series focus on real-
valued time series from Gaussian noise and perturbation models. However,
emerging applications in neuroscience involve discrete-valued time series, such
as point processes and categorical observations. This project aims to develop
flexible and scalable statistical machine learning methods and efficient
software tools for inferring brain connectivity networks using discrete-valued
high-dimensional time series data from neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale brain connectivity networks often
involve complex nonlinear and multi-scale interactions that are usually unknown
in practice. Applications of parametric models in such settings may not provide
an accurate window into the brain's dynamics, especially if the model
assumptions are violated. This research bridges this gap by developing scalable
statistical machine learning methods and theory for flexible nonparametric
analysis of high-dimensional discrete-valued time series. In particular, this
project will develop (i) clustering and variable screening methods for high-
dimensional point processes, (ii) an efficient and general nonparametric
estimation framework for network discovery from a general class of point
processes, and (iii) a novel regularized estimation framework with provable
identifiablity guarantees for network reconstruction from high-dimensional
categorical time series. Theoretical properties of these methods will be
investigated, and efficient open-source software tools will be developed to
facilitate the application of the methods by the scientific community. Together,
these tools provide a comprehensive framework for analysis of high-dimensional
discrete values time series arising in various neuroscience applications, and
will advance the current state of statistical machine learning methods for the
analysis of high-dimensional time series. The PIs also plan to release the
software developed as open source and build a user community around the language
by ensuring that interested researchers are able to contribute to the codebase
of the software developed. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This
aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this award.