* 1722563
* Center for Undergraduate Research in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kathryn Leonard, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,387,600.00

The Center for Undergraduate Research in Mathematics (CURM) promotes academic
year undergraduate research in mathematics and statistics based upon a model
consisting of (a) training faculty members to mentor students in research, (b)
engaging 2-5 students and a faculty mentor in research during the academic year
at their own institution, (c) preparing students to succeed in graduate studies,
and (d) advising faculty members on how to maintain consistent undergraduate
research including finding resources for other funding sources. Each year, CURM
will administer mini-grants to about 54 undergraduate students working in 16
groups during the academic year at various institutions across the U.S, and will
provide a workshop for faculty mentor training and spring conference events for
students to present their research. In past years, CURM has primarily reached
four-year or comprehensive institutions. The center is now expanding its reach
by (a) creating regional cross-institutional collaborations, with an emphasis on
community colleges; (b) promoting regional mathematical community by integrating
CURM into regional mathematical structures and outreach activities; and (c)
incubating research activity at teaching-focused institutions through
connections to student research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CURM participants
will perform research in various areas of mathematics. Undergraduate students
will conduct research in mathematics, prepare and present conference talks, and
write and publish research papers related to this research. Faculty will
revitalize their research programs and connect their work to their local
mathematical community. Engaging students in research provides these faculty
members with an opportunity to align their research interests with the goals of
their institutions. This can be particularly important for women and other
underrepresented groups whose work is known to be undervalued and are who are
therefore more likely to work at an institution whose research emphasis is not
matched with their research talents. By adding institutional partnerships, CURM
stands to spread its mentoring expertise to PhD-granting institutions where
mentoring may not be a priority, and its connections to a well-established
network for community colleges where undergraduate research in mathematics has
not yet taken hold. The new effort to cultivate regional strengths through CURM
stands to contribute to robust intellectual communities in more isolated parts
of the country.