* 1722619
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: "RehabBuddy" Extending Individualized Physical Rehabilitation Beyond the Clinic Using Wearable Technology to Empower Patients
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Samir Rawashdeh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 158,293.00

Musculoskeletal conditions, often requiring rehabilitation, affects one-third of
the American population annually. RehabBuddy is a rehabilitation assistance
system that extends the reach of a physical rehabilitation specialist beyond the
clinic to address two significant problems in the current standard of care; poor
adherence to prescribed exercises and the lack of objective tracking. Both will
be addressed by developing a system that uses body-worn motion sensors and a
mobile application (e.g. tablet or phone) that provides the patient with
assistance to ensure that home exercises are performed with the same precision
as under clinical supervision. Assisted by a specialist in the clinic, the
wearable sensors and user interface developed will allow the capture of
individualized exercises unique to the patient's physical abilities. The system
will assist patients by providing real-time corrective feedback to repeat these
exercises through a correct and complete arc of motion for the prescribed number
of repetitions. The planned work will develop the sensing system to measure the
body's motion, the motion processing algorithms that provide measurements of the
joint angles, and a real-time corrective feedback approach. The system will be
objectively evaluated by three-dimensional motion analysis and assessed by
patients with a musculoskeletal injury. The final system will be capable of
documenting exercise performance and enhancing the patient's confidence by
providing a portable rehabilitation assistant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RehabBuddy
is a multidisciplinary project that spans several domains. The planned approach
goes beyond passive exercise monitoring to a patient-in-the-loop approach with
real-time corrective feedback. The core scientific challenge is to develop a
general framework using inertial sensors capable of exercise motion capture and
later assisted repetition for any joint and any exercise through real-time
feedback, enabling patient-centered health care. Effective signal processing
methods using inertial measurement units to achieve this are not known. The
research will include inertial measurement unit signal processing, identifying
parameters that unambiguously define custom exercises, and providing useful
feedback to assist the patient in repeating exercises correctly while minimizing
compensation at other body regions. The system will be evaluated for shoulder
exercises, a multi-joint structure that requires a more comprehensive and
general solution and has had little attention in prior literature. Critical
questions on the human-computer interaction aspect will also be addressed. The
effectiveness of the feedback and the system as a whole will be evaluated on how
patient motivation and their empowerment to manage their injury are affected by
the increased confidence and self-reliance aided by the feedback. It is unknown
if providing real-time feedback will improve patients' self-efficacy when
performing exercises. Also, it is unknown if upper extremity exercise
performance can be enhanced with real-time feedback without supervision. Through
the development and evaluation of RehabBuddy with patients, the project aims to
begin addressing these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.