* 1722995
* Collaborative Research: The Topology of Functional Data on Random Metric Spaces, Graphs and Graphons
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Washington Mio, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 354,912.00

Extracting, modeling, conceptualizing, and visualizing information residing in
complex datasets in actionable form are core themes in modern data analysis.
This project will take up these challenges in the broad realm of functional
data, as they permeate the sciences and practical applications. The project will
develop mathematical methods and computational tools that help us execute these
tasks and establish a pipeline from functional data to actionable knowledge.
There is a vast landscape of potential uses of these methods. Examples include
analyses of dynamical social networks, understanding variation in the spatial
profile of gene expression to enable studies of associations with health and
developmental outcomes, and exploratory studies that interrogate microbiome and
metabolomic networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage techniques
from topological data analysis (TDA) to further develop and extend persistent
homology and integrate TDA with probabilistic methods. This will enable
development of methods and tools for probing structural variation in functions
defined on random domains. The project will develop topological methods,
computational tools, and their foundations to summarize, analyze, and visualize
functional data on random compact metric spaces, networks and graphons, and
establish a pipeline from such data to actionable knowledge. The advances
resulting from the project will open many new perspectives in practical
applications and research in such disciplines as developmental and evolutionary
biology, medicine, social sciences, and engineering. Though powered by state-of-
the-art methods, the resulting tools will be simple to use so as to attain broad
utility. To enhance this important aspect of the project, by way of
interdisciplinary collaboration with domain scientists, the methods will be
tested on case studies that involve analyses of plant shape, rock micro-
structure, and human microbiome data. The methods and software tools resulting
from this project will be documented and distributed online for use by the
research community further broadening the impact on other disciplines. The
project also will generate resources to support several outreach activities.