* 1722540
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Smart Wearable Systems to Support and Measure Movement in Children With and Without Mobility Impairments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Mark Jones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 395,356.00

This project focuses on the development of wearable technologies to measure and
assist upper-limb mobility in children with mobility impairments. Because
mobility impairments in early life can have long-term effects on psychological
as well as physical development, it is important both to help children overcome
these impairments through assistive technologies and to be able to measure the
effect of interventions in everyday movements over long periods of time.
However, most assistive and sensing technologies are bulky and uncomfortable.
The project team will develop soft, low-profile sensing and actuating
technologies that look and feel like everyday clothing. The wearable systems
will be developed and evaluated with a group of 3-12 year old children and their
caregivers. This work will contribute to the development of technologies that
enable understanding and effects of interventions on mobility impairments, and
contribute to the burgeoning smart textiles and clothing industry in the USA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach relies on stitched, textile-based
sensing and a hybrid approach of soft inflatable structures and shape-memory
fibers to assist limb movements. Learning based activity recognition algorithms
will be developed that are robust to differences in body shape and garment-
movement error. The atypical movements performed by children with mobility
impairments will be recognized, enabling assessment of clinical indicators like
range of movement. The actuating component of the proposed system uses soft
pneumatic structures to provide counter-gravitational (lift) forces, and Shape
Memory Alloy (SMA) spring-type actuators to provide directional control. The
system will be developed in two phases: initially, the sensing component and the
passive lift (inflatable abduction support) will be developed using typically-
developing children, and tested in 4-week in-home trials with 15 children with
mobility impairments. The active actuated system will be developed and deployed
in collaboration with 5-10 families with children with mobility impairments over
a period of one year. The effects of both systems on user?s upper-limb mobility
as well as the usability and social acceptability of the systems will be
evaluated.