* 1722657
* Transition Plan for Moving the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Core Collection to the OSU Marine and Geology Repository
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 809,762.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic core collection, housed at Florida State
University since 1963, is one of the world's premier marine geology collections.
This archive is a unique collection of sediment cores that has enabled a wide
range of research advancing our understanding of Antarctic region and the Earth
system. Oregon State University (OSU), under a separate award from NSF, will
provide ongoing curatorial services for this collection through the OSU Marine
and Geology Repository. This project is a comprehensive transition plan to move
the Antarctic core collection from Florida State University to OSU with logging
and digital archiving tasks completed by May 1, 2018.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic and the Southern Ocean
National Collection of Rock and Sediment Cores currently housed at Florida State
University will be relocated to Oregon State University (OSU) and housed along
with the OSU Marine and Geology Repository. Oregon State University
investigators will co-manage the Antarctic core collection and the Marine and
Geology Repository as a single modern repository and analytical facility. The
combined collection will be housed a new 33,000 square foot building with
refrigerated space that can hold both collections with approximately five
decades of expansion space. The co-location and co-management of these two
collections offers unique curatorial synergies, cost savings, and improved
capabilities to support both the research and educational needs of a wider
marine and Antarctic communities. The facility will house a 32-person seminar
room, a large 1,044 square foot core lab that allows layout, inspection and
examination of cores, and adjoining analytical laboratories that will provide
quantitative analysis as well as experiential learning opportunities for
students. This award fund the transition and physical movement of the collection
from Florida State to Oregon State. The transition plan is split into three
phases, starting in January 2017 with reconnaissance of the current Antarctic
core collection in Florida, data entry in the current repository database (Phase
1), labeling of all cores before they are put in boxes (Phase 2) and carrying
out the actual move (Phase 3) in the first nine months of the transition plan.
The goal is to finish the entire transition and full digital curation of the
collection by 1 May 2018. The transition plan was developed to incorporate the
best curatorial practices and to facilitate a successful move and transition of
the irreplaceable Antarctic core collection from Florida State University to
Oregon State University.&lt;br/&gt;