* 1722545
* Homotopy Theory in the Ecliptic:  Chromatic, Equivariant, and Motivic Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Michael Hill, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides partial support for participation in the conference
"Homotopy Theory in the Ecliptic: Chromatic, Equivariant, and Motivic
Mathematics" held at Reed College, in Portland, Oregon on August 18-21, 2017.
This activity will bring together leading researchers, postdoctoral associates,
and graduate students interested in chromatic, equivariant, and motivic homotopy
theory to share recent progress and ideas in these fields during a three-day
research conference.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The conference focuses on chromatic,
equivariant, and motivic homotopy theory, branches of topology that have a
history of cross-pollination. The primary scientific aim of the conference is to
further their co-creative interaction. There has been ongoing progress at the
intersection of the three fields, and these interactions have been fruitful for
both the development of theory and the advancement of computations. Among the
topics of focus are the development of equivariant motivic homotopy theory, the
role of equivariant methods on chromatic homotopy theory, and the influence of
motivic methods on the computations of the stable homotopy groups of spheres.
The invited speakers are on the forefront of the recent developments in these
fields, and their work highlights the intersections. Details are available on
the conference website at https://sites.google.com/site/eclipseconference/.