* 1722376
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering brewer's yeast for biosynthesis of terpenes for the production of flavor determinants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Charles Denby, Berkeley Brewing Science Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to engineer brewer's yeast for a more consistent,
cost-effective, and sustainable brewing process. The flowers of hop plants
provide both bitterness and "hoppy" flavor to beer. Hops are, however, both a
water and energy intensive crop and vary considerably in essential oil content,
making it expensive and difficult to achieve a consistent hoppy taste in beer.
The goal is to engineer brewer's yeast to biosynthesize aromatic monoterpene
molecules that impart hoppy flavor to beer by incorporating recombinant DNA
derived from yeast, mint, and basil. Over the last two decades, consumers have
displayed an increasing preference for beers that contain hoppy flavor. Hops are
an expensive ingredient for breweries to source (total domestic hop sales have
tripled over the last 10 years due to heightened demand) and a crop that
requires a large amount of natural resources: ~100 trillion liters of water is
required for annual irrigation of domestic hops. Reducing the reliance of the
brewing industry on hops would significantly increase the sustainability of the
brewing process by decreasing water usage, also leading to the commercial
benefits of decreased brewing costs and greater consistency of beer flavor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to engineer the
biosynthesis of hop-derived monoterpenes in brewer's yeast to meet the following
industrial performance requirements: 1) Normal propagation and fermentation
characteristics, 2) precise and robust production of monoterpenes at scale, and
3) the absence of off-flavors. The proposed research sets out to test whether
the expression of 5 key biosynthesis pathway enzymes can be expressed in a way
that each of these performance requirements is met in a single strain. Recently
developed synthetic biology tools will be used to create hundreds of DNA
constructs, each containing a different combination of promoters driving
expression of the 4 corresponding genes (designs). Incorporating genetically
stable DNA constructs into brewer's yeast is complicated by their polyploid
genome. To overcome this difficulty, preliminary work was conducted to develop a
Cas9-mediated integration strategy, which leverages a colorometric assay to
assist with the challenge of identifying stable pathway transformants. Strains
will be constructed and evaluated in two subsequent rounds. In the first round,
a diverse set of designs will be explored, and in a second round, strains will
be constructed based on the designs that most closely meet with performance
requirements and avoid production of potential off-flavors.