* 1722716
* Autonomous and Lagrangian Platforms and Sensors: A Scientific and Technical Review
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Daniel Rudnick, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 135,612.00

Observational oceanography involves the sampling of a global turbulent fluid.
Relevant length scales range from the size of ocean basins down to the
millimeters where turbulent dissipation occurs. Time scales of interest are as
small as seconds to climate fluctuations of decades or centuries. A relatively
new approach to address the challenges of sampling this broad range of scale is
to use autonomous platforms, defined here as being unconnected either to a ship
or the seafloor. The trends in autonomous and Lagrangian platforms and sensors
(ALPS) have been apparent for some time. This recognition led to the initial
NSF-sponsored ALPS workshop in 2003 and it is timely to revisit its findings. In
2003, the Argo array had only 900 floats on its way to the current array of more
than 3500. Underwater gliders were being developed, but no real science had been
done with them yet. Propeller-driven AUVs were beginning to deliver results. A
wide range of biogeochemical sensors was discussed at the meeting, mostly as
possibilities, although there were some results from floats. Many of the
predictions in the ALPS report have proven to be accurate, with a marked
increase in the number of scientists using autonomous platforms to address
research problems. The ALPS-II meeting will take place at the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, during 21-24 February 2017.The outcome of ALPS-II
will be broadly shared with the ocean scientific community. In pursuit of this
objective, the meeting will be as open as possible subject to the limited number
of on-site participants. A website will make publically available all meeting
materials, including the final report. The plenary sessions will be broadcast on
the internet. Importantly, all workshop participants will be encouraged to
consider the interests of the broader community in their contributions. Meeting
recommendations are expected to include means to make ALPS technologies
accessible to more scientists. If fully successful, the results of the meeting
will be a catalyst towards the adoption of ALPS widely throughout the ocean
community, both for research and operations.

This second ALPS science and technology review has the overarching goals (1) to
survey progress in the past 13 years, and (2) to assess future prospects. The
meeting will examine the ALPS enterprise through a sequence of slices through a
rapidly growing field. The history and potential of the various platforms
(drifters, floats, gliders, autonomous underwater vehicles, autonomous surface
vehicles, unmanned aerial vehicles) will be addressed. The various classes of
sensors including physical, biogeochemical, optical, acoustic, etc. will be
reviewed with special attention to their use on autonomous platforms. The
scientific problems amenable to ALPS technologies will be discussed including
global and regional issues, high latitudes, ocean acidification, and climate
variability. The value of ALPS in ocean forecasting will be a topic of interest,
including approaches for adaptive sampling and control. Models for managing and
operating ALPS assets will be discussed, with the goal of making the
technologies available to more scientists. This brief list of topics is neither
exhaustive nor prescriptive, as meeting participants will have latitude to guide
the meeting.