* 1722906
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Smart Intervention Strategies for Hepatitis C Elimination
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Anne Spaulding, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2021
* USD 133,752.00

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a global health problem that causes
more deaths than other common infectious conditions, including HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis and malaria. Because the infection has a long latency period with
few symptons, the majority of those infected remain unaware of their health
status. The World Health Organization (WHO) and the National Academy of Medicine
recently set an ambitious target to eliminate HCV by 2030; however, several
challenges exist. The true prevalence of disease is unknown and effective
screening policies do not exist, and treatment, while effective, is very
expensive. This project has the following three overarching aims: 1) estimating
the true disease burden of hepatitis C at the State and National level; 2)
identifying effective screening and treatment strategies for identifying
hepatitis C infection; and 3) designing practical decision support tools for use
by stakeholders to manage the disease. From a societal perspective, the research
will assist decision makers in reducing HCV disease burden. The team is engaged
with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), State and County
health departments, and the World Health Organization (WHO), who are the
potential stakeholders of the research. This project will also provide learning
and research experience to students and fellows on the application of systems
dynamic modeling to healthcare.

This research will apply methodologies from epidemiology and operations research
to provide decision support for the allocation of limited resources to effective
intervention policies to contain the ongoing epidemic of HCV. The research team
will address several important research questions related to hepatitis C
management and control by 1) conducting surveys to estimate HCV prevalence in
at-risk populations; 2) estimating the true HCV prevalence at the State and
National level via a validated agent-based simulation model; 3) researching
optimization-based approaches to dynamic allocation of adaptive intervention
strategies. The research is expected to lead to practical decision support. The
research will advance knowledge in mathematical and computational modeling of
infectious diseases and guide the allocation of limited resources towards
eliminating HCV as a global health threat.