* 1722276
* SBIR Phase I:  Hydro-financial modeling architecture for the automated optimization of low basis risk indices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Matthew Marshall, Lotic Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the improved financial resilience of the
numerous industries that are reliant on stable water conditions. The innovation
will enable the transfer and pooling of the financial risks posed by drought and
flood in an increasingly efficient market. In the US, over $250B of industrial
activity depends on stable freshwater systems across the energy, agricultural,
and utility markets. Floods, droughts, freezes, and other conditions destroy
roughly $10B in economic value annually in the US alone - value which cannot be
recovered until it is accurately quantified and mapped to clear and measurable
indicators. This SBIR research will enable the generation of accurate risk
indices that bring clarity to the opaque and complex financial impacts of
volatile water conditions. This will improve the accessibility, cost, and
effectiveness of index-based insurance contracts, which provide businesses with
crucial financial relief from the droughts and floods that hamper their
operations. Such contracts also create new investment opportunities with
diversification benefits for investors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to overcome the
technical challenges of seamlessly and scalably 1) combining and analyzing
massive heterogeneous datasets relevant to hydrologic-financial risks, 2)
managing a diverse set of models that cover hydrology, industrial operations,
markets, and actuarial sciences, and 3) optimizing the configuration of data and
models to generate accurate and precise risk indices. This project will
construct and test a unified semantic data model for hydrologic-financial risk
and deploy optimizations to maximize accuracy of the indices for a specific
industrial use case. The architecture allows for the automated provisioning of
disparate datasets and the deployment of best-in-class modeling and optimization
tools to generate detailed risk indices. The research will create new
vocabulary, when necessary, to bridge the gaps between existing ontologies in
hydrology, industrial asset operations, actuarial analysis, and financial market
conditions. If successful, the research will enable a dramatic reduction in both
the time and cost required to produce hydrologic-financial risk analyses and the
instances of errors in those analyses.