* 1722123
* SBIR Phase I: A Medical Device to Protect and Stabilize Umbilical Catheters in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Eric Chehab, Novonate Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to standardize the process of securing and
protecting umbilical cord catheters. These catheters are inserted into newborn
babies in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and are used to provide life-
saving nutrients and medication directly into their bloodstream. Unfortunately,
the infection rate associated with these catheters is among the highest in the
healthcare system. There is an important need for a simple medical device that
reduces the risk of infection. A reduction in infection rate would save
hospitals hundreds of thousands of dollars per year since they must currently
absorb the cost of treating these infections. Most importantly, reducing
umbilical catheter infection rates would save neonatal lives in any hospital
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a standardized
device that reliably secures umbilical cord catheters and protects the catheter
insertion site from various sources of infection. The current standard of care
for securing these catheters in NICUs across the United States is a roll of non-
sterile tape that offers no protective barrier to the catheter insertion site.
This is in stark contrast to medical devices that are used with adult catheters
and help prevent bloodstream infections. The research objectives include
evaluating different materials, testing the catheter securement mechanism,
testing bacterial colonization rates, and evaluating the device?s biosafety for
use on neonatal skin. This will be accomplished using custom-built testing rigs
and protocols. We anticipate the successful development of a device with
material specifications that allow for clinical testing in the NICU.