* 1722529
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Characterization of Rapid Jurassic True Polar Wander
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Jessica Creveling, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2023
* USD 58,456.00

The motion of continents throughout the geologic history of the Earth strongly
affects a vast number of processes on its surface. Among the effects of
continental drift are the formation of mountain belts and volcanoes, the spread
and extinction of biodiversity, and changes in climate at the local and global
scales. Continents on Earth may move via one of two fundamentally different
processes. The more familiar mechanism, known as plate tectonics, involves the
differential motion of continents relative to each other. The second, less well-
understood process is known as true polar wander (TPW), wherein the entire Earth
rotates as a single unit such that the location of the present pole is
transferred to a lower latitude. Theoretical studies show that TPW should have
strong effects on the global environment, including regional sea-level changes
of &gt;100 m and drift of land surface across multiple, contrasting climate
zones. However, the cause, rate, and even the existence of large-scale TPW
events in Earth history have been controversial. Here we will measure the
magnetism of rocks from the Late Jurassic (~165-150 million years before
present) and pursue theoretical geodynamical computations to characterize the
motion of the Earth during this most recent proposed episode of TPW. The results
will have important implications for understanding the drivers of observed sea-
level and climate changes throughout geologic time and for elucidating a
fundamental process by which the global geography of the Earth
evolves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is divided into two closely coupled
parts that use complementary techniques to understand Jurassic TPW. First, the
investigators will collect paleomagnetic rock samples from the La Negra
Formation of Northern Chile and the Chon Aike province of Patagonian Argentina
to quantify the position of continents during the 165-150 million year ago (Ma)
interval, which has been identified by previous studies as the most recent time
interval of potentially large amplitude (about 30 degrees) TPW. These rock units
represent the most continuous deposits of igneous rocks from the candidate TPW
interval, which implies the highest likelihood of recovering high precision
paleogeographical information using paleomagnetic techniques. As part of this
experimental component of this project, the team will collect samples for
geochronological analysis using Ar-Ar and U-Pb in zircon techniques, which would
provide more reliable rates of motion during this time span. Second, they will
simulate the polar wander of the Earth using existing geodynamical code that
accounts for the motion of mass anomalies in the mantle and lateral variations
in the lithospheric strength of the Earth. A second, coupled geodynamical code
will compute the expected changes in regional sea-level caused by the TPW
motion. Combined with experimental data, these models will narrow the range of
possible drivers of Late Jurassic TPW and evaluate its potential effect on
records of climate and sea-level.