* 1722000
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-Material 3D Printing of  Personalized Medical Simulation Models
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Davide Marini, Inkbit LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop the necessary technology and
manufacturing workflows to provide medical professionals with extremely
realistic physical models of tissues and organs. The models will be manufactured
rapidly (within a few hours), inexpensively, and on-demand. They will be
patient-specific based on the patient?s CT and MRI scan data. This will have
profound implications on the planning of complex medical procedures such as
tumor removal and will enable medical professionals and their teams to practice
patient-specific surgical scenarios. This will improve surgical outcome,
generate efficiencies in the operating room and decrease medical errors which,
by some accounts, are the third largest cause of death in the United States. The
ability to 3D print realistic human organ models will also provide medical
students with a way to practice medical procedures with a wide degree of
diversity. This will accelerate the learning rate and expand the breadth of
training experiences. Similarly, the models will provide a way for medical
professionals to practice rare, high-risk procedures on-demand. The proposed 3D
models will become a central part of the medical simulation toolbox and will
enable a new generation of surgical planning and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to manufacture extremely realistic
physical models rapidly, inexpensively, and on-demand relies on a novel
multimaterial additive manufacturing process with a closed-feedback loop enabled
by machine vision. This new process manufactures objects layer by layer, each
layer made from a discrete set of elements, where each element is built from one
material from a pallette of materials. The use of the closed-feedback loop
system allows incorporating both liquids and solids with a wide range of
mechanical and appearance properties. The development of a material palette that
is necessary to mimic properties of real tissues will be a crucial part of the
project. This material palette will be expanded by spatially combining base
materials into composite structures. The second main thrust of the project
relies on a software design workflow that translates geometric and material
specifications describing a simulation model (e.g., an organ or a tissue) into
multimaterial volumetric data. The volumetric data will be used as input to the
multimaterial printing platform. The new design workflow requires development of
modeling approaches that go beyond traditional, boundary-based CAD
representations.