* 1722251
* 23rd International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Andrew Ellington, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

Life operates on a hardware that is composed of cells enclosing molecular
components and a software encoded by information and programs written in
molecules. With the vision of understanding the natural molecular programs and
further establishing novel molecular programming rules for engineering and
developing synthetic systems, the annual International Conference on DNA
Computing and Molecular Programming has been one of the premier
interdisciplinary forums where scientists with diverse backgrounds (e.g.;
experts in computer science, physics, chemistry, biology and mathematics) come
together to present their highest quality research and discuss new ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for 12,000 USD to support student travel
expenses for the 23rd of the conference series (DNA23), to be held at The
University of Texas at Austin on September 24-28, 2017. The primary purpose of
these funds is to provide assistance to students who are delivering oral or
poster presentations at the conference. The process of selecting the travel
award recipients is intended to give priority to women and underrepresented
minorities, in addition to supporting quality research presentations.
Approximately 24 successful student applicants from institutions (excluding The
University of Texas at Austin) will be funded for travel and accommodation, with
an expected average award of 500 USD per student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective is to encourage and incentivize a new generation of researchers to
attend the conference. The travel awards will help to foster the development of
the next generation of molecular programmers, by encouraging students to attend,
present their work, and interact with other important players in the field.
Students who attend the conference will get exposure to early versions of work
that are expected to be published in top venues and, furthermore, they will have
the opportunity to interact with, and potentially collaborate with, researchers
who are producing work of the highest quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of
topics includes algorithms and models of computation for biomolecular systems;
control of molecular folding and self-assembly to construct nanostructures;
demonstration of switches, gates, devices, and circuits; molecular motors and
molecular robotics; computational processes in vitro and in vivo; studies of
fault-tolerance and error correction; synthetic biology and in vitro evolution;
software tools for analysis, simulation, and design; as well as a range of
applications in engineering, physics, chemistry, biology, medicine and
nanotechnology education. The first day of the conference will be devoted to
tutorial on the use of nucleic acid nanotechnology in synthetic biology and
talks from speakers on best practices in nanotechnology education. These latter
talks and ensuing discussions will allow educators from around the world to
share their approaches on how to effectively impart the interdisciplinary field
of nanotechnology to students. The presentation sessions during the conference
will be an excellent stage for discussing new results of highest quality and
exchanging new ideas, which will contribute to advancing knowledge and
developing new technologies.