* 1722647
* Collaborative Research: Data-enabled Modeling, Numerical Method, and Data Assimilation for Coupling Dual Porosity Flow with Free Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mingzhen Wei, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

The coupling of dual porosity flow and free flow arises in many important
applications. However, the existing Stokes-Darcy types of models cannot
accurately describe this type of coupled problem since they only consider single
porosity media. Therefore, with the support of lab experiment data, the PIs
develop a new coupled multi-physics multi-scale model and the corresponding
numerical methods for accurately describing this coupling. Furthermore, both the
lab and field datum provide the possibility to improve the accuracy of the model
prediction through data assimilation. This project provides students many
valuable training opportunities in data-enabled modeling, development of
numerical methods and code packages, data assimilation, mathematical analysis,
and engineering applications. They can gain solid foundation in computational
math and data science, valuable research experience, and extensive collaboration
experience with engineers. Starting from this collaboration work, the
investigators plan to disseminate the proposed model, methods, and packages to
more engineers and scientists for solving their realistic problems, present the
work in professional conferences and colloquia, and organize special sessions in
conferences for related works. Moreover, this project is part of the expansion
of the computational and applied mathematics program and Missouri Institute for
Computational and Applied Mathematical Sciences at Missouri S&amp;T. This
department-oriented expansion will benefit the entire engineering-based
university and help state of Missouri enhance its relatively less active
research in computational mathematics. At the University of Wyoming, the
mathematics and statistics departments are merging in 2017 with a new emphasis
on data sciences, mathematics, and statistics. This project will provide an
immediate boost to the data science initiative and provide a justification for
recruiting new students, scientists, and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
challenging to propose appropriate interface conditions for the new model in
order to couple the two flows in a physically valid way. Moreover, coupling two
constituent models leads to a complex system involving different scales in the
dual porosity flow and the free flow, which demands accurate and efficient
numerical methods. The use of existing data to improve the model prediction will
even further increase the complexity and computational cost by a significant
amount due to the big amount of data and iterative feature of the data
assimilation methods. When the nonlinearity, time-dependence, realistic
interface/boundary conditions, and data information interact with each other in
a dynamic system, the whole system becomes much more complicated and much larger
in computational scale. Therefore, significant challenges still remain for the
intricate multi-physics multi-scale model to couple the dual porosity flow with
the free flow. This project proposes a dual-porosity-Navier-Stokes model with
the support of lab experiment data, develops the decoupled non-iterative multi-
physics domain decomposition method with optimal convergence rates, study the
variational data assimilation method with a newly defined cost function for
improving the interface model prediction, carries out the mathematical analysis
for the model and the numerical methods, and applies them to one or two
applications. This research dynamically combines all of these components into a
hybrid system of research and development that will take full advantage of the
inherent relationship between the novel mathematical modeling/methods/analysis
and the practical engineering advances in validation/data
assimilation/applications, hence will lay the groundwork for reliable modeling
of many applications involving complex flow in fractured porous media with
highly-conductive conduits.