* 1722008
* STTR Phase I:  Distributed and Scalable Coordination of Solar Photovoltaic and Battery Storage Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Andrew Giroux, Packetized Energy Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development and
validation of technologies that enable electric energy systems to operate
reliably and affordably with very large amounts of renewable energy. Clean,
reliable and affordable electricity is vital to modern society. However the
variability of wind and solar generation can lead to catastrophic grid
reliability problems if real-time demand does not match the supply. This project
will develop and demonstrate a system to manage distributed (e.g., rooftop)
solar photovoltaic systems operating with and without local electrical energy
storage (i.e., batteries) in a way that extracts the most value for the
customer, while simultaneously improving the reliability of the electricity
infrastructure. The project will leverage algorithms inspired by those used by
millions of devices to send data over the Internet. Like Internet data, energy
will be delivered in discrete energy packets. These packets are coordinated
independently, anonymously, and fairly to simultaneously solve real-world grid
problems and provide value to end-users. The result of this project will be an
integrated software-as-a-service and hardware solution in which customers gain
incentives for participating and electricity industry members realize savings by
reducing infrastructure needs, such as additional fossil fuel
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will enable the decentralized, randomized, and bottom-up
coordination of two- and four-quadrant power-electronic inverters attached to
solar photovoltaic and electric battery storage systems. In contrast to
competing, centralized, top-down scheduling approaches, the proposed technology
enables inverters to regulate both active and reactive power output according to
an automaton that undergoes probabilistic state-transitions based on both real-
time local measurements and communication with an aggregator. By incorporating
local measurements, the method ensures that the energy needs of the end-use
consumer are met while providing flexibility to a load aggregator or electric
utility. This flexibility will enable distribution utilities to manage feeder
power flows, losses, and voltage constraints. The probabilistic nature of the
coordination prevents harmful synchronization effects, such as oscillations,
while maintaining privacy of end-consumers through anonymous interactions akin
to how data packets are routed on the Internet. Upon completion of the project,
a commercially viable, human-friendly software-as-a-service (SaaS) technology
will be demonstrated that implements this decentralized approach to coordinate
distributed inverters in a manner that is compatible with modern grid
operations.