* 1722155
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced alkaline electrolyzer stack for hydrogen peroxide onsite production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Ming Qi, Peroxygen Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is a significant advance in the production of hydrogen
peroxide. The project, if successful, will yield an on-site electrolytic
generation method that reduces the cost of peroxide production by up to 50%
compared to the traditional centralized chemical process. By reducing cost,
hydrogen peroxide can be used more widely as an oxidizer in bleaching,
wastewater treatment, and other processes, ultimately lowering chlorine
pollution by replacing chlorine-based oxidizers. The paper/pulp and textiles
industry in particular will benefit from lower cost bleaching chemicals and
reduced effluent treatment costs. The electrolytic method reduces environmental
pollution and eliminates the need for transportation of explosive high
concentration hydrogen peroxide. The innovative electrolyzer design used for
hydrogen peroxide production will enhance the scientific knowledge base on how
to build improved electrode structures that support multiphase flow, and may
have applications in other industrial electrolysis systems, including the chlor-
alkali process. This STTR Phase I project proposes to demonstrate a scaled-up
high efficiency alkaline hydrogen peroxide electrolyzer system. The most
difficult challenge to overcome for scale-up relates to the electrode
manufacturing process. The electrodes are made by coating a catalyst-containing
ink onto a conductive substrate. The composition of the ink is non-standard, and
has not been coated at commercial scale. The Phase I research will involve
detailed investigations of ink formulation, coating, and processing conditions
for roll-to-roll manufacturing of the oxygen reduction electrode. The roll-to-
roll manufactured electrodes will be tested in pilot-scale hardware to
demonstrate their durability and performance. Manufacturing-friendly multilayer
coatings will be developed and investigated to overcome challenges associated
with multiphase flow. After completing pilot-scale electrode manufacturing, the
electrolyzer stack will be assembled and tested at an experimental bleaching
facility to ensure that the electrolytically-generated alkaline peroxide can be
used as a bleaching chemical. The development of the multiphase electrode in
this Phase I project will enable improvements in other electrolytic processes
using multiphase flows.