* 1722795
* I-Corps: Bio-inspired membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Isabel Escobar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on new
technologies for water treatment. Tap water from a central water treatment
facility or a local well is generally of high enough quality to drink without
further treatment; however, there are geographic areas where the water is either
permanently or temporarily unsafe. Other needs include addressing water
aesthetics that are not at unsafe levels but are not desired by the consumer. To
enter this market a product needs to be differentiated and cost sensitive. In
this project the team we will focus on evaluating the competitive landscape,
identifying commercialization partners, and understanding the consumer needs in
industrial and household application.

This I-Corps project uses a new method to cast bio-inspired water treatment
membranes. Aquaporin, a highly selective water channel protein, has received
worldwide attention because of its potential to form aquaporin-based membranes
with high flux and rejection for water treatment. The high water permeability
and selectivity of aquaporins makes aquaporin-based biomimetic membranes
attractive for water purification. In this project pores or channels
specifically engineered in a pore-spanning biomimetic membrane to maximize water
transport efficiency, compared to conventional polymer membrane filters. These
bio-inspired membranes display higher contaminant rejection efficiency and
significantly improved backflush cleaning effectiveness as compared to
traditional membranes. This has the potential to decrease operating costs and
increase the life of the membrane.