* 1722495
* Experimental Study of Pressure-induced Structural Changes in Silicate Glasses to &amp;gt;100 GPa
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 183,705.00

Silicate magmas are the most efficient carriers of heat and matter throughout
Earth's reservoirs, and play an important role in a wide range of geological
processes. Silicate magmas are high pressure objects, formed at depth in the
present Earth beneath volcanoes, mid-ocean ridges, subduction zones, and
hotspots, or in the deep magma ocean in the early Earth. Silicate magmas undergo
structural changes at high pressure conditions, and knowledge of the pressure-
induced structural changes in silicate magmas is important to understand
behavior of silicate magmas in the Earth's deep interior. The investigator
developed new double-stage high-pressure apparatus combined with synchrotron
X-ray measurement, to study pressure-induced structural changes in silicate
glasses, which is an analogue material of silicate magmas, at high pressure
conditions to &gt;100 GPa corresponding to the lowermost part of the Earth's
mantle. Establishing the new high-pressure experimental technique in a user
facility (the beamline 16-BM-B, HPCAT in the Advanced Photon Source) contributes
to researches not only in Earth and planetary sciences but also in various
scientific fields such as physics and material sciences as well as engineering,
and to educational activities for graduate students and young postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to experimentally
investigate pressure-induced structural changes in SiO2 and silicate glasses at
high pressure conditions to &gt;100 GPa. Large volume sample is vital for
accurate measurement of the structure of silicate glasses at high pressure
conditions using X-ray diffraction measurement. The investigator developed a new
double-stage Paris-Edinburgh type large volume press to generate high pressures
to &gt;100 GPa with large sample volume. Structure of silicate glasses will be
measured by in situ multi-angle energy dispersive X-ray diffraction at high
pressures. This project will provide vital experimental constraints on
understanding pressure-induced structural changes in silicate magmas at the
pressure conditions of the Earth's deep mantle to the core-mantle boundary by
(1) obtaining the first experimental data for structure of silicate glasses to
&gt;100 GPa, and (2) establishing relationship between Si-O coordination number
and oxygen packing fraction to generalize the pressure-induced structural
changes in silicate glasses for application to silicate magmas in the Earth?s
deep interior.