* 1722440
* SBIR Phase I:  Hardware and Software Systems for High Throughput, High Cell Density Fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Matthew Ball, Culture Robotics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a high throughput, imagery-based
single cell analysis system. The system will be used to characterize high cell
density polymicrobial samples captured during biological research. Initially,
the technology will be applied to the problem of quantifying extremely low
levels of microbial contamination in biological samples. The quantification and
control of microbial contamination is an important challenge in industrial
fermentation and in the manufacturing of biologics. Methods for rapid and
sensitive detection of microbial contaminants do not exist. Traditional
contamination detection methods involve time-consuming culturing of cells or
manual and imprecise checks with a microscope. The proposed technology will
provide automated and rapid sample characterization, allowing a speed of
analysis that is 1000 times faster than current systems. This increased
throughput will additionally allow lower levels of contamination to be
quantified. While initially applied to research, the technology can also be used
as an analytical and diagnostic tool in the medical field. For example, this
analysis system could be used to search for malformed red blood cells in a human
sample that might arise due to a disease like sickle cell anemia, or to
determine the relative abundance and morphology of immune cells, an analysis
that would help identify certain leukemias.

This project will create a hardware platform and a parallelized computer vision
system that is capable of fully characterizing each cell in a 1mL biological
sample in under five minutes. To analyze samples taken from a fermentation
process with high cell densities requires the micrography system to be capable
of processing over one billion cells in the analysis window. The project aims to
develop four subsystems: a high pressure microfluidic system for separating and
isolating cells, an imaging system, a set of high throughput algorithms to
classify the cellular imagery data and a horizontally-scalable computing
platform on which to run the classifying code. The project will begin by
developing a low throughput, fully functioning prototype. The efforts will then
focus on developing the four primary subsystems in parallel, using knowledge
gained in the prototyping efforts to guide the later work. Additional phases
will focus on the integration of high throughput versions of the subsystems. The
fully realized single cell micrography system will represent a leap forward in
speed and specificity compared to traditional cytometry systems. With no manual
intervention and in an open-ended, label-free manner, researchers will be able
to conduct parts per billion-level inspection of a biological sample.