* 1722731
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Crowd in Action: Human-Centric Privacy-Preserving Data Analytics for Environmental Public Health
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Linke Guo, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2019
* USD 307,999.00

Although current healthcare systems actively collect medical data from patients
in hospitals, numerous personal subjective data is commonly neglected in the
analysis of environmental public health due to high-sensitivity of health-
related data. As a result, there is a lack of real-time monitoring data, such as
symptom reports from high-risk groups and severe environmental pollution,
causing notoriously long latency for effective prevention of the spread of
epidemic diseases. This project is to address the fundamental challenges on
collecting and analyzing multi-scale data from multi-sources for environmental
public health in a privacy-preserving manner. The developed technologies empower
each individual in a community to proactively contribute real-time data of
themselves and surroundings for the betterment of public health without
compromising his/her privacy. In addition, this project also serves as a
training ground for educating future decision-makers and workforce on privacy-
preserving healthcare technologies.

This multidisciplinary research advances the state-of-the-art public health by
combining multi-scale data collection and analysis. Specifically, the project
redesigns current healthcare monitoring systems for both severe infectious
diseases and long-term environment-related diseases and their exacerbation
(e.g., air pollutant-induced pulmonary diseases, such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and lung cancer). By considering the high sensitivity and
distributed manner of the data from patients and users, this project addresses
the privacy preservation in two-fold: 1) completely redesign efficient
collaborative classification schemes by applying novel metrics without leaking
individual's privacy; and 2) introduce new architectures to perform
crowdsourcing data analysis by using light-weighted and verifiable encryption
schemes. This project also grounds the theoretical outcomes to actual
crowdsensing systems and social networks for validation. Finally, a new
methodology on public health prediction model is developed with practical
systematic implementation in healthcare systems.