* 1722200
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel shear-based platelet function test (PFT) using 3D MEMS electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Xin Zhao, Atantares Corp
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,984.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates to the
management of clotting&lt;br/&gt;and bleeding which is a major clinical
challenge that costs &gt; $100B healthcare system burden. In&lt;br/&gt;the
United States, it affects more than ten million patients of major surgery,
trauma,&lt;br/&gt;cardiovascular disease, stroke and cancers. The underlying
biology is a complex orchestration of&lt;br/&gt;protein and cellular pathways
that react in the context of blood flow. Proven diagnostic tools
that&lt;br/&gt;capture this complexity, and also meet the constraints of diverse
challenges do not exist. This&lt;br/&gt;project intends to create a novel
modular hemostasis test platform using proprietary microsystem&lt;br/&gt;modules
deployed in configurable cartridges tailored to meet clinical requirements.
Initially a&lt;br/&gt;3D microelectrode based platelet function test module will
be developed and optimized with&lt;br/&gt;potential for best in class
performance following multi-scale optimization of the
dynamic,&lt;br/&gt;physical diagnostic environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a
simple, low&lt;br/&gt;cost platelet function assay (PFA) with the objective of
delivering best in class performance via&lt;br/&gt;multiscale optimization of
the local biophysical diagnostic environment. Multiplate
Electrode&lt;br/&gt;Aggregometry (MEA), a macroscale impedance-based device has
already shown promise, yet&lt;br/&gt;remains cumbersome and has suboptimal
classification accuracy between patient subsets. In&lt;br/&gt;MEA tests, as with
most PFAs, the role of local fluid shear and macro/microscale
physical&lt;br/&gt;environment remains largely neglected despite their well-
recognized role in platelet response.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary work suggests
untapped potential in controlling and modifying PFA performance.&lt;br/&gt;By
optimizing these signals with respect to clinical end points and subpopulation
differentiation,&lt;br/&gt;this shear-based micro-platelet function test modules
stand to revolutionize platelet function&lt;br/&gt;testing for the broadest
possible benefits.