* 1722734
* RAPID: Research+Practice Collaboratory: Tools and Methods for Forming Research-Practice Partnerships
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Bronwyn Bevan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 02/28/2018
* USD 103,794.00

The University of Washington, as the lead organization of the Research +
Practice Collaboratory, will run three workshops to provide technical support
for constructing the kinds of research-practice partnerships (RPPs) that are
required by the new CSforAll Solicitation (NSF 17-525). The hands-on workshops,
modeled on a shorter version held in September of 2016, are designed to

1. Generate interest in the value of RPPs in supporting new efforts in
sustainable, equity-oriented CS education, 2. Advance understanding on the
formation and maintenance of robust RPPs, and 3. Support teams in the
development of appropriate RPP research questions and project designs that could
result in benefits to both practice and theory.

The workshops will be held in January 2017 in three cities: Atlanta, Los
Angeles, and Chicago. Prospective PIs will apply in teams of 3-4 people. Teams
should include a K-12 educator with responsibility for curriculum and
instruction, professional development/certification, or assessment, a K-12
educator who will be responsible for implementing changes at the building or
classroom level, and, if relevant, a community stakeholder that is an effective
advocate for equity at the state or district level. If the team has already
identified an education researcher, that researcher should attend as well.
Additional education researchers will be invited to work with the teams.

A brief report will be generated summarizing the areas of interest, possible
tensions, and newly identified opportunities with respect to creating stronger
connections between researchers and practitioners that can advance the equity-
oriented CSforAll effort.