* 1722533
* CAREER: Photoactivated miRNA delivery for modulation of human adipose stromal cell differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Daniel Hayes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2018
* USD 82,820.00

1254281&lt;br/&gt;Hayes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modulation of cell and tissue
function with microRNA (miRNA), which are small non-coding RNA sequences
naturally found in animal and plant tissues, is a promising technique to improve
the control of wound healing and tissue repair processes. When combined with
adult stem/stromal cell (ASC) therapies these techniques may result in a new
regenerative medicine paradigm. Several miRNA and other potential
oligonucleotide based therapeutics have been demonstrated to posses potent
bioactivity but current state-of-the-art oligonucleotide delivery techniques are
largely incompatible with clinical therapies due to toxicity and lack of
specific action. This project will address the critical need for a clinically
relevant, safe and effective miRNA delivery system which provides temporal and
spatial control of activation at the site of diseased or damaged tissue. As a
primary objective the project will optimize, a nanoparticle (NP) based, light
activated, miRNA delivery system (LAMD) for the light activated spatial and
temporal regulation of bone and blood vessel formation using ASC as a model
system. A secondary objective is the development of a more cost effective and
robust processes for the fabrication of a targeted version of the basic LAMD
system. Research into manufacturing processes with improved yields and
morphological control will address a critical limitation to the development of
therapies using targeted particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the lengthening
life span and increasing activity levels of the aging population we expect to
see a substantial increase in the number of patients presenting with orthopaedic
injuries. Of particular interest are solutions to skeletal disorders, such as
bone disunions and non-healing, critical sized defects caused by wear, cancers,
trauma or as the result joint replacement. The development of a photoactivated,
nanoparticle based, miRNA delivery system that addresses the limitations of
traditional miRNA delivery vectors while providing for spatial and temporal
control of activity could be transformative for miRNA use in regenerative
medicine. This project will provide direct support for several undergraduate and
graduate students per year to work on this project as research scholars. The
project presents a unique and interdisciplinary opportunity for students
majoring in biomedical engineering, chemistry and related fields to build
fundamental knowledge and appreciation in the areas of nanomaterial synthesis,
stem cell biology, photobiology and regenerative medicine. The outreach
components of this project will include K-12, undergraduate and graduate
education activities.