* 1722408
* SBIR Phase I:  Container Grids for Software Defined Security
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2018
* David Lenrow, CN3 Systems, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project appears in three areas. First, there is an $8B
dollar market for legacy hardware network security products today that is in
transition to Software Defined Security. Adoption of this general SDSec platform
has the potential to accelerate that market transition and improve enterprise
security. Second, this project's success as an open platform could dramatically
shorten the time between research insight and at-scale production deployments;
security software built to a lower bar of scale/resiliency is faster and easier
to build. The end result will be an increased rate of innovation, and new
markets for niche, fit-for-purpose security functions that today are not
profitable for vendors to build. Last, this platform could harmonize enterprise
security investments and practices for on premise workloads with security
investments for public cloud workloads, solving a key dilemma faced by leading
IT organizations. This will make those organizations more competitive on the
world stage.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project addresses the two hardest technical challenges in
building an enterprise-grade network security function, scale and resiliency, in
a general way that can be applied to both new products and legacy codebases with
no code change. Addressing scale/resiliency problems in a general way across
many network security functions is novel, and this particular approach of
massively parallel, lightweight packet processing functions to achieve this is
new to this domain. Why now? The massively parallel design proposed here is far
too expensive and impractical with traditional hardware-based network functions.
Even traditional hypervisor-based virtual machines carry too much hardware
overhead to make this design cost competitive. By using vSwitches and network
security functions packaged as Linux containers, the hardware overhead cost per
instance drops dramatically, and this class of approach for scale/resiliency may
be proven practical.