* 1722825
* SCH: EAGER: Personalizing Drug Delivery through Clinically Relevant Modeling and Control
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Brier, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 286,563.00

The variety and complexity of medications used by physicians for the treatment
of diseases are increasing. Difficulties arise in finding the proper dose for
drugs that have a narrow therapeutic range, high toxicity, altered effects with
disease progression, or those that are affected by genomic factors. Because of
these complexities, physicians often rely on trial-and-error-like approaches to
determine optimal drug doses for individual subjects. Unfortunately, these
approaches may lead to over- and under- dosing, resulting in subtherapeutic
effect or increased risk of adverse events. Advances in engineering and
computational intelligence may help to alleviate much of the uncertainty when
dosing these agents. To address the complexities in individualized drug dose,
this EAGER research aims to investigate a new methodology for the development of
individualized patient models and a novel control approach for personalized drug
dosing. In the short term, this effort will impact the treatment of anemia, a
common chronic condition in hemodialysis patients. The successful completion of
the proposed research, however, has the potential to result in a new method for
personalized drug dosing that can be applicable to many other chronically
administered drugs that require some type of monitoring. On the educational
front, plans include training graduate students and involving undergraduate
students with research. Several existing programs such as INSPIRE and the High
School Outreach Program will be used to reach out to high school students.
Outcomes of the project will be made available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this EAGER project is to investigate a novel approach to
individualized drug dosing using a new modern control method based on Radial
Basis Functions (RBF) and robust patient-specific models. The project has the
following three specific aims: 1) The theoretical principles of semi-blind
robust system identification are examined to produce individual patient models
from a limited number of noisy patient-specific clinical data. In contrast to
classical identification techniques, robust system identification takes into
account system uncertainties, unmodeled dynamics and model complexity, i.e.,
there is no assumption on the model order, uncertainties and noise affecting
data. 2) Based on the these predictive individualized models, the development of
a patient-specific dosing approach using a novel RBF-Galerkin controller is
proposed to generate optimal dosing sequence and expected response adapting to
temporal changes in patients' dose-response characteristics. 3) The new method
will be evaluated in silico using a test case, derived from previously collected
clinical data: Erythropoietin (EPO) dosing for anemia management. This is a
clinically relevant test-bed as the administration of drug EPO is intensively
monitored, has narrow therapeutic range and can have serious adverse effects.
Following successful in silico evaluation of the proposed method, a validation
study will be performed at the University of Louisville controlled hemodialysis
unit. As a benchmark we will use existing state-of-the art approaches to anemia
management as well. Successful application of the proposed technique to this
agent will provide proof-of-concept that the proposed method can be applicable
in clinics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.