* 1722650
* Collaborative Research: Multi-scale models of subduction zone earthquake cycle observations
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrew Freed, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 08/31/2020
* USD 124,087.00

Earth's tectonic plates get recycled back into the mantle at subduction zones.
The largest earthquakes happen there, and these megathrust environments also
generate a range of other geohazards including tsunamis and volcanoes, making
their study of great societal relevance. Recently, seismological and geodetic
measurements have revealed a range of phenomena associated with megathrust
behavior that are not captured by a simple, stick-slip earthquake cycle model of
slow loading and catastrophic rupture. These newly discovered phenomena include
transient, creeping events of fault slip on decadal scales which may indicate
preparatory behavior of the fault system, perhaps systematically linked to the
main seismic event. Mechanical models have not quite kept up with these new
discoveries and our understanding of the physical processes behind these
phenomena is incomplete. A new, integrative framework is therefore needed to
understand the physical mechanisms and fault constitutive laws behind complex
deformation and seismicity patterns. This project seeks to develop such a
mechanical model, initially for the data rich Japan setting, in order to
understand regional megathrust dynamics and fault interaction patterns, as well
as improve seismic hazard estimates. Later, such a mechanical model may
potentially be deployed at other subduction zones such as Cascadia and assist in
interpreting existing and planned monitoring data streams for earthquake
forecasting and early warning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To capture the spatial and
temporal scales involved in this complex problem, three sub-projects are to be
pursued in collaboration between researchers at University of Texas Austin
(UTIG), Purdue University, and the University of Tokyo: 1) The development of
sets of multi earthquake-cycle scenarios based on numerical models of visco-
elastic, inter-, pre-, co- and post-seismic fault loading in Japan. 2) The
development of global mantle flow and regional, time-evolving mantle convection
models to understand long-term, subduction induced forcing of plate boundaries
and backarcs in the region. 3) The development of cross-timescale, visco-elasto-
plastic models in 3-D, incorporating rate and state friction as well as other
fault constitutive laws in a dynamically consistent, thermo-mechanical
convection framework. This will enable, for example, studying the role of pre-
seismic, slow slip phenomena for fault zone evolution, eventually in the
presence of fluid flow. All project parts will be integrated, and results from
different approaches cross-checked. Moreover, all sub-projects are complementary
and will guide the establishment of the general subduction zone model that is
needed to understand earthquake cycle observations and seismicity in Japan and
elsewhere.