* 1722355
* STTR Phase I:  Low-cost, onboard navigational autonomy and awareness for next generation UMVs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Anthony Mulligan, Hydronalix
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,986.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to reduce the
necessary supervision and oversight required to operate multiple unmanned
platforms in the execution of real-world, specific, task-based activities
supporting search and rescue, routine mapping and intelligence gathering
missions. Shifting control from teleoperation to autonomous navigation could
enable first responders such as lifeguards, to quadruple their capacity to
assist in mass, maritime disaster, rescue scenarios for example. The current
practice of a single lifeguard handling 3 victims in a routine riptide incident
will be improved by a factor of four, through the use of this technology,
allowing lifeguards to better manage mass-scale, maritime disasters that may
involve a hundred victims. Human lifeguards could focus on those people
requiring immediate personal assistance (unconscious, hypothermia or children
for instance), while unmanned maritime platforms could be tasked with responding
to clusters of survivors better capable of self-rescue. Lifeguard assistant
robots can also help with the over 400,000 lower profile events in the US each
year. A robot could not only save lives but reduce risk to the lifeguard who
typically has to swim or jet-ski out to provide flotation and rescue lines to
victims in dangerous conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop increased intelligence
and self-awareness for autonomous platforms that will result in an increase in
operator ?trust? and allow potential operators who might consider autonomous
platforms as ?unreliable? due to potential lost communication links, to have
greater confidence in adopting these platforms. The technology will transition
from far field navigation control (such as waypoint based navigation) to a near
field control allowing precision delivery of the platform to the desired
location in a dynamic environment. This capability would allow a maritime
platform to autonomously drive to a designated cluster of survivors, slow down
and behave according to known social proxemics so as not to further stress the
victims. On board, vehicle health monitoring would allow critical system
parameters to be reported and broadcast allowing ad-hoc networking with other
platforms in the region. The overall objective would be to optimize the use of
resources in any region and to quickly allow multiple lifeguard teams converging
on a mass marine casualty event to interact but without having to pre-register
or have a priori knowledge of each other?s systems.