* 1722229
* STTR Phase I:  Multi-faceted System for Document and Product Security
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Jeevan Meruga, NP SYSTEMS INTEGRATION, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project will support the development of a powerful new track-
and-trace platform in the global fight against counterfeit products in high-risk
supply chains. From pharmaceuticals to aviation to defense, many industries now
face a growing problem with maintaining visibility to the authentic products in
their supply chain, while identifying black market and grey market products that
could harm their customers and have serious impacts on national security. This
project will build on interdisciplinary research from materials science,
photonics and information technology to create an innovative new platform that
connects physical supply chains with digital supply chains through the use of
covert codes that are placed onto products. These codes are printed using
nanoparticles that are only visible when exposed to a laser with very specific
properties. The security platform that this research enables will provide U.S.
industry with a robust new system for authenticating genuine products and
maintaining visibility throughout the global supply chain. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project
develops a system designed to thwart counterfeiting. The system is based on 1)
covert printed markings, carrying encoded information, that convert near
infrared (NIR) excitation either to visible light or to shorter-wavelength NIR
light, and 2) a proprietary reader-decoder system that is cyber-enabled to
access secure data bases. The two major technical challenges addressed in this
project both involve maximizing the overall signal-to-noise ratio of the system.
The first challenge improves the long-term stability and up-converting
nanoparticle payload-capacity of a novel, micro-emulsion (aqueous continuous-
phase) ink. The second challenge creates micro- or nano-scale substrates that
greatly amplify the up-conversion signal. Successfully overcoming these
technical hurdles will significantly advance the readiness of the technology for
commercialization and Phase II development. It is estimated that reaching the
milestones specified within the specific research objectives will lead to a 250x
enhancement of up-conversion intensity when using low excitation power
densities. Such an enhancement would be transformational to the system and
enable the use of lower laser powers in the reader/decoder device which in turn,
would lower costs and greatly extend the utility of the system to, for example,
a hand held, portable reader.