* 1722152
* EarthCube Building Block:   GeoDataspace:   Simplifying Data Management for Geoscience Models
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Tanu Malik, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 209,153.00

A big obstacle to such sharing is the inordinate amount of time and effort that
must be spent in creating, communicating, receiving, and interpreting
specifications of data, models, and associated knowledge. This inability to
quickly and conveniently share is particularly a problem in computational
geoscience, wherein scientists spend significant portions of their time managing
the many input and output files that are typically associated with a model. When
developing, testing, validating, and comparing models, particularly coupled
models, the number of such data elements and the complexity associated with
their management soon outgrows human memory capacity. The unfortunate
consequence is that researchers often narrow the scope of a model analysis,
compromise research quality, or conduct analysis within restricted teams. This
pilot project will demonstrate a mechanism to overcome this challenge in the
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GeoDataspace pilot will develop a
new data-centric approach to describing models and associated data resources for
computational geoscience. This new approach will both simplify model use and
enhance the shareability, reusability, and reproducibility of models, data, and
computations?properties widely sought by computational geoscientists.
Specifically, the project will develop methods for defining, sharing, and
accessing geounits, collections of descriptive metadata that define a m the
entire collection of files needed to run a computational model, including
details about the model run. In the case of files, processing and manipulation
scripts, manifests, spreadsheets, or one-off databases, the encapsulation may
consist simplify of the elements location and specification of each element. The
GeoDataspace team includes (a) experts in cyberinfrastructure, data management
systems, and SaaS at UChicago; (b) experienced and leading geoscientists in four
domains of solid earth, climate, hydrology, and space science, and a leading
expert, as well as, geoscientist on model coupling frameworks. Together the team
has identified a cross-cutting data management barrier that must be critically
addressed in a domain-independent manner so as to extend capabilities to a
broader set of geoscientists.All participating geoscientists are initiators,
leaders, working-group chairs, and/or representatives of the five modeling
communities we represent, including Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics
(CIG), Community Earth System Models (CESM), Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrological Science, Inc. (CUAHSI), and Community Coordinated
Modeling Center (CCMC) at NASA, and finally Earth Systems Bridge (ESB), a
community invested in developing model coupling frameworks. In total, the number
of geoscientists either directly or indirectly involved in GeoDataspace is in
the hundreds, if not thousands.