* 1722972
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: A Non-Invasive and Wearable Molecular Diagnostic Platform for Remote and Passive Monitoring of Patients at Risk for Sepsis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Sriram Sankararaman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 941,202.00

This project will devise an integrated sensing and analytical framework to
enable non-invasive remote monitoring of in-home/in-hospital patients at risk
for sepsis with a wearable diagnostic platform. Sepsis is the leading cause of
admitted patient mortality and is one of the most expensive conditions (&gt;$20
billion per year) treated in U.S. hospitals. Early detection and timely
intervention are the most crucial factors in improving the outcome for these
patients, but the symptoms of sepsis are nonspecific and the repeated blood
tests that are required to appropriately monitor are time-consuming and
performed at suboptimal rates. These limitations significantly degrade the
efficacy of early goal-directed therapy. The core hypothesis of this project is
that through the real-time analysis of sweat, sepsis can be detected and its
severity can be classified. In that regard, an integrated sensing/analytical
framework will be developed to correlate the sweat readings to the sepsis
status. Specifically, the research plan includes: 1) devising a chemically-
enhanced sweat extraction interface, 2) developing disease-specific inference
models and sweat analysis framework, and 3) evaluating the framework applied to
septic patients. These efforts will converge toward the development of a patient
monitoring platform, which with minimal reconfiguration, can be optimized toward
other clinical and physiological applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
research will address fundamental questions critical to advancing the field of
sweat-based biosensing. An integrated sensing technology and analytical
framework that normalizes longitudinal sweat readings with respect to multi-
conditionally induced secretion parameters will provide quantitative insight
into sweat secretion processes and promote our understanding of this complex and
multivariate system. Achieving this requires resolving various scientific
bottlenecks at multiple fronts spanning from inconspicuous sweat induction at
modulated rates, longitudinal/multiconditional in-situ sensing and development
and validation of statistical models that can account for the various sources of
uncertainty. The team of investigators will capitalize upon their expertise in
flexible device fabrication, bio-interface/sensor design, pharmacology, sweat
gland physiology, clinical research, and statistical modeling to deliver the
proposed objectives. Through in-situ analysis of sweat lactate as a proxy for
blood lactate, with a wearable sweat extraction/analysis device, the project can
detect the dramatic elevation in blood and detect/classify the severity of
sepsis. The outreach component of this project will focus on promoting the STEM
participation of underrepresented minorities at high school and undergraduate
levels by creating a diverse, STEM-motivated community. Moreover, the
educational component of this project will integrate findings from the planned
research activities into the course materials.