* 1722169
* STTR Phase I:  Development of super-efficiency thermoelectric generators and waste heat management with black metal and super-wicking surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Anatoliy Vorobyev, AlchLight
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will help establish a
commercially viable method for mass production of high-efficiency heat
exchangers for the rapid advancement of thermoelectric solar cells and waste
heat management. The advancement to be made in this project will help harvest an
enormous amount of solar energy and heat energy from the environment. Thermal
energy from natural (solar, geothermal etc.) as well as from man-made thermal
sources is a continuously available, and currently underutilized resource with
the potential to become an important pillar of renewable energy. The solar
thermoelectric devices require minimal maintenance and are suitable for
deployment in remote regions. The successful completion of this project will
significantly improve the performance of solar thermoelectric generators.
Besides harnessing solar energy, thermoelectric devices can also be used for
waste heat recovery from automobile exhaust and industries using high-
temperature furnaces to enhance fuel efficiency and generate electricity for
automotive operations. Our estimated outcome can enhance the fuel efficiency of
automobile engines by 15-20 %with around $67 billion annual reductions in
gasoline expenses and around 570 billion pound reduction in annual carbon
emission.

The intellectual merit of this project is to develop a disruptive technology to
improve the efficiency of thermoelectric devices. Currently, the efficiency of
thermoelectric devices is much lower than their theoretical values due to the
lack of ideal heat exchanger materials for both hot and cold ends. The research
goal is to enhance current module efficiency by more than 90%. The project
includes testing and validation of the heat exchanger into thermoelectric
generation modules for solar electricity generation and waste heat management
from thermal sources at different temperatures, as well as developing methods
for mass production of heat exchanger materials. The size of the treated
surfaces can be well controlled, making it possible to fabricate microscale
solar thermal devices for infrared sensors and night vision cameras.