* 1722516
* SCH: INT: Personalized Real-Time Learning of Optimal Diagnostic Tests using Multi-Modal Clinical Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* William Hsu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,351,581.00

This project harnesses the growing amount of data that is captured in the
electronic health record to discover the optimal diagnostic pathway for an
individual patient. A multidisciplinary team with expertise in decision
modeling, radiology/clinical practice, informatics, and machine learning will
investigate approaches that transform data into actionable knowledge, enabled by
a new class of clinical decision support algorithms that actively learn from
available clinical data. The objective of this project is to develop and
evaluate a data-driven framework for decision support that helps clinicians to
deliver individualized patient care by discovering optimal sequences of actions
and to diagnose patients in a timely, accurate, and cost-effective manner. The
project addresses challenges related to finding relevant information from large,
longitudinal patient data; learning sequences of actions from past patient
cases; and handling uncertainty that is inherent to the practice of medicine.
The new algorithms will improve how observational clinical data can be used to
generate evidence that improves healthcare delivery, efficiency, and ultimately,
realizes precision medicine and improves patient outcomes. A diverse group of
graduate students will be trained in an interdisciplinary manner to translate
algorithms and data science concepts into applications that have real-world
clinical utility, and with a clear understanding of the technical and cognitive
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will create a
generalizable framework for learning from healthcare data to discover optimal
actions for individual patients with the following objectives: (1) to determine
what combination of diagnostic procedures (e.g., imaging, labs, biopsy) should
be used to achieve an accurate and timely diagnosis, and in what sequence; and
(2) to demonstrate that learning such pathways can be done using available data,
allowing the new methodology to be applied in a wide range of clinical domains.
Novel aspects of this project are three-fold: (1)Dealing with an environment
that is unknown and changing over time in unpredictable ways through a novel
adaptive learning approach to discover the most informative features that are
predictive of subsequent actions taken in real-time. This builds upon earlier
work in relevance learning to dynamically elucidate the relationships between
clinical features and possible actions. (2)Developing a new type of bandit
algorithm that not only discovers the next best diagnostic test to order, but
also identifies additional information that is needed to make a definitive
diagnosis. The accuracy and value of diagnostic tests are dependent on many
factors (e.g., technology, patient characteristics). The team will assess how
prior information from similar patients can speed-up learning given these
factors. (3)Providing confidence bounds about the risks and benefits of
selecting a specific diagnostic exam to perform. These confidence bounds can be
easily understood by clinicians. The performance and utility of this approach
will be demonstrated using a prospective study that solicits physician feedback
about specific recommendations for a given patient case and learns from
situations in which the physician does not follow the system's recommendation.