* 1722390
* STTR Phase I:  Perovskite Solar Cells with Tin Oxide Electron Transport Layers for Optimized Performance and Lifetime
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Augusto Kunrath, MVSystems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 223,823.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be seen in the strengthening of the
renewable energy landscape, in the diversification of our energy sources, and
ultimately in the reduction of fossil fuel?s impact on human health and the
environment as our society moves toward clean electrification of our energy
supply and distribution systems. Due to the low cost of its raw materials,
intrinsic scalability and rapid evolution of efficiencies, perovskite solar
cells are the ideal candidates to validate thin film photovoltaics as a safe,
commercially viable and economically sustainable source of energy. This rapidly
emerging technology is compatible with existing silicon photovoltaics and can be
combined with them to enhance their efficiencies, or can be used as stand-alone
devices that can ultimate meet or exceed the performance of silicon while
enabling an intrinsically inexpensive and scalable manufacturing process.
Initial studies predict an estimated cost of production of modules lower than
$0.28/W after amortization of initial capital investment, which translates into
a cost of production ~30% lower than that of current photovoltaic technologies.

The proposed project will provide a solution to a key degradation mechanism that
affects the lifetime performance of perovskite photovoltaics. Degradation is
caused by trapping of charges at the interface between the light absorbing
perovskite layer and the electron transport layer, typically TiO2, which leads
to the breakdown of the perovskite structure through a sequence of chemical
reactions. In this project TiO2 will be replaced by SnO2 (either intrinsic or
doped) which has an electronic band structure that matches very closely with new
high efficiency perovskite compositions. Additionally, SnO2 is considerable less
expensive than TiO2, easier to deposit with high quality, i.e. low density of
electronic defects, and it is more environmentally robust in the presence of
moisture and oxygen than TiO2. SnO2 also does not photocatalyze degradation
pathways of the perovskite layer, which is recently thought to be occurring with
TiO2. Preliminary laboratory work using SnO2 as an electron transport layer
yielded efficiencies comparable to cells manufactured using TiO2 (~18%), but
more importantly, tests showed virtually no degradation after 500 hours of
operation. Our goal is to further improve the properties of the perovskite cells
(efficiency and stability) while developing a robust, inexpensive deposition
process for SnO2.