* 1722913
* SCH: INT: Personalized Proactive Diabetes Self-Management and Social Networking for American Indians
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 988,114.00

The epidemic of diabetes in American Indian (AI) communities is a serious public
health challenge. As daily diabetes care is primarily handled by the patients
and their families, the effectiveness of diabetes control is largely impacted by
self-care strategies and behaviors. This project proposes a proactive diabetes
self-care mobile platform based on the unique socio-economic, cultural, and
geographical status of AI patients living in a reservation community in the
upper Midwest. The mobile platform connects AI diabetic patients to their
medical devices, healthcare team and similar patients, and offers personalized
prediction, recommendation, and social networking regarding diabetes care. It
transforms diabetes management from the traditional reactive and hospital-
centered care to preventive, proactive, evidence-based, and person-centered
care. This project will also provide valuable research opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students, especially from underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
develop an integrated, accessible, cost-effective solution for improved diabetes
self-management and social networking for AI patients. Considering the quasi-
ubiquitous use of cellphones in most AI communities, a cellphone-based platform
is proposed to provide smart and personalized service. A biocultural ontology is
developed to model the unique characteristics of AI patients. Based on a user's
ontological profile, through ontology-based reasoning and machine learning
approaches, personalized prediction and recommendation are delivered to the AI
patient. Semantics-based social matching is applied as a technical and
intellectual framework for connecting AI patients with similarities to form
online peer support communities. Personalized self-managed trust and privacy
mechanisms are developed to establish secure user relationships. To improve
system usability, a multimodal interface is implemented to deliver information
with appropriate input and output modalities to a user based on the user's
physical and social context.