* 1722542
* Mapping Fine-Scale Structure in Earth's Inner Core With a Global Array of Seismic Arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Keith Koper, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 270,000.00

After the Earth formed it quickly differentiated into a dense, fluid, metallic
core surrounded by a magma ocean of less dense, molten rock. The magma ocean
ultimately solidified into Earth's mantle and crust. These rocky outer layers
act as an insulating blanket and have kept most of the core in a fluid state to
the present. But at some point, long ago, the core became cold enough to
solidify in the very center of Earth, where the pressure is highest. As the core
continued to cool, the solid inner core slowly grew larger. Currently, the
radius of the inner core is about 1/3 the radius of the core itself. The aim of
the proposed work is to map out the subtle variations in the geologic structure
of the inner core using scattered seismic energy that has been recorded by a
global network of seismic arrays. These patterns will give insight into how the
solid inner core is formed and deformed by dynamic processes in the fluid outer
core. The proposed work will be conducted by the PI and a graduate student at
the University of Utah in collaboration with early career scientists at Los
Alamos National Laboratory (LANL). During the course of the project, the
graduate student will visit LANL annually and make contacts within the large and
diverse LANL geophysics program. It is likely that early career LANL scientists
will also visit the University of Utah during the project, strengthening a lab-
university collaboration. The proposed work will leverage the tens of millions
of dollars that have been invested in developing and maintaining the
International Monitoring System (IMS), which is operated in support of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. This project will highlight the value of
IMS data for basic science and demonstrate a pathway that other academic
researchers might use to gain meaningful access to IMS
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes a three-year project to map out
large-scale regional variations in the fine-scale structure of Earth's inner
core using seismic data recorded by a global array of seismic arrays. The PI
will apply array processing techniques to earthquake generated waveforms
recorded at the small-aperture (~5-20 km) arrays of the International Monitoring
System (IMS) to identify and isolate the subtle coda waves that follow pre-
critical reflections from the inner core boundary (PKiKP). Pre-critical PKiKP
coda waves are uniquely sensitive to the properties of small wavelength (~1-10
km) scatterers in the inner core that contribute to the well-known, but poorly
understood, low Q of the inner core. To better understand the origin of long-
wavelength variations in inner core Q, the PI will document regional variations
in inner core scattering strength and rigorously compare them to existing quasi-
hemispherical models of the inner core that are based on the apparent Q measured
from waves refracted through the inner core (PKPDF). Forward modeling of pre-
critical PKiKP coda envelopes will be conducted using a previously developed
ray-based, single-scattering approach that has been validated against multiple-
scattering phonon simulations. The proposed work will, for the first time, map
out the scattering strength of the inner core over a complete range of
longitudes, with dense sampling of both quasi-hemispheres and the longitudinal
transition zones. The results will shed light on the fundamental nature of inner
core heterogeneity, and constrain the range of geodynamic models that can
explain its origin.