* 1722987
* Collaborative Research: The context for rifting in East Africa - melt distribution and lithospheric removal imaged from axis to flank
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Kathleen Keranen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 24,637.00

Continental rifting is a fundamental part of the plate tectonic cycle, and lies
at the nexus of geothermal and mineral resources, seismic and volcanic hazards,
and geophysical research. Substantial variation between rift zones worldwide
indicates that continental breakup is dictated by a complex interplay of
tectonic forces and geologic characteristics. Therefore, it is critical to
understand the full context for a rifting system, from the highly extended rift
center that houses volcanoes and earthquakes to the flanks of the rift, where
extension is just beginning and pre-rift structures are still evident. The Main
Ethiopian Rift segment of the East Africa rift is perhaps the world's most
iconic continental rift. New imaging techniques will be applied to recently
acquired seismic data spanning this rift to reveal the 3-D internal structure of
this rift and shed light on key geologic processes in this and other rifts
around the world. This project involves collaboration with scientists from
Ethiopia and provides career opportunities for early career researchers under-
represented in the Earth sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed imaging of the
internal structure of an entire rift system, from flank to axis, can shed light
on the mechanics, controls, and time-dependency of extensional processes in the
Main Ethiopian Rift. Recently acquired data from a wide aperture broadband
seismic array is critical in sampling pre-rifted structure that may control rift
dynamics, as well as to image the geodynamically crucial transitional zone
between rift axis and flank. Our tomographic technique entails simultaneous
inversion of P and S receiver functions with Rayleigh wave phase velocities
within a Bayesian framework; this approach is ideally suited to capture
lithologic/seismic discontinuities, the presence of melt, and complex 3-D rift
structure. Anisotropic body wave inversions and splitting studies will help
constrain the locus of melt as well as the time-integrated strain history of
this rift. This project utilizes seismic data from a number of previous projects
in the region, combining the strengths of multiple deployments to achieve a
synoptic understanding. Collaboration with Ethiopian scientists and supporting
the early careers of under-represented researchers are among the broader impacts
of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.