* 1722130
* SBIR Phase I:  Evaluation of screen-printing as a manufacturing technique for MRI coils
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Pierre Lechene, InkSpace Imaging, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,980.00

This SBIR Phase I project tackles the key challenges of using screen-printing to
manufacture receive coils for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) at a commercial
scale. MRI is widely used to establish a broad variety of clinical diagnosis,
but suffers from long exam times and a high rate of failure, resulting in high
costs. Printed receive coils are flexible, lightweight, conform well to the
human body and can be manufactured at an order of magnitude lower costs. With
this technology, coils can be designed and printed to fit all patient anatomy,
therefore improving image quality and offering superior comfort. These
technology offers the potential to increase success rate of MRI exams, speed up
procedure time and to enhance clinical workflow. Printed coils will have an
impact on the accessibility to MRI, serving a more diverse patient population,
such as pediatric and bariatric patients, who currently have limited access to
this imaging modality, due to the lack of adequate coils. Overall, this project
aims at enabling the fabrication of printed coils, thus contributing to reduce
health care costs associated with MRI while significantly improving the quality
of patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
investigates critical aspects of characterization of screen-printing MRI coil
arrays for clinical use. We have shown that printed and flexible MRI arrays
provide diagnostic images, while providing better fit and comfort to patients.
Printing electronic materials is a novel manufacturing approach which is used
here to fabricate these medical devices. Our goal is to provide coils with size
and design customized for the diverse anatomy of patients. In this proposed
program, we will evaluate the reproducibility of printing, design strategies and
the robustness and lifetime of printed coil arrays. Coil size and geometry have
a direct impact on image quality and body coverage. We will study the
fundamental limits of coil size and geometry when fabricated using solution
processed conductors with lower conductivity than conventional metals. The
variations in measured signal-to-noise-ratio and image quality from print to
print will be characterized and documented in order to provide a successful
model for large-scale and low-cost manufacturing of coil arrays. Finally, the
robustness of printed arrays will be tested. The packaging used in our designs
are significantly different from the status-quo. Lifetime quantification for
arrays used in clinical scenarios is important for a successful business plan.