* 1722404
* SBIR Phase I:  IoT2:IoT Energy and Power Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Mark Bachman, XIDAS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 09/30/2018
* USD 224,319.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to demonstrate a new way of integrating
energy harvesting technologies in standard electronic circuits. This offers the
opportunity to produce small sensors and devices in remote locations that can
collect information, monitor conditions, and transmit data without the need to
replace batteries. Small batteries are unsuitable for electronics that are
remotely deployed, driving interest to harvest electrical energy directly from
the movement and vibration of machinery. Currently, energy harvesting is too
large, expensive, and inefficient for practical deployment. If energy harvesting
can be made small and inexpensive, it can enable a large suite of products and
services for industrial, civil, and agricultural remote monitoring. This project
offers the potential to bring energy harvesting to electronics in a way that
allows highly efficient energy conversion from vibrating or moving machinery,
while maintaining small size and low cost. The ability to embed tiny moving
parts directly within printed circuits is highly innovative, and dynamic energy
harvesting is an excellent application of this technology. The patented
manufacturing processes can be performed using domestic electronics
manufacturing infrastructure helping to bring next-generation manufacturing to
the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to demonstrate a new
way to embed dynamic energy harvesting devices directly within printed circuit
boards, enabling micro energy production at low cost and small size. The project
builds on patented manufacturing processes that leverages conventional
electronics manufacturing infrastructure?devices can be built having feature
sizes in microns without the need for expensive silicon fabrication foundries.
The project will explore designs and fabrication processes for small, efficient
vibrating units, culminating in the production of multiple devices in a single
small footprint circuit board. Significant effort will be on the development of
small, efficient vibrating units that can be manufactured cheaply and in large
quantities, yet embedded directly within printed circuits. Three manufacturing
rounds are anticipated, producing real devices that can be experimentally tested
and measured. The successful completion of this project will demonstrate
electrical energy production in a small printed circuit board (approximately the
size of a credit card), targeting 100 microwatts to power sensing and telemetry
electronics.