* 1722127
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Thermoelectric Heat Exchanger (iTEG-HX) for Carbon Neutral Electricity Production through Recovery of Cold Energy from Regasification of LNG
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Yuriy Lobunets, SOLID CELL INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to demonstrate a reliable, low cost solid-state
device for harvesting the wasted thermal energy released during regasification
of LNG at gas terminals around the world. The proposed device will include
thermoelectric elements incorporated directly into the LNG gasification heat
exchanger, in order to harvest the temperature difference between cryogenic
liquid and vaporized natural gas. Today, approximately 180 Billion kWh of energy
(roughly equivalent to 5% of the total annual electricity consumption of the
United States) is wasted annually at regasification terminals around the world,
representing a huge addressable market for the proposed technology.
Additionally, the proposed technology will benefit the US economy by making
American LNG more cost-competitive in export markets.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to evaluate and demonstrate the feasibility
of a thermoelectric generator integrated directly into an LNG regasification
heat exchanger in order to effectively recover the latent energy released during
regasification of LNG and convert it to electricity. The current state-of-the-
art is based on gas turbines and expanders that rely on a combination of Rankine
cycle and Brayton cycle. These technologies are complex, capital intensive, and
costly to maintain. Consequently, they are seldom deployed at regasification
terminals, resulting in massive energy waste. Direct conversion of the waste
thermal energy to electricity through ?cryogenic? thermoelectrics is a practical
and cost effective option. The proposed research will develop and demonstrate a
laboratory prototype device integrated within a model plate-type LNG
regasification heat exchanger. The main tasks include design of the system
architecture, characterization of thermoelectric materials in cryogenic
temperatures, modeling of heat transfer, prototype fabrication, and testing.
Research will target design and process intensification, in order to minimize
device cost.