* 1722228
* SBIR Phase I:  Air-coupled MEMS-based Ultrasound Transducer for Assessment of Tympanic Membrane Motion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Mark Moehring, OtoNexus Medical Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will focus on a novel medical ultrasound device for
the accurate diagnosis of middle ear infections. The device uses a small
transducer that transmits ultrasound energy into the ear canal to determine
whether a middle ear infection is present, and whether an antibiotic is
appropriate. The focus will be to design and optimize an air-coupled MEMS
(microelectromechanical systems) ultrasound transducer. The device will be a
cost-effective method to improve diagnoses and reduce antibiotics in a market in
which 17.6M doctor visits per year are coded directly to middle ear infections
in the U.S. Ear infections are the #1 indication for which antibiotics are
prescribed for children and the #1 cause for surgery in childhood, costing more
than $10B annually in the U.S. Accessing this market will require consistent
device performance with low variability and rare failure, as well as the ability
to perform manufacturing with a high yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
I project will seek to enable the development of the first known commercial
medical product utilizing air-coupled (capacitive micromachined ultrasound
transducer) CMUT technology. CMUTs have been proposed for many applications, but
very few have moved beyond the early research stage due to the high degree of
technical difficulty and cost required to translate a research device into one
that generates consistent transducer performance with low variability and rare
failure rate. The work of this proposal facilitates the investigators? goal by
establishing fast automated assessment of CMUT performance, both electrically
and mechanically. The investigators will design and construct test systems to
rapidly and automatically evaluate electromechanical and acoustical performance
of CMUT designs. The electromechanical system automatically evaluates electrical
impedance across frequency and bias voltage. The acoustical test system
automatically evaluates pulse-echo directivity and sensitivity of a given CMUT,
across bias voltage and pulsing parameters. The authors propose to use the two
test systems to determine electromechanical tests which can be done in the
foundry at the wafer level, which are predictive of acoustic performance. NSF
funding is being sought to make this challenging but promising CMUT technology a
commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;