* 1722564
* Out Of The Box And Into The Cloud:  Strategic Planning at Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 24,875.00

This project serves the national interest by helping to develop new tools for
conducting and communicating science both nationally and internationally, by
building collaborations between the technology and the academic research
communities at local through global scales, and by training students about to
enter the workforce in cutting-edge technology, biological research, and their
interfaces with societal needs. The project is to conduct a planning effort for
emplacing infrastructural improvements to Jasper Ridge Biological Station at
Stanford University (http://jrbp.stanford.edu/). The vision is to add to Jasper
Ridge Biological Field Station's research capabilities by repurposing the
current maintenance yard into a place to design and install "pop-up field-
station facilities" that can be feasibly replicated at low cost in remote
locations. The pop-up facilities will be environmentally friendly, making use of
re-purposed and local materials, and self-sufficient for energy, water
purification, and waste treatment. Their "out-of-the-box" design will be
adaptable for use in strikingly different geographic and cultural settings. The
concept is to provide a diverse variety of field stations with the capacity to
employ cutting-edge and emerging technology in order to acquire and send data to
the cloud for collaborative analyses with those who may live on opposite sides
of the world. The scientific rationale is that developing such networking
capacity is a prerequisite to attacking local-to-global scale research questions
that are not easily explored in isolation, using techniques such as genomic
analyses, automation of labor-intensive camera-trapping, drones, remote sensing
and mapping, and collaborative analyses. It has been particularly difficult to
employ these emerging technologies in field stations that are in remote
locations, but it is necessary to do so in order to effectively understand how
best to accommodate growing societal needs while still maintaining the
biologically-based life-support systems upon which people depend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on building capacity and common
research agendas among a broad spectrum of biological field stations, from
regional partners to those in developing countries. The intent is to not only
enhance the science that can feasibly be performed at field stations in diverse
settings, but also to provide hands-on training in cutting-edge energy systems,
biological research, and collaborative approaches for students and other
participants. Scientists, technology advisors, students, potential funders, and
other stakeholders will be convened to plan the pop-up facilities and the
coordinated research for which they are being developed. Important applications
range from tracking biodiversity, to understanding the distribution and function
of microbiota, to mapping how species use the landscape and how to most
effectively manage them. The planning will include a three-day workshop at
Stanford University's Jasper Ridge field station, as well as a series of
meetings that will transpire through a year. The outcome will be the roadmap
needed to prototype the new pop-up field-facility approach at Jasper Ridge
within three years, and emplace similar capacity in remote field stations within
five years. The environmentally-friendly, low-cost infrastructure solutions that
will be planned in this effort will be of use not only to field stations, but to
a variety of stakeholder applications in off-grid locations. Training
opportunities will be enhanced for students from both developed and developing
countries to learn from diverse faculty, entrepreneurs, and from each other -
both scientifically and culturally - in field-related settings, recognized to be
one of the most effective and influential learning environments.