* 1722472
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Suction Tip for Marine Life Avoidance During Robotic Sediment Removal
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Francis Parks, Akabotics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be achieved through
shifting the paradigm of waterway maintenance into a more regular occurrence,
giving way to reduced pollutant levels in waterways, since they will be promptly
removed instead of allowing them to accumulate toxins, and increase property
values, utilization, and income within the marina industry. Additionally,
embedded sensor intelligence and continuous waterway monitoring will grant the
community and dredging regulatory agencies increased visibility and
understanding of the health of the marine life in the waterway and allow them to
more closely monitor environmental violations. With widespread adoption and
further development, the innovation could potentially have far-reaching benefits
in assisting with water and energy security by keeping inlet canals and
reservoirs that comprise our society?s infrastructure clean and running at peak
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will aim to design, develop, and test an intelligent suction tip
for use in year-round sediment removal in waterways. Current sediment removal
technologies are destructive to marine ecosystems and costly to employ. As such,
this project aims to develop an intelligent suction tip for marine life
avoidance during robotic sediment removal in waterways. The project activities
include the design and rapid prototyping of a suction tip filter that prevents
fish entrainment, design and implementation of water quality sensors for
environmental niche modeling, in-house saltwater testing, and marine
representative freshwater testing.