* 1722384
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Wicking Matrix Bioreactor for Pluripotent and Progenitor Cell Expansion
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Susan Sharfstein, Sepragen Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2018
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of the Small Business technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop a bioreactor that may be used for
production and expansion of cells for regenerative medicine, tissue engineering,
and drug discovery. While significant advances have been made in developing
strategies for the culture and differentiation of pluripotent stem cells, there
is a critical gap in scaling these processes up to the number of cells required
for clinical and research applications. The specific focus of this project is
the scale-up of beta islet cells for the treatment of diabetes. Diabetes
currently affects 400 million people worldwide leading to 5 million deaths a
year. There is currently no cure. A source of transplantable islet cells could
alleviate many diabetic complications and restore the quality of life for
millions of individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes
to develop and test a novel wicking bioreactor and bioprocess for expansion of
human pluripotent-derived beta islet cells. More specifically, this will require
focusing on 3 major objectives: i)Optimizing the cellulosic surface of the
wicking matrix with chemical and extra cellular matrix additions to ensure
attachment and proliferation of the islet cells; ii)optimizing controlled
differentiation parameters such as oxygenation levels and feed rates to achieve
a 10 fold increase in differentiated cells; and iii) develop a process using
physical and biochemical means to remove the differentiated cells from the
matrix while maintaining cellular integrity both in terms of viability and
phenotype. These studies will serve as proof-of-principle of the proposed
bioreactor for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications.