* 1722313
* STTR Phase I:  De Novo Production of Aroma Compounds by Nonconventional Recombinant Yeast
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Yinjie Tang, Arch InnoTek, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop an engineered nonmodel yeast platform for
the economical and sustainable production of natural aroma compounds. High
quality aroma compounds have a variety of applications, ranging from flavor and
fragrance to cosmetics and pharmaceuticals. With the strong consumer demand for
more natural alternatives to chemically synthesized ingredients in both food and
personal care items, the production of these ingredients by fermentation will
add a renewable source to the supply chain and will reduce demand on botanical
sources. This work will advance methodologies and knowledge for creating novel
microbial cell factories via 13C-metabolite tracing, metabolic flux analysis,
fermentation optimization, and kinetic modeling. The lessons from this research
will offer general guidelines for overcoming biosynthesis hurdles and optimizing
bioprocess operations, and will facilitate the development of transferable
technologies for inexpensive production of diverse natural products that are
broadly used for human health and wellness. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I project proposes to integrate synthetic biology and bioprocess
engineering to optimize the microbial strain for the de novo production of
natural aroma compounds. Because plants carry aroma compounds in extremely low
amounts, commercial extracts from plants are not economically viable. To
overcome these challenges, this project will develop a novel fermentation
process for production of these compounds with high product specificity and
yields. Specifically, a nonmodel yeast strain will be engineered via PUSH
(increase the supply of the precursor acetyl-CoA), PULL (overexpress key
biosynthetic pathway genes), POWER (enhance ATP and NADPH generation)
strategies. Further, 13C-metabolic flux analysis will be used to rigorously
measure in vivo enzyme functions, to delineate acetyl-CoA supply/consumption
pathways, and to identify metabolic burdens or bottleneck factors. Meanwhile,
novel simultaneous fermentation and product recovery will be built to improve
productivity. The fluxome information and fermentation kinetics will offer
guidelines for rational genetic modifications and bioprocess optimizations.
Ultimately, this environmentally friendly process would provide a new, reliable
and natural manufacture scheme to meet the growing demand of consumers for
healthier products.