* 1722847
* SCH: INT: Multispectral Panoramic 3-D Endoscopic Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Guan Wu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 850,111.00

This research project seeks to develop a new smart sensor technology for a
widely-used clinical procedure called endoscopy, which is the most critical
component in minimum- and non-invasive robotic procedures. Robotic medical
diagnosis and surgery offers significant benefits both to the patient by
minimizing damage and hence reducing recovery time, and to the clinician by
enhancing his/her operation accuracy, dexterity, and efficiency. A main
challenge in these robotic procedures is the lack of real-time, full-color, true
three-dimensional (3-D) endoscopic imaging with good spatial resolution, large
field of view and low cost. Mature 3-D imaging technologies, such as Computed
Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), and ultrasound, take time to
complete and process, rendering them impractical in most real-time clinical
procedures. Stereo-vision microscopic cameras similar to sensors in Microsoft
Kinect can be adopted to generate 3-D endoscope images, but the depth resolution
and field of view are severely limited due to the endoscope's small physical
dimensions. Further, a stereo-vision camera can only create the perception of
3-D depth in the clinician's brain, but cannot reconstruct a true 3-D image. The
latter is needed to match the real-time 3-D image to the ones acquired before
the procedure by other methods (CT or MRI) and guide the clinician to identify
the anatomy and locate the point of interest. The developed smart sensor
technology can greatly improve the efficiency, prevent the errors, and lower the
cost in our healthcare systems. This project will advance smart medical
technologies beyond the current state-of-the-arts, such as electronic medical
documentation and wireless networking of existing medical devices, by
incorporating the latest sensor technologies into the medical devices themselves
and integrating these devices into a complete smart system. The synergy between
devices comes not only through data communications but also by complementing
each other's medical functionalities, and thus improving the performance and
enabling new clinical capabilities for the whole system. Smart medical systems
built on the sensor technology developed in this project have the potential to
generate significantly technological, economical, and social
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to create a new microscopic,
true 3-D imaging technology based on the latest advances in silicon photonics,
3-D integration, and imaging analysis techniques. It will be applied to
endoscopy applications with good spatial resolution (1 degree angular resolution
and sub-millimeter depth resolution), panoramic field of view, multi-spectral
capability, high reliability, small size, and low cost. It will enable real-
time, ``full-color", endoscopic imaging in a complex anatomy such as inside a
bladder with cancer tissues, and the generated true 3-D images can be viewed
without glasses and matched with the pre-procedure reference. The fully-
integrated sensor prototypes will be fabricated and assembled in the PIs'
laboratories, and then tested in a setting similar to the clinical application.
The algorithms and computation schemes for 3-D image analysis will be developed
and demonstrated. The vertically integrated research activities span clinical
applications, software, systems, circuits, and devices, and will be carried out
by a multidisciplinary research team that involves Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Computer Science, and medicine.