* 1722621
* FSML: Real-time genomics: enabling the next generation of field ecology and evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Conner, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 259,799.00

The W.K. Kellogg Biological Station (KBS - http://www.kbs.msu.edu) of Michigan
State University (MSU) has been awarded a grant to enhance educational and
research projects that utilize molecular and genomics tools to address a broad
range of questions in ecology, evolution, conservation biology and agriculture.
KBS is the largest off-campus unit of MSU and is known worldwide as a premier
field site for research, education, and outreach in ecology and evolutionary
biology. KBS provides access to diverse natural and managed habitats, many
suitable for experimentation, and also hosts a number of long-term studies that
provide unique opportunities for research on ecological and evolutionary
processes. Advanced molecular and genomic tools are increasingly used for
gaining improved and sometimes transformative understanding of these processes.
The growing research in this area by current KBS faculty, and interest of new
MSU faculty and researchers from other institutions has taxed our current
facilities and severely limited our ability to include training in molecular
techniques and bioinformatic analyses for graduate and undergraduate students.
These funds will be used to expand and support a new Molecular Ecology &amp;
Genomics (MEG) laboratory at KBS that will integrate research and teaching for
resident and visiting researchers, provide next-generation-sequencing (NGS) and
bioinformatics training for graduate students, and allow us to expand summer
course offerings and research experiences for undergraduates to include these
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MEG lab at KBS will support a wide set of NGS
technologies from high throughput DNA/RNA extraction through genomic library
preparation and sample send-off. The equipment to be installed in the MEG lab
will expand the types of research that can be carried out at KBS to include
studies in transcriptomics and functional genomics (i.e., CRISPR/Cas9 gene
knockouts) in addition to RNA and DNA genomic library preparation. The
improvements will include a Kingfisher Flex for high-throughput DNA/RNA
extraction, a multi-mode plate reader for fluorescent and absorbance assays for
measurement of nucleic acid quality and quantity, and a mobile microinjection
station for functional genomic and molecular development work in non-model
organisms. Importantly, these improvements will provide opportunities for novel
research that couple "-omics" studies with field based natural history.
Expansion of the MEG lab also will support the undergraduate educational
programs at KBS by allowing us to introduce students in summer courses to these
techniques and technologies and train those here for research experiences in
modern molecular genomic tools and bioinformatics. These tools are being used in
a growing number of exciting and creative ways throughout ecology, evolutionary
biology, agriculture, and conservation biology, the central research topics at
KBS. Gaining expertise in molecular and bioinformatic methods will better
prepare students for careers or graduate education in these fields. The KBS MEG
Lab will also allow us to develop teaching modules and train K-12 teachers so
that they can better understand, and where possible, include these approaches in
their classrooms.