* 1722504
* EAGER Maker: Developing High-Tech, Low-Cost Making Projects to Enhance Computational Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* A. Susan Jurow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project is supported by the STEM+Computing (STEM+C) program, which advances
applied research integrating computational thinking and computing activities
within disciplinary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics teaching
and learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). The
Developing High-Tech, Low-Cost Making Projects to Enhance Computational Teaching
and Learning (ECTL) will design a new genre of low-cost, high-tech maker
projects to help students work across physical and digital designs to expand
their computational thinking practices into new directions. The project
objectives are to: 1) build knowledge and pedagogical practices that create new
entry points for young people to explore digital computation; 2) develop
culturally relevant digital making projects that advance equity-oriented
Science. Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) and computational
practices for youth and communities whose member are underrepresented in STEM;
and 3) identify future areas of research and development that will expand civic,
cultural, and scientific participation. Rather than giving educators the digital
designs of computer scientists and asking them to implement new projects in
afterschool settings, ECTL will design digital making projects that recognize
community expertise. This expertise combined with that of artists, computer
scientists, and learning scientists will allow the project team to develop new
high-tech/low-cost projects to advance the computational thinking practices of
young people in working-class communities of color. This project builds on the
computational practices rooted in histories of making activities within
marginalized communities and will introduce new digital computing practices into
their existing material-rich making programs. Guided by project research, ECTL
will design activities using low-cost, high-tech tools like craft cutters and
e-textiles in combination with familiar objects, tools, and activities that
educators are already using in their maker programs. The project will use a low
cost/high tech approach to explicitly connect students' cultural worlds to
digital computational thinking practices that are not expensive, flashy, or
laboratory-like. Project research findings and practical educational resources,
such as activity/educator guides to low-cost/high-tech projects, will be widely
shared with researchers and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECTL is designed to
ensure that transformative learning in the digital maker movement is equitable
and incorporates the ingenuity of working class communities of color in the
design and expansion of computational thinking education initiatives. The
project will first study how computational practices are already supported in
maker programs, and then complement existing practices with the use high-
tech/low-cost digital technology to create a new genre of culturally sustaining
digital maker projects. Three research questions will guide the development
process: 1) How do young people learn computational thinking practices through
activities that connect to cultural practices and creative play with high-tech,
low cost materials in three afterschool programs? 2) How do educators enhance
young people's computational thinking practices using high tech low cost
materials in existing afterschool settings? 3) How do artists, educators,
computer scientists, and researchers work together to develop new projects that
draw out young people's computational thinking and deepen practices over time?
Each cycle of research and design will begin in the three afterschool settings
where researchers will observe and collect video data of computational practices
that educators are already supporting through the development maker projects in
their afterschool settings. The next phase will be video analysis of these
computational thinking practices emerging in each site. Teams of afterschool
educators and their research partners will analyze and present examples,
challenges, and creative breakthroughs they capture in their local site. The
final phase of each cycle will culminate in workshops with research + practice
partnerships, artists, and computer scientists to develop and prototype digital
maker projects that build on existing practices with a focus sharper focus on
culturally sustaining digital designs. ECTL will contribute to the literatures
on distributed cognition and collaborative learning by focusing on the
understudied ways in which cultural practices and identity development, how
race, class, and gender identities can be can be leveraged as resources, The
project will add to the limited but growing research on in the design and
implementation of high-tech low-cost maker projects.