* 1722561
* Collaborative Research: Toward understanding spatio-temporal variations of seismic clusters in different environments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Yehuda Ben-Zion, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 248,000.00

Mitigating the devastating economic and humanitarian impact of natural and
human-induced earthquakes requires advanced research on quantification of
seismicity patterns, identification of induced seismicity, and improved
forecasting ability. The risk posed by human-induced seismicity may be
especially acute severe in California and other tectonic regions that operate
geothermal, oil, and gas fields in highly populated areas with societal
infrastructure. This project synthesizes novel earthquake cluster
identification/classification techniques, physical modeling, and high-quality
earthquake and geodetic data from different tectonic environments toward
improved understanding of seismicity in relation to large events and human-
induced earthquakes. A distinguishing property of the approach is uniform
analysis and interpretation of thousands of earthquake clusters on different
space-time-energy scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigations quantify the
dynamics of seismicity on time scales of hours to tens of years, and zoom
spatially from worldwide analysis to focused studies of selected regions with
high-quality data. The research produces a comprehensive database of cluster
styles such as dominant earthquake cluster types and values of their essential
parameters, at global, regional, and local scales. The employed approach is
intrinsically data-driven, but it is informed and motivated by models of
seismicity with different types of rheologies and loadings that help
interpreting the results. The combined observational and theoretical studies
facilitate extracting fundamental information from the observed results on the
basic underlying physics. The project develops improved methods for detecting
human-induced seismicity, catalog declustering, establishes relations between
earthquake clustering and principal loading mechanisms, and may provide
additional signals for tracking the preparation process of large seismic events.
The developed tools and results can have significant impact on understanding of
seismicity and analysis of seismic hazard in active tectonic environments, oil,
gas, and geothermal production areas, and regions containing both.