* 1722801
* SCH: INT: Data-In-Motion Prediction and Assessment of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Harm Derksen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,315,371.00

The goal of this project is to develop new computational approaches for
synthesizing streams of real-time electronic health data for health monitoring
and early disease detection. The team will utilize these technologies to address
the problem of monitoring patients with lung disease to identify Acute
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS). ARDS is an ideal problem, because it is
frequently missed by clinicians with wide-ranging consequences to patients. The
project will develop two emerging concepts in machine learning, learning with
privileged information and uncertainty, both of which have relevance in
healthcare. It will also develop new approaches for integrating different data
types, including waveforms (e.g. electrocardiograms), images (e.g. chest
x-rays), and numeric data (e.g. laboratory results) to more effectively assist
clinicians in medical diagnosis. The project will also establish a
multidisciplinary learning platform for computer-assisted health decision
support systems to prepare students, postdocs, and early career clinical
scientists in precision medicine using highly effective mathematical tools. It
will also include participation of groups underrepresented in STEM through
recruiting new students, integrating the research training in a highly diverse
laboratory, and exploring multidisciplinary, research applied to real-world
problems in biomedical science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes to extend machine learning techniques to a) incorporate
privileged information in algorithm training (data routinely available in
retrospective databases but not live clinical environments) and b) to account of
uncertainty in training labels (because even medical experts have uncertainty in
medical diagnosis). These approaches will lead to more accurate and efficient
algorithms for the detection of medical conditions where diagnostic uncertainty
is common. The project will develop effective signal processing techniques to
identify perturbations associated with respiratory insufficiency and ARDS
development in time series data. The project will also develop image processing
techniques that extract clinically relevant features from digital chest
radiographs of the lungs that could improve the accuracy of real-time clinical
diagnosis in many respiratory that are frequently difficulty to distinguish
among. Finally, this project will integrate these novel methodologies to develop
a clinical decision support system.