* 1722351
* SBIR Phase I:  Tandem-ABALONE Detector Module
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* John Smith, PHOTONLAB, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is many-fold. The novel photosensor technology
developed within this project will enable a new generation of ultrasensitive
experiments in the broad field of astroparticle physics?designed and constructed
on previously impossible scales This technology is advantageous as detectors of
ultrahigh energy cosmic radiation, neutrinos, dark matter and more. In addition,
our technology addresses societal needs, including advancements in medical
imaging and nuclear security. In medical application, the same core technology
can enable the production of cost-effective ultrasensitive whole-body-enclosing
medical scanners (patent pending) for preventive, virtually harmless (low-dose)
cancer screening of the symptom-free population (a currently non-existent
service). For nuclear security application, this technology can enable
widespread and cost-effective detection of illicit fissionable and radioactive
materials (also a currently non-existent possibility). In general, this project
can lead to the creation of a highly profitable and multi-faceted hi-tech
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will meet the needs of our
lead customer/partner, an international collaboration aiming at the detection of
cosmic neutrino radiation at the South Pole site with unprecedentedly high
sensitivity. Such sensitivity will be achieved in a volume of 10km^3 of ice,
instrumented with 2500 m deep chains of detectors, and only a detector concept
and cost-effective hi-tech production method like ours can reach that goal.
However, harsh conditions at the experimental site require specific
modifications to the core design of our invention. Pairs of modified
photosensors will need to be packed into each detector unit, which will be
electrically grounded on its surface, so the standard high-voltage connection
must be swapped with the ground-potential. Consequently, the photodiode will be
moved from the middle to the periphery, and specially designed light pipes will
bring the light to them. At the same time, we will design a high-voltage power
supply that will be integrated within the narrow spacing between the two
photosensors. Additionally, this assembly must operate at -70 oC. Therefore, we
will produce modified photosensors, design and produce all the additional
components and interfaces, test the detectors under near-realistic conditions,
and share them with our customer/partner for further evaluation and feedback.