* 1722461
* SBIR Phase I:  Zulip threaded group chat
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Timothy Abbott, KANDRA LABS INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is group chat technology that enables knowledge
workers to collaborate more effectively than ever before. It is the first tool
built that empowers users to efficiently carry out both real-time and
asynchronous conversations in the same system, with each user reading only those
conversations that are important to them. In particular, the technology empowers
teams to make decisions in virtual meetings that take place asynchronously over
periods of hours or days. This is in contrast with existing group chat
technology, where conversations usually end as soon as someone starts talking
about something else. This ability to conduct long running, virtual meetings is
invaluable for large teams that need to coordinate work across different
locations and time zones. Large, distributed teams are fast becoming the norm
for how organizations operate, as instant communication and globalization make
such teams the workforce of the future. Coordinating the efforts of such teams
is a huge pain point for companies, and this technology is a leap in the state
of the art in this space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project has two key research objectives: scaling the
technology to work for teams of size 10,000+, and determining the feasibility of
porting the technology to mobile. A major scalability research area is search.
The company envisions the technology to be the primary place where decisions are
made, and hence a primary place where knowledge is stored, so fast, full-text
search is important, despite the fact that chat generates much more traffic than
email. One research area on mobile is the HCI challenge of displaying rich
options for conversation navigation on a small mobile screen. The problem is
unique to this technology, since having long running, asynchronous conversations
means that users do not typically read messages in a strictly chronological
fashion. The company anticipates the Phase I grant will enable it to develop a
working solution to the search scalability problem, and a working prototype of a
performant and productive mobile user experience.