* 1722502
* I-Corps: Nitrate Elimination from Water and Filtration Systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Joseph Stucki, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
filter to businesses, government agencies, and individuals to eliminate nitrate
from water. Nitrate in drinking water has significant impacts on society because
it causes serious human health problems. It also promotes the growth of algae in
rivers, lakes, and coastal areas, which interferes with tourism, recreation as
well as other commercial uses of these areas. The two principal sources of
nitrate entering water supplies are the runoff of nitrate fertilizers from
agricultural fields and the discharge from municipal and industrial waste-water
treatment plants. Intercepting these waters and eliminating the nitrate from
them before it enters the environment constitutes a major segment of the
potential for commercialization of the technology. Drinking water treatment
plants are a potential commercial user, as are homeowners with water
purification systems.

This I-Corps project will explore the potential commercialization of a filter to
eliminate nitrate from water. It consists of a bed of sand grains coated with an
iron-bearing clay mineral. Before coating, the clay is engineered to react with
nitrate. Once coated, the sand/clay mineral attracts and reacts with nitrate in
the flowing water, changing it to harmless nitrogen gas or ammonium. Iron in the
clay is the key for changing the nitrate. The intellectual merit of the project
is that three independent research findings were combined to make the filter.
These include processes to reverse the charge on the clay surfaces, changing the
iron charge to react with nitrate, and finally engineering a system with
suitable flow characteristics.