* 1722749
* RAPID: Civil Infrastructure and Reconstruction Efforts following Hurricane Matthew
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Mark Schuller, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 38,026.00

As a uniquely destructive and deadly 2016 Atlantic storm, Hurricane Matthew has
offered both the opportunity and obligation for understanding what sociocultural
variables contribute to the efficacy of disaster recovery and relief efforts.
The RAPID project explores the extent to which post-disaster rebuilding efforts
are impacted by civic infrastructure, such as sharing practices, solidarity
ties, and institutional variation in evaluation methods among non-governmental
and governmental organizations. Findings will be disseminated to aid
organizations involved in disaster recovery efforts. Reports would offer
practitioners and researchers of humanitarian aid/ disaster response a model for
a more robust assessment tool that leverages local resilience, particularly the
sharing relationships and institutions. The research also fosters international
collaboration among scientists, broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups in the sciences, and will train undergraduate and graduate students in
methods of anthropological data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mark Schuller of Northern Illinois University
will explore recovery efforts in Haiti, where Hurricane Matthew caused the
largest loss of life and infrastructural damage. The devastation is still being
assessed, however the material costs, particularly in the South and Grand'Anse
provinces, is quite significant: over 80 percent of structures were severely
damaged or destroyed, trees were either felled or stripped of foliage, including
staple crops such as breadfruit, and the season's ground crops were also
destroyed, along with many irrigation systems. With a team of researchers from
the Faculté d'Ethnologie, the State University of Haiti, the PI will developing
a sampling frame to identify existing and emergency leaders and agencies, and
through a range of ethnographic data collection and analysis tools, explore to
what extent sociocultural variables, such as solidarity ties, moral and ethical
systems that emphasize values such as sharing, and perspectival diversity among
various organizations and entities, are influencing recovery efforts. This
research offers a timely, unique, and an urgently-needed opportunity to quickly
assess the sociocultural ideologies, belief systems, practices and institutions
that are central to the rebuilding effort, offering a clear, early case study
with which to evaluate theories of resilience and the relief-to-development
continuum, particularly the transition from "emergency" phase to
"reconstruction." Communities' own actions and assessments are often missing
from these assessments. Hurricane Matthew offers a unique opportunity to collect
data now, before the humanitarian apparatus is fully established.