* 1722997
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Computational Design and 3D Printing of Textiles
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Victor Zordan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 57,172.00

In addition to being the essential fabric of the world's fashion industry,
textiles are important components for automotive, aeronautical, architectural,
and defense applications. Yet textile prototyping and design (whether for
garments, upholstery or composite materials) is an arduous and expensive
process. This research project seeks to understand and advance the role of new
additive manufacturing technologies (commonly referred to as "3D printing") in
the design and prototyping of textile products. The PIs' goal is to develop 3D
printing hardware and computer software that enable engineers to prototype
textile designs more quickly and economically, and with greater control over a
broad gamut of mechanical, optical, and electrical characteristics such as
aerodynamic drag, adhesion, heat regulation, friction, elasticity, porosity,
density, electrical conductivity, and visual appearance. Beyond individual
textiles, project outcomes will support the fabrication of complete products
that do not require considerable stitching and assembly, and which may include
curved shapes too difficult to cut from flat panels and/or complex composite
assemblies too costly to fabricate via traditional methods. To achieve these
objectives, the PIs will develop: a library of highly-optimized textile "units"
that can be combined using a new language of textile functionality to form a
vast array of possible textiles; computer optimization software that enables
precise control of textile properties; a computer program that allows users to
visually and interactively design complex textile products; and a specialized 3D
Printer that is able to precisely fabricate textiles involving multiple
materials.

Technically speaking, this project will create the first complete
hardware/software pipeline for digital design and fabrication of textiles using
multi-material 3D printing. The first fundamental step in this pipeline is
constructing parameterized meta-material templates that provide users with high-
level knobs for tuning the behavior and large-scale properties of a textile.
Next, the ability to interactively simulate the behavior of a virtual textile
will be achieved by combining continuum homogenization and data-driven methods;
the PIs will develop an interactive design tool that employs first order
sensitivity analysis tied to the physical simulation, to enable designers to
navigate the huge space of possible designs at both the micro and macro levels.
A new language for functionally specifying textile designs that employs a
reducer-tuner model will allow engineers and designers to specify meta-materials
in terms of desired behavior and performance, enabling designs with guarantees
on their characteristics and compliance with standards. Printing volumes for
current 3D printers are limited; however, by incorporating computational textile
folding into the pipeline, the PIs' system will be able to print very large
designs in much smaller folded configurations. Solution of the folding problem
will involve nonlinear, non-convex, optimization with unilateral contact
constraints. Finally, textiles and garments will be printed using both off-the-
shelf 3D printers and a novel low-cost, high-resolution, modular 3D printing
platform that is capable of printing with up to 12 different materials that vary
in mechanical and appearance properties. In addition to photopolymer materials,
the PIs plan to extend hardware capabilities to 3D print structures using co-
polymers and solvent-based materials. More information about this project is
available online at http://textiles.csail.mit.edu/