* 1722154
* STTR Phase I:  A Device for Rapid Estimation of Temperature Dependent Thermal Properties for Food Processing Systems
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Dharmendra Mishra, Thermetrics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) will be the development of a dynamic thermal analysis system for
use in aseptic food processing. The true value of thermal properties for
specific food products is required for the design of a thermal process to
prevent possible bacterial contamination due to underheating, or degradation and
formation of unwanted compounds due to overheating. The proposed innovation
would allow food processors to improve their understanding of thermal properties
in rapid heating applications, and by validating novel food processing
technologies. The impact is expected to be that the quality and nutritional
value of aseptic processed foods should increase dramatically as it will
eliminate the need to excessively overcook products to ensure their safety. The
commercial impact of this research will be through enhancing the quality of
aseptic processed food and of rapidly heated batter-based foods. As the aseptic
food quality will be further enhanced compared to that of canned and frozen
alternatives, this technology will also increase the growth of the rapidly
growing aseptic food industry.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a commercial prototype device
capable of rapidly measuring the thermal properties of a material over a range
of temperatures. Currently, there is no way to quickly measure properties, which
are necessary for accurate modeling of rapid heating processes such as those
used for aseptic food processing and for foods baked between hot irons, such as
burgers. Without rapid measurement, the food product deteriorates before taking
measurements. Phase I research should develop, build, and validate a physical
prototype and associated software. Control and data acquisition software, along
with data analysis and parameter estimation software, will be finalized and
validated. The device will be tested against materials with known parameters to
statistically validate its performance and accuracy. Finally the device will be
tested alongside the prior state-of-the-art to compare its performance to the
industry standard. The product of this research will be a commercially-viable
prototype that has been validated against literature values and has been
demonstrated to outperform current devices. The device will be able to measure
parameters over a range of temperatures more accurately and in a fraction of the
time of current methodology.