* 1722066
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Formulation for the Delivery of High Concentration Protein Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Paul Brown, Elektrofi Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2017
* USD 224,923.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to significantly improve the patient experience
by providing easy, convenient, and fast delivery of protein therapeutics through
the administration of high-concentration, low-viscosity solutions via
subcutaneous injection. Currently, high-concentration antibody solutions have
viscosities far above the recommended limit for subcutaneous injections. This
project aims to drastically lower the viscosities of high-concentration protein
formulations. The success of this project would greatly benefit patients by
providing a much shorter administration time for drugs that now require hours of
intravenous infusion. In addition, this solution can also improve therapies that
are already administered subcutaneously by reducing the frequency of injections
by increasing dosage. Development of this technology can also enable the
development of protein therapeutics with promising efficacy, but intractable
solution properties or commercially unattractive patent
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Phase I project is to establish the
proof-of-concept data supporting the viability of a new formulation platform for
proteins. This platform will generate a formulation containing high
concentrations of protein therapeutics which may be delivered at substantially
lowered viscosities due to a reduction in the intermolecular interactions among
proteins. The formulation thus provides a subcutaneous syringe-compatible route
to delivering biologics at high-concentration, and low-viscosity, ultimately
driving a shift from timely intravenous delivery protocols to simplified
subcutaneous injections. Constraints on subcutaneous delivery volume (&lt;2 mL)
necessitate antibody concentrations much greater than 100 mg/mL. Unfortunately,
viscosities far beyond the accepted injection limit (50 cP) are typical of this
situation due to extensive interaction among the protein molecules. Current
viscosity reduction methods attempt to regulate these interactions but have yet
to substantially address the issue. The proposed work utilizes a novel process
to gently formulate proteins using only FDA-approved materials. This approach
eliminates the effect of the protein-protein interactions on the solution
viscosity. The proposed project will involve development of the platform through
(i) identification of optimal formulation parameters, (ii) demonstration of
rheological improvements to high-concentration protein solutions, and (iii)
demonstration of preservation of biological structure and activity. &lt;br/&gt;