* 1722579
* Seismic Anisotropy across the USArray using Surface-wave Arrival Angles
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* M. Gabrielle Laske, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 06/30/2023
* USD 321,162.00

The deployment of the USArray transportable array (TA) has allowed seismologists
to compile seismic datasets and images with unprecedented detail. Seismic
analyses of an extremely rich dataset of some 2000 stations have so far been
based on 'standard' seismic data such as travel times. However, other kinds of
data such as the particle motion of surface waves provide complementary
observations to model smaller details in shallow Earth structure. The short
distance between TA stations allows seismologists to trace in detail how surface
waves from distant earthquakes bend around as they traverse the TA. This, in
turn, can be used to fine-tune models of Earth structure beneath North America
and improve scientists' understanding how the continent is made
up.&lt;br/&gt;Certain mantle rocks exhibit seismic anisotropy where the speed at
which seismic waves travel depend on the direction from which they approach.
Anisotropy also forms when a plate, such as the North American plate, responds
to forces tugging along its edges. Small subsets of TA stations can be used like
antennas to measure the properties of this anisotropy. This, in turn, allows
scientists to explore mantle processes that form, move and ultimately destroy
Earth's plates. &lt;br/&gt;This project will collect both types of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In global tomographic studies, surface-
wave arrival angles have proven extremely useful to enhance the imaging of
short-wavelength structure. Due to the sparseness of the global seismic networks
the interpretation of such data were interpreted using perturbation theory to a
great-circle approach. The dense USArray Transportable Array (TA) allows
seismologists to observe the structure-induced evolution of the teleseismic
wavefield across a large network in unprecedented detail. While Helmholtz
tomography utilizes the amplitude and phase of one-component surface wave
waveforms, the evolution of surface wave particle motion provides complementary
constraints on small-scale heterogeneity beneath North America. While arrival
angles support phase-based dispersion analyses of the mantle, observables such
as the dip and the ZH ratio are particularly useful to constrain shallow crustal
layers. This project will provide a new database of surface-wave particle motion
observable.&lt;br/&gt;A second aspect of this project focuses on Rayleigh wave
azimuthal anisotropy. The dense station spacing of the TA allows a leap-frogging
"beam forming" type approach using small subarrays. In comparison to an all-
inclusive tomographic joint inversion scheme for anisotropy and heterogeneity,
this approach can remove some of the trade-offs between the two. The underlying
assumption here is that structure within a subarray is homogeneous, but given
the dense station spacing of the TA, this should be a valid assumption. In
return, obtained observables will be "in-situ".