* 1722491
* SBE-RCUK:   Diet, Migration and Health in the Context of Mortality Crises
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Sharon DeWitte, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 162,460.00

Crisis mortality is a dramatic but temporary increase in mortality rate
resulting from a single factor, such as a disease epidemic, famine, flood, and
warfare. Crisis mortality was important in the past and still has the potential
to powerfully shape human demography and biological variation. Anthropological
work on past mortality crises has not yet fully clarified the factors that
created vulnerability to mortality during different crisis events and the
longer-term consequences of demographic crises. Using large skeletal samples
from medieval England, Dr. Sharon DeWitte (University of South Carolina), in
collaboration with Dr. Julia Beaumont (University of Bradford, UK) and Dr. Janet
Montgomery (Durham University, UK), will integrate paleodemographic and isotope
analyses to examine temporal changes in diet and migration at the time of the
14th-century Black Death and the interactions among diet, migration, demography,
health, sex, and socioeconomic status in the context of the medieval mortality
crises of famine and plague. This project will highlight the cultural and social
factors that affect crisis events and their outcomes. The results of this
project can aid predictions about what might happen in future demographic
crises. Clarifying the wider social and economic contexts of mortality crises
contributes to the development of policies that can reduce their occurrence and
effects. The Black Death and its context provide fascinating examples that
capture the public attention and imagination, which can be leveraged to produce
positive change. By revealing what happened at the time of the Black Death, this
project can motivate action in the face of crises today. Such action might
include increased spending on disease research, and efforts to reduce
disparities in access to food, medical care, and other resources that affect
vulnerability to and mortality during crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clarifying
how dietary resources were distributed in the medieval period will allow for an
examination of the ways in which general resource availability in a population
does not necessarily translate into widespread benefits in the face of
socially-, economically-, or politically-prescribed patterns of access to those
resources. This project will also contribute to an understanding of long-term
changes in migration in the context of disaster and particularly the health
consequences thereof. This project will be done using over 2400 skeletons from
medieval England using hazards-analysis based approaches in combination with
isotope data to achieve the following objectives: 1) determine whether diet
improved significantly for different segments of society following the Black
Death; 2) examine the effect of migrant status on risk of death during the Black
Death and determine whether patterns of migration or the health of migrants
changed following the Black Death; 3) determine the factors that affected risks
of medieval famine mortality; and 4) determine whether the experience of famine
substantially affected risks of mortality during the Black Death, other medieval
famines, and under conditions of normal medieval
mortality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is awarded under the SBE-RCUK Lead
Agency Agreement.