* 1722897
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Dyadic Behavior Informatics for Psychotherapy Process and Outcome
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stefan Scherer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 334,454.00

Using multimodal indicators, this project will develop a novel computational
framework that models individual and interpersonal behavior in relation to
process and outcomes in psychotherapy and other interpersonal contexts. The
unique aspect of the project is the explicit joint and dyadic modeling of
individuals' multimodal behaviors to holistically understand the system of the
dyad. This research will pave the way to a better understanding of the dyadic
behavior dynamics in psychotherapy and beyond. The project will build the
computational foundations to predict process and outcomes, and more broadly
inform behavioral science: The project will (1) contribute to knowledge about
the psychotherapeutic process by identifying and characterizing behavior
indicators with respect to process and outcome measures; (2) deepen our
understanding of dyadic coordination dynamics that contribute to strong working
alliance between clients and therapists; (3) make available to the research and
clinical communities the Dyadic Behavior Informatics framework and Behavior
Indicator Knowledgebase for use in other settings; and (4) establish the
foundation for novel education and training materials and interventions. The
knowledge and computational tools developed as part of this project will impact
computing and behavioral science and applied domains more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance understanding of dyadic
behavioral dynamics by developing computational representations that can model
fine-grained dyadic coordination between individuals and new algorithms that can
model multi-level dynamics. Central to this research effort is the creation of
the Behavior Indicator Knowledgebase (BIK) that will summarize discovered
knowledge about significant and validated dyadic behavior indicators. While this
work could have profound impact on behavioral and social science as a whole, the
project specifically focuses on understanding the dynamics that predict process
and outcome variables in psychotherapy. The project identifies five fundamental
research challenges and presents a plan to address them directly: (1) Acquire a
large, dyadic, and multimodal dataset of 64 patients with distress disorders
seen over 8 psychotherapy sessions; (2) Create multimodal behavior indicators
which can model the within session dynamics of the client or therapist; (3)
Develop new dyadic behavior indicators that explicitly model the client-
therapist coordination, (4) Develop abstract dyadic behavior representations
that can learn the fine-grained dynamics between client and therapist behaviors;
and, (5) Validate the computational representations (embeddings) and prediction
models by assessing their impact on the predictive power of process and outcome
measures in psychotherapy and assess generalizability beyond psychotherapy.