* 1722578
* A Distributed Learning Environment for the Mathematics of Climate and Sustainability
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Mary Silber, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 467,480.00

The research project focus will be on the mathematics needed for understanding
our climate, its impacts and will help address the pressing issues of adaptation
and sustainability in light of inevitable changes. Through this program, four
cohorts of students will be trained in the mathematics underlying the all-
important societal and scientific issues emanating from climate and
sustainability. This will span a five year period and encompass four intensive
week-long summer camps. Each cohort will consist of seven graduate and three
undergraduate students. They will be trained in collaborative team-work that
will prepare them well for a career in any scientific endeavor involving
mathematical investigation. Each year will include online training to prepare
the students for the summer camp and ongoing focus research groups during the
subsequent academic year, during which time the students will work on concrete
research problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new approach to both graduate and
undergraduate student research training in applied mathematics is envisioned.
The program will be based around yearly cycles in which a new cohort of students
will be drawn from a national pool of applicants each year. The students will be
brought through the program and trained in critical research and professional
skills needed in the modern world of collaborative and interdisciplinary
research. The year-long activities will be built around an intensive summer camp
that kicks off the program for each student and ongoing web-based groups through
which much of the skill-building and mentoring will take place. The effort is a
partnership between the Mathematics and Climate Research Network (MCRN) and the
American Institute of Mathematics (AIM). MCRN has considerable experience in
building a web-active community that keeps a large geographically dispersed
group engaged throughout the year and it will be the host environment for this
effort. AIM will provide the institutional framework as well. This award was co-
funded by the NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program. The NRT Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training.