* 1722221
* SBIR Phase I:  Venous Valve Prosthesis as a Cure for Chronic Venous Insufficiency
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Austin Walker, INNOVEIN, INC
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a much-needed novel
prosthetic valve that will provide a potential treatment option for the millions
of U.S. patients suffering from chronic venous insufficiency (CVI). As people
age, valves in the veins of their legs begin to function poorly. This allows
blood to build up in the ankles due to gravity, leading to pain/swelling of the
feet, skin discoloration, and ultimately open wounds by the ankles. As there is
no approved venous valve on the market, current treatment consists of palliative
options such as wound care and skin grafts. These treatments can cost tens of
thousands of dollars per patient for non-healing venous stasis ulcers. The
proposed technology will work to treat CVI while mitigating complications
associated with prior attempts at valve prostheses, including formation of blood
clots and valve breakdown. The approach described leverages a minimally invasive
approach, averting costly expenditure and offering an up to 40% reduction in the
cost of care in the first year of treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to develop a novel prosthetic valve technology to treat incompetent
veins by targeting the underlying cause of the disease. In order to successfully
progress on the path to commercialization, it is necessary to validate
technologies such as this on the bench and in long-term animal trials. These
steps provide the foundation for future clinical trials and ultimately use in
the broader population. The objectives are to build the device, compare
iterations on the bench, and validate the technology in animals. We anticipate
selecting an iteration and having successful animal results. The proposed
project will allow for further validation of safety and function of the
described approach and progress on the path to commercialization.