* 1722660
* Developing a sustainable plan to advance research and education at the Valentine Eastern Sierra Reserve
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Carol Blanchette, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2020
* USD 24,990.00

The Valentine Eastern Sierra Reserve (VESR) comprises 2 of 39 field stations in
the University of California Natural Reserve System, and is located at the base
of the eastern escarpment of the Sierra Nevada mountains. VESR attracts
researchers from throughout the US to study many wide-ranging issues, from
aquatic ecosystem ecology to ecological responses to climate change, and is well
known for its active outreach programs. To best serve the growing VESR
constituency while perpetuating VESR as a resource, this project will develop a
long-term (five to ten year) strategic plan for VESR research, education,
outreach programs, and facilities. The strategic plan will articulate a
scientific vision for research and educational use, and an evaluation of the
programs, facility needs and resources necessary to support that vision. The
goal of the strategic plan is to enhance research and education activities at
VESR as well as the regional coordination of research, education and outreach
activities across the Sierra Nevada region through a network of regional agency,
non-profit, academic and field station partners.

The planning process involves engaging with key stakeholders through virtual and
in-person workshops to identify regional coordination opportunities. The
strategic plan will direct the prioritization of facilities and programs
enhancements, and access for researchers, students, educators and natural
resource managers in the eastern Sierra Nevada. The involvement of an
Environmental Science Masters level student in this process will provide
graduate student level training in biological research, environmental management
and related fields. Engaging with regional coordinators at workshops supported
by the proposed planning process represents a formalized step in establishing a
regionally coordinated node representing the Eastern Sierra Nevada that can more
effectively participate in larger scale global observatory or climate change
research efforts. The strategic plan and planning process will contribute to
ongoing dialogue, and directly benefit several land and wildlife management
agencies with jurisdiction over the Sierra Nevada, whose need for information to
inform land management has increased markedly in recent years due to persistent
drought conditions and other environmental stressors.