* 1722372
* SBIR Phase I:  Beam Steering Full Duplex Wireless Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Frank Carr, Lextrum Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable the
efficient use of wireless&lt;br/&gt;spectrum. Over the last decade, the world
has seen a sharp increase in the number and diversity&lt;br/&gt;of mobile
devices. With this surge in mobile devices, access to spectrum has become
an&lt;br/&gt;overarching issue impacting the everyday life of citizens. The
demand is expected to grow&lt;br/&gt;exponentially in the coming years, with the
rapid adoption of the Internet of Things (IoT) linking&lt;br/&gt;everything we
interact with in daily life. The technology developed under this project will
allow&lt;br/&gt;communication devices to listen and broadcast simultaneously, on
the same frequency, thus&lt;br/&gt;effectively doubling spectrum utilization by
operating in Full Duplex (FD) mode. By improving&lt;br/&gt;spectral efficiency
and simplifying frequency planning, the results from this project will
enable&lt;br/&gt;newer paradigms for the rapid design, development and
deployment of mobile devices. Society&lt;br/&gt;as a whole will benefit from the
increased array of applications enabled by robust,
spectrally&lt;br/&gt;efficient communication devices. Furthermore, valuable
spectrum assets will be released and can&lt;br/&gt;be redirected to create new
opportunities for growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will demonstrate a practical Full-
duplex&lt;br/&gt;communication system prototype. The goal of the project is to
develop a functional prototype&lt;br/&gt;showing the ability of fast
cancellation that enables reliable full duplex operation at
transmit&lt;br/&gt;powers suitable for outdoor deployment. While Full Duplex has
been shown to be achievable&lt;br/&gt;under static channel conditions,
maintaining the desired isolation between transmit and receive&lt;br/&gt;path in
a dynamic channel is difficult, mainly due to the high level of reflected power
into the&lt;br/&gt;radio system that can limit its performance. By deploying
novel and efficient cancellation&lt;br/&gt;methodologies the prototype will be
able to track and compensate for moving targets as they&lt;br/&gt;appear in the
radiation space of the FD system. Innovative co-designed spatial, analog and
digital&lt;br/&gt;approaches will be used to converge on the optimal parameters
for cancellation, while ensuring&lt;br/&gt;a rapid response time. All proposed
algorithms under this project will be tested on a real-time
FD&lt;br/&gt;prototype system, under realistic wireless channel condition, to
ensure that practical issues are&lt;br/&gt;accounted for.