* 1722604
* Collaborative Research: A geomagnetic intensity time series from the Proterozoic Laramie anorthosite
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jeffrey Gee, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 222,798.00

The research project will document variations of the Earth's magnetic field
strength for the period from approximately 1440 to 1380 million years ago to
test models of geomagnetic field formation and the thermal evolution of the
Earth. The Earth's magnetic field protects the Earth's surface from harmful
cosmic radiation and potential interruptions of communication systems and
electrical grids. To predict the stability and strength of the Earth's magnetic
field, it is essential to understand how the field formed and what processes
control its strength. It has been argued that the nucleation of the solid inner
core led to a prominent and robust increase in geomagnetic strength, but the
timing of inner core formation is in some dispute. Sparse and possibly biased
data on the intensity of the magnetic field have been used to argue for inner
core formation at about 1400 million years ago, but recent estimates of core
thermal conductivity suggest that inner core growth may have begun only in the
latest Precambrian, approximately 600 million years ago. The research in this
project will provide high-quality, well-dated estimates of the ancient magnetic
field over a critical time period in the evolution of Earth's magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated magnetic, petrologic and
thermochronologic data from the well-dated 1430 million year old Laramie
anorthosite complex will be used to construct a time series of geomagnetic
intensity (and directional) variations. Samples will be collected from a series
of eight drill cores, each about 50m in length, and complementary surface coring
systematically away from the preserved cooling margin of the intrusion. The
paleointensity study will focus on small subsamples designed to isolate the
high-stability remanence carried by magnetite within plagioclase crystals. The
precise cooling history will be determined from U-Pb radioisotopic dates of the
mineral apatite, which has a thermal closure temperature of approximately 450°C,
close to the minimum temperatures of remanence acquisition. The pristine cores
will be dual purposed as they will also be used to investigate primary igneous
petro-fabrics and the processes by which igneous foliations and any lineations
have been produced, thereby deepening our understanding of the crystallization
processes of igneous bodies. The project will train several undergraduate
students, form the basis for one PhD dissertation, and strengthen collaboration
among scientists at two institutes, the University of California San Diego
(Scripps Institution of Oceanography) and the University of Wyoming (Department
of Geology and Geophysics).