* 1722513
* An experimental facility to test the impacts of multiple physical stressors on physiology, ecology and genomics of marine species
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Mark Denny, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 279,341.00

Coastal marine ecosystems in the US and the economies that depend on them are
experiencing the brunt of an increasingly variable climate, characterized by
increasing frequency and intensity of heat waves, strong El Ni√±o events, storms,
low-oxygen episodes and gradual ocean acidification. These changes in the
environment have cumulative biological effects, and a great deal of research
shows how each one separately affects many marine species. What is needed next
is a set of experiments on how these environmental factors act when they act in
combination with each other. This project will establish a new multi-user
experimental facility at Hopkins Marine Station that will provide independent
control of seawater temperature, dissolved oxygen concentration and
acidification. These units will allow researchers to expose marine species to
the wide range of physical conditions found naturally in upwelling ecosystems,
and to alter those conditions to match future predictions. The proposed facility
will enable training in experimental biology and climate change science for
postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students at all Monterey
Bay institutions, K-12 outreach programs, and a training program for graduate
students from the University of Puerto Rico. A major component of the proposed
training activities is through collaboration with faculty at California State
University Monterey Bay in supporting broad participation of underrepresented
minorities, women and first generation college students in independent research
and course-based projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of multiple
environmental stressors acting together on marine species has been hypothesized
to be more than the sum of the impacts of single stressors alone. Yet this
hypothesis has not often been tested across a range of species that naturally
experience multi-stressor environmental impacts. The proposed facility will
enable researchers at marine institutions in the Monterey Bay area to conduct
the next generation of multi-stressor experiments with a suite of benthic and
pelagic marine invertebrates and fishes that are relevant to local ecosystems
and environmental variability. This project will address this issue by
establishing a new multi-user experimental facility at Hopkins Marine Station
(https://hopkinsmarinestation.stanford.edu) that will allow independent control
of seawater temperature, dissolved oxygen concentration and pH over a range of
parameter values that regularly occur in Monterey Bay and the offshore waters of
the California Current System. The facility will include 40 independently
controlled 189-liter aquaria and is based on successful construction and
experimental use of four fully working prototypes. Thirty-six units will be
added as part of this project. Four 500-liter round tanks to facilitate the
study of small pelagic fishes and squid, and a small-tank system designed to
allow the rapid change of multiple physical parameters through mixing of
controlled water volumes for experiments on pelagic squid and fishes that
involve equipment-intensive electrophysiological and biomechanical approaches
will be components of the system to be employed. Experiments conducted in this
facility will be analyzed through a wide range of modern tools including
advanced genomics, neurophysiology, analysis of species interaction strengths,
and ecosystem modeling. Overall, these facilities will provide an unprecedented
ability to conduct collaborative joint experiments on a wide range of
ecologically and economically relevant species and will support a creative and
comprehensive research program on the effects of changing physical parameters on
biodiversity and ecosystem functioning of the future oceans.