* 1722049
* SBIR Phase I:  An Automated Design Flow to Build Energy Efficient Vision Processing and Machine Learning Chips for the Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Dylan Hand, Reduced Energy Microsystems, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 05/31/2018
* USD 224,576.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to bring data-driven decision making to
new areas of human interaction with technology. The Internet of Things (IoT)
embodies the hardware, software, and systems that enable monitoring and managing
objects in the physical world electronically. IoT devices will enable
performance optimization of systems and processes, time savings for people and
businesses, and quality of life improvements. The total economic impact of the
IoT is estimated to exceed $11 trillion by 2025. However, reaching these lofty
estimates requires advances in hardware technology, particularly for energy-
constrained IoT devices that must gather data, make decisions based on the data
gathered, and communicate to a larger system under a limited power budget. The
company will develop low power embedded computer vision systems and machine
learning algorithms for use in for virtual/augmented reality, drones,
surveillance cameras and other applications.

The proposed project advances the commercialization of new ?timing-resilient?
chip technology, which promises unparalleled power efficiency by bringing
dynamic voltage scaling to IoT devices with minimal impact on traditional design
flows. Changing the operating voltage of a device can lead to significant energy
efficiency improvements, yet many circuit designers do not take advantage of
this technique due to increased design time and complexity. This proposal
focuses on the development of a comprehensive computer-aided design (CAD) flow
that transforms existing synchronous designs into more efficient asynchronous
timing-resilient designs that support a wide range of voltages. The proposed
project addresses three aspects of the automated flow: design for
manufacturability and test; analysis of logic cell libraries at lower voltages;
and interfacing the new timing-resilient circuits with synchronous circuits. The
flow combines simulation, analysis, synthesis, place-and-route, and test with
similar efficiency as standard commercial flows. This research aims to limit the
additional testing overhead of the converted design and the performance impact
of interfacing with traditional circuits to within 10% of synchronous
counterparts. The development of this new flow will enable chip designs that are
fundamentally more energy efficient and help bring the full power of machine
learning to smaller form factors.