* 1722482
* RAPID:  Cascading of Extreme Events (Drought-Wildfire) in a Pristine Watershed Located in the Southeast US: Implication on Hydrology, Water Quality and Microbial Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Barbara Campbell, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,980.00

Many parts of the southeastern US are in the middle of an extreme drought that
not only threatens our agricultural productivity, but also may lead to forest
fires that have other cascading events. One such event is the impact on drinking
water quality. Greenville, SC obtains the bulk of its drinking water from a
well-protected reservoir that is situated in the middle of a forest that is
currently heavily damaged by ongoing forest fires that just got under control
within the past week. With the ensuing seasonal rains, much of the burned
material will enter the streams that supply water to this large, metropolitan
city. Our aims in this project are to access the changes that the forest fire
has on the hydrology and water quality of this important reservoir. We will
compare hydrological, biological and chemical differences between streams
impacted by fire and those that have not been impacted to evaluate if these
extreme events affect the quality of our drinking water. We will combine new
hydrological models and next generation molecular tools with standard chemical
measurements to investigate these differences. An engineering graduate student
that is helping to develop the hydrological model will also be cross-trained in
these latest microbiological and statistical techniques. Our assessment will be
an important step in understanding what impacts forest fires may have on water
quality in other areas of the US. &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
collect perishable water quality related data to determine how the current
combination of climate extremes such as droughts and subsequent wildfire events
affect a pristine watershed in South Carolina in terms of its hydrology, water
quality, and microbial community composition and structure. Specifically, we
will address the following:&lt;br/&gt;a) How does the water quality change
within a watershed following fire? How much water quality change is controlled
by change in watershed conditions (altered landscape and changing hydrology) vs
changes in stream internal processes? and&lt;br/&gt;b) We will evaluate the
consequences of drought - wildfire regime specifically after the destruction of
the vegetation cover and the subsequent alteration of spatial soil properties
(e.g., infiltration) and geomorphic features on runoff and sediment loads in a
pristine watershed based on the pre-fire and the post-fire
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;We will assess the influence of wildfires on stream water
quality, for example, dissolved oxygen, nitrate, phosphate, heavy metals and
ammonium; taxon richness (alpha diversity) and the structure and composition of
microbial communities. We will utilize next-generation sequencing to assess the
microbial communities and statistically compare differences in water quality as
assessed by these molecular and chemical assays to streams not impacted by
forest fires. With these experiments we hope to quantify the major controls on
post-fire water quality as well as the internal stream processes that mitigate
stream water quality. These data will enable stream water quality recovery times
to be better characterized and will directly impact how the post-fire watershed
should be managed as a public water supply. This research will inform
stakeholders (e.g., Greenville water system) about the possible impacts of
wildfire on water quality and take necessary steps such as green technology to
help mitigate any debris run-off and/or any stream siltation from the burned
areas of the watershed. These research findings can be applied to other areas of
the U.S. due to current and expected future combinations of drought and wildfire
events.&lt;br/&gt;