* 1722515
* Renewal: Mineral Physics Studies under the Pressure-Temperature Conditions of Earth's Deep Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The investigators believe they have discovered a giant oxygen reservoir at the
extreme pressure-temperature conditions between the Earth's deep mantle and iron
core. The reservoir consists of previously unknown iron superoxides which could
suddenly release its excessive oxygen. In the present project, the team will
further explore the different types of iron superoxides, the conditions for the
explosive oxygen release, and the consequences of oxygen eruptions. The sporadic
eruptions provide a new, unified mechanism for answering questions on a list of
seemingly unrelated past events that occurred during Earth's 4.6 billion years
history and shaped the present living planet. Where did the oxygen in the air
come from? What caused the mass extinctions that killed the dinosaurs and
ushered in the mammals? What was the driving force that pushed all continents to
merge into a single supercontinent, and later pulled the supercontinent apart to
form individual continents? From understanding the Earth's Past and Present, we
may gain insights into the Earth's Future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator's recent discovery of high P-T iron superoxides, FeO2 and FeO2Hx
with the pyrite-type Pa3 structure has suggested potential paradigm changes in
mineral physics and geodynamics of the deep lower mantle. The team proposes to
further investigate the high P-T mineral physics properties of the superoxides,
including the incorporation of other major components such as MgO2, AlO2 and
SiO2 into the Pa3 iron superoxide, its interactions with silicate bridgmanite
and post-perovskite, its electronic and magnetic spin states, and its valence
states of iron and oxygen. The team will search for other stable structural
types in addition to Pa3 for firon-based superoxides with the apparent Fe
oxidation state &gt;3+, and determine their elastic wave velocities for
comparison for comparison with seismic observations in the deep Earth. The
team's previous research suggested the existence of a massive amount of oxygen-
rich patches at the core-mantle boundary. This research will investigate the
metastability of such giant oxygen reservoirs, and the consequences when the
stored oxygen is released, particularly the resulting geodynamics of the super
plate tectonics that may explain the origin of merging and rifting of
supercontinents.