* 1722523
* WORKSHOP: Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW) 2017 Doctoral Research Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Andrea Forte, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2018
* USD 27,342.00

This is funding to support next year's CSCW doctoral research consortium
(workshop) of approximately 15 promising doctoral students from the United
States and abroad, along with 4-6 distinguished research faculty. The event will
take place in conjunction with the ACM 2017 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work and Social Computing, to be held in Portland, OR, on February
25-March 1, and which is sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's
Special Interest Group on Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). The CSCW
conferences are the premier venue for the presentation of research relating to
the design and use of technologies that affect groups, organizations,
communities and networks (including collaborative systems and social computing).
The development and application of new technologies continues to enable new ways
of working together and coordinating activities. Although work is an important
area of focus for the conference, technology is increasingly supporting a wide
range of recreational and social activities. CSCW has also embraced an
increasing range of devices, as we collaborate from different contexts and
situations. Research published at CSCW is heavily refereed and widely cited;
ranked as the second most impactful HCI conference by Google Scholar Metrics
(after CHI), the 2016 event was attended by approximately 700 top researchers
from academia and industry around the world. CSCW 2017 will be the 20th
conference in the series; more information may be found online at
http://cscw.acm.org/2017/index.php. The CSCW doctoral consortia, which began in
1992, have been highly successful in providing a forum for the initial
socialization into the field of young doctoral scholars, and many of today's
leading CSCW researchers participated as students in earlier consortia. These
doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next generation
of CSCW researchers, allowing them both to sharpen the research skills and to
create a social network among themselves and with senior researchers at a
critical stage in their professional development. Maintaining and fostering
research dialog among the diverse disciplines that are present in the CSCW
community results in synergistic and transformative research collaborations.
Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of
dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the
students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field.

The Doctoral Colloquium at CSCW 2017 will be a 1.5-day event taking place on
Saturday and Sunday, February 25-26. Goals of the doctoral colloquium include
building a cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of
colleagues spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by
having experts in the research field mentor them and provide constructive
advice, and making it possible for promising new entrants to the field to attend
their research conference. The first day of the Colloquium will be an afternoon
session to allow participants a chance to get to know one another with
structured small-group activities, including modeling the tradition of practice
talks and providing one another with feedback on their presentations. Students
who were paired for pre-colloquium feedback will listen to one another's talks
and provide feedback. Practice talks are a tradition in research labs with
strong mentoring and training cultures; the Doctoral Colloquium will model this
practice for students who may not be part of a large research lab. During the
second day, each student will make a formal 10-minute presentation about his or
her doctoral research, culminating in a 20-minute session of discussion and
feedback (both from members of the faculty panel and other student participants)
on the work. The feedback will be geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other CSCW research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Additional feedback will be provided by
faculty panel members in informal one-on-one discussions during meal times,
break times, and throughout the remainder of the conference. An informal working
lunch will include an "interrogating research life" panel, in which mentors will
give short statements and students will be encouraged to ask questions about
different aspects of research life, including research career paths, funding,
work-life balance, etc. Follow-up activities (including poster sessions) will
take place during the conference's main technical program. Doctoral colloquium
papers will be published in the Extended Abstracts for the conference, which
will be available to attendees and online; in this way, the students' work will
be disseminated in a more enduring form. The organizing committee will take
proactive steps to ensure diversity and increase participation from institutions
and ethnic groups that have been traditionally underrepresented at CSCW; in
particular, they will limit acceptances to a maximum of two students from the
same institution.