* 1722969
* Fate and role of metastable pyroxenes in the subduction process
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Przemyslaw Dera, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Subduction zones are geological environments that play a particularly important
role in plate tectonics and recycling of crustal material into the mantle. A
majority of earthquakes with magnitude greater than 5.5, and much of volcanic
activity, both of which dramatically affect human civilization, are distributed
along the boundaries of tectonic plates, and originate within subduction zones
(e.g. the Ring of Fire). Pyroxene minerals are present within the subducting
slabs in large quantities and their transformations are relevant for controlling
the subduction process. Better understanding of the transformations these
minerals undergo on microscopic scale will improve our ability to predict
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and may help to mitigate some of the damage
they cause. Within this project the team will use a diamond anvil cell
apparatus, miniature hand-held devices capable of generating pressure and
temperature conditions found at hundreds of kilometers of depth within the Earth
interior, and will conduct an investigation of transformations that different
members of the pyroxene family undergo, while transported into the Earth's
mantle within the subducting slabs. The results of these experiments will be
complemented by quantum mechanical calculations and will be incorporated into
geophysical modeling software to assess the effects on the subduction process
and mantle convection. Besides specific scientific goals, within this project
the investigators will focus on educating the broader scientific community and
the general public about mineral physics research through activities such as
participation in live interviews on Hawaiian TV and participation in the CIDER
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most mantle pyroxenes disappear below the
transition zone (either dissolved into garnet, transformed to dense high-
pressure polymorphs, or decomposed into oxides and dense silicates), at
convergent margins the conditions of the cold subducting slab are characterized
by much lower temperatures and promote metastable preservation of minerals such
as pyroxenes and olivine beyond their thermodynamic stability fields, with
possible consequences for slab buoyancy and earthquake triggering. The pyroxene
(Px) structure is remarkably resilient, and if the temperature does not exceed
1000Â°C, can be easily preserved to pressures as high as 60 GPa (depths well
beyond 1000 km). The general topology of the Px stable phase diagram has been
well-established, however, until recently, very few experimental studies
ventured into the metastable compression regime, most important for cold
subduction zones. With previous NSF funding the PI and collaborators used
synchrotron single-crystal micro-diffraction technique and discovered a number
of intriguing, previously unknown phase transformations in the pyroxene family,
occurring on compression at temperatures lower than the pyrolite geotherm. These
transformations discontinuously change the thermodynamic properties of pyroxenes
as a function of depth within the subducting slab, and are present across a wide
range of pyroxene compositions. This current project continues exploration of
the metastable phase boundaries and geodynamic consequences of the metastable
polymorphism of pyroxenes. The team is aiming to explore three primary
hypotheses: (H1) Even though the structural modifications introduced by the
metastable phase transitions are subtle, and accompanying density
discontinuities small, their consequences on thermodynamic and elastic
properties, PT slopes of phase boundaries, as well as buoyancy relations within
subduction zone can be significant; (H2) Defects, such as dislocations caused by
metastable phase transitions, have significant consequences for pyroxene phase
diagrams, and may leave quenchable signatures that will be recognizable in
exhumed rock samples; (H3) Well-defined crystalline phases with penta-
coordinated silicon are present as intermediates during densification of most Px
compositions within cold slabs, and may significantly affect reactivity and
rheology.