* 1722562
* Collaborative Research:   Scalable and Flexible Algorithms to Detect Structural Change in Complex Sequence Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Feifei Xiao, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2020
* USD 47,484.00

Modern technologies in science and engineering generate data that become bigger
in size and more complex in content. It is important and challenging to
understand such data using statistical and computational methods, especially to
identify trends in the data. Examples include large scale sequence data from
genomics and market data from economics. In genomics, researchers search for
copy number variations (CNVs) by examining hundreds of thousands of measurements
of biomarkers along the whole genome. In financial engineering, it is useful to
identify and interpret abrupt changes of stock prices. In these examples, a
premier goal is to discover structural changes from massive sequence data. In
this collaborative project, the investigators intend to develop and study
theoretically sound and practically flexible and portable strategies to analyze
complex sequence data and apply the proposed algorithms to real data for
scientific discovery. The investigators aim to develop scalable and flexible
algorithms to identify and infer structural changes in contemporary high-
throughput data. In particular, they will work on (a) fast change-point
detection techniques which are flexible enough to handle non-Gaussian data and
dependent data; (b) new statistical framework for joint analysis of multiple-
sequence data; (c) theoretical foundations for inference of change points which
can assign significant levels for detected change points and achieves the
control of false discovery rate (FDR); (d) applications to CNV data for
scientific discoveries. Moreover, the investigators plan to develop user-
friendly and publicly accessible software for the proposed methods so that
researchers can apply the proposed methodologies directly to their research
problems.