* 1722507
* FSML: Quantifying carbon dioxide and methane fluxes in freshwater lakes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Timothy Griffis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 456,801.00

Freshwaters are biogeochemical 'hot spots' on Earth that play an important role
in global biogeochemical cycles, and they are net sources of two important
greenhouse gases, CO2 and CH4. The exchanges of these gases between the
atmosphere and freshwater are episodic which makes modeling these fluxes
difficult. The goal of this proposal is to obtain instrumentation that will
enable quantifying fluxes of these gases in aquatic systems and increase the
research capabilities of two University of Minnesota field stations to support
science that will: (a) quantify changes in the physical, chemical and biological
environment of aquatic systems and (b) understand drivers and responses of
aquatic ecosystems and feedbacks with the atmosphere via CO2 and CH4 fluxes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure requested here will build research,
teaching and outreach capacity at two of the University of Minnesota's superb
field stations, Itasca Biological Station and Laboratories(IBS) and Cedar Creek
Ecosystem Science Reserve (CC). It will quantify fluxes of two of the most
important greenhouse gases and facilitate understanding of mechanisms that
regulate releases to the atmosphere. The proposed instrumentation will provide
incentive for both internal and external researchers to use IBS and CC. Three
very different ecological systems at IBS and CC will be instrumented for high
temporal resolution of physical, chemical and biological variables. The proposed
work on iconic Cedar Bog Lake and nearby water bodies would extend the research
focus at CC to wetlands, rivers and lakes. The water bodies at the two stations
represent a gradient of diversity that will enable comparative studies. These
data will contribute to a global lakes monitoring network (GLEON), to which both
Cotner and Knoll contribute. There are extensive avenues for outreach at both
field stations. Data from the lakes will be displayed in real-time at visitor
stations and numerous school and public tours at each site. A science in the
schools program, InSciEd Out, which is focused on K-8 students will use these
data to help generate hypotheses and experiments focused on how lakes and
wetlands function. Lastly, this work will impact science and society by
providing important infrastructure for understanding exchanges between aquatic
systems and the atmosphere, a poorly understood area of limnology and
atmospheric science. It will also impact society through the training of many
scientists, from kindergarten through graduate school and beyond.