* 1722761
* EAGER: Iron-Virus Interactions in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Mya Breitbart, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2020
* USD 299,295.00

Iron is an essential micronutrient for phytoplankton that is required for
photosynthesis and respiration. Insufficient iron has been shown to limit
phytoplankton growth in large regions of the surface ocean, and correspondingly,
iron cycling is directly linked to carbon cycling in much of the marine
environment. Nearly all iron in seawater (&gt;99%) exists as complexes with
organic molecules called ligands, which govern the concentration of iron
dissolved in the water and the bioavailability of that iron to phytoplankton.
However, despite the importance of iron-binding organic ligands, their sources
and identities are largely unknown. Viruses, the majority of which are phages
(viruses that infect bacteria), are extremely abundant in seawater and are in
the same size fraction as dissolved iron. Recent evidence that non-marine phages
contain iron as part of their structures has led to the proposal that marine
phages may represent a previously overlooked class of organic iron-binding
ligands. This project is determining the contribution of marine phages to
dissolved iron pools and culture phage-host systems in the laboratory to
determine if phages utilize bacterial iron-uptake receptors for infection in the
manner of a Trojan horse. As the first study to examine the biogeochemical
impact of trace elements contained within the structure of highly abundant
marine phage particles, successful completion of the proposed research will be
transformative for biological and chemical oceanography and have far-reaching
implications for other fields, including human health where iron availability
plays an important role in microbial pathogenesis. This project contributes to
the multidisciplinary training of a graduate student and postdoctoral
researcher. Research results will be disseminated through scientific
publications and presentations, and the public will be educated about linkages
between viruses and ocean chemistry via a hands-on exhibit for the annual St.
Petersburg Science Festival. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Building upon evidence from
non-marine model systems demonstrating the presence of iron ions in phage tail
proteins and phage utilization of cell surface receptors for siderophore-bound
iron, this project combines field and laboratory-based experiments to test the
following three hypotheses regarding iron-virus interactions in the oceans: (1)
Iron incorporated into phage tails originates from bacterial cell reserves,
reducing the amount of iron available for remineralization upon lysis; (2)
Phages constitute important iron-binding ligands in the oceans, accounting for a
substantial portion of organically complexed colloidal dissolved iron; (3)
Marine phages compete with siderophore-bound iron for uptake receptors on the
bacterial cell surface and use iron in their tails as a Trojan horse for
infection. Initial calculations predict that phages could account for up to 70%
of the colloidal fraction of organically complexed dissolved iron in the surface
ocean; therefore, this project is critical for advancing knowledge of trace-
metal cycling as well as phage-host interactions. Additionally, if a portion of
the cellular iron thought to be released from bacterial cells for
remineralization following lysis is already incorporated into phage tails, then
these findings will have significant implications for oceanic biogeochemical
models. Through a combination of laboratory-based culture experiments and field
sample measurements, this project could reveal the identity of a ubiquitous
component of colloidal organic iron-binding ligands, modify the estimates of
iron concentrations and species released through viral lysis, and potentially
identify a novel receptor type for marine phage that may compete with the
acquisition of siderophore-bound iron by host bacteria.