* 1722991
* Three Dimensional Seismic Velocity Structure of Puerto Rico Virgin Island Microplate
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Elizabeth Vanacore, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2021
* USD 95,138.00

This project aims to study the structure and tectonics of the Puerto-Rico and
Virgin Islands region located at the northeastern border of the Caribbean Plate.
In this region, the North American plate is subducting beneath the Caribbean
Plate. This interaction between the North American and Caribbean Plates results
in significant earthquake activity including the 1918 earthquake and tsunami
that devastated western coast of Puerto Rico. Currently, there are multiple
tectonic models proposed to describe the interaction between the two plates.
However, these models are currently poorly constrained by the available analyzed
datasets. The primary goal of this project is to generate high quality seismic
velocity images and refined earthquake location data that will provide data
based constraints for the regional scientific models and enhance knowledge of
the regional earthquake and tsunami hazard. This scientific study will involve
two major processes, a relocation of the Puerto Rico Seismic Network earthquake
catalog for the years 2015-2017 and a three-dimensional seismic velocity imaging
of the region. This time period has been specifically selected to create a
synergetic dataset with a current seismic experiment in the Dominican Republic
(eastern Hispaniola). The direct data tie between this project and the project
in Hispaniola will permit the future combination of the two separate datasets,
the creation unified products, and promote scientific partnerships in the
region. The first methodology to be applied in this study, earthquake
relocation, is the process in which the earthquake locations determined by
regional seismic networks and the United States Geological Survey (USGS), which
are real-time fast solutions designed to provide information to emergency
agencies, are re-examined in detail and refined using more advanced but time
consuming computer algorithms as well as additional data that was not available
in real-time to generate more accurate locations. The second methodology of this
study, travel time tomography, is a method in which a three-dimensional seismic
velocity image of the Puerto Rico-Virgin Islands region will be produced in a
procedure analogous to how the human body is imaged in a medical CT scan. The
imaging to be performed in this study will reveal the regional structure of the
Earth's crust and upper mantle. This image combined with the relocated
earthquake catalog will provide a robust view of the active tectonic processes
that drive the observed regional seismic activity and provide data constraints
for future scientific tectonic models. The products generated by this
investigation, the relocated earthquake location catalog and seismic velocity
imaging, will not only enhance scientific knowledge but also enhance the
knowledge of the local earthquake and tsunami hazard. The relocation of local
events will permit the identification of the most active faults within the
Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands region, especially in Great Southern Puerto Rico
Fault Zone and Great Northern Puerto Rico Fault Zone. Consequently, this will
aid in the process of updating the Puerto Rico seismic hazard map which has not
been revised by the USGS since 2003. The three-dimensional seismic velocity
model will be used to determine if the current Puerto Rico Seismic Network one-
dimensional velocity model used for earthquake location requires an update. The
results of this study will be presented to the general public as short articles
in the University of Puerto Rico Mayag端ez website and Puerto Rico Seismic
Network outreach materials, which impacts hundreds of school children and
teachers throughout Puerto Rico every year. This research will also enhance
participation of underrepresented students and faculty in the geosciences. The
master's student at University of Puerto Rico Mayag端ez (a Hispanic Serving
Institution) will be funded to conduct the research as part of his/her thesis.
The student and principal investigator will also present their research in
national meetings and publish in peer-reviewed journals.



This study proposes to focus on the seismic structure of the Puerto Rico-Virgin
Islands Microplate (PRVIM), one of several proposed microplates in the
deformation zone of the northeastern Caribbean margin. Of particular interest is
the structure and dynamics of the subducting North American Plate beneath the
PRVIM. Multiple tectonic models have been proposed for the dynamics across
Hispaniola and the PRVIM. However, these models are currently poorly constrained
by the available analyzed datasets. The primary goal of this project is to
generate high quality seismic velocity images and refined earthquake location
data that will provide data based constraints for the regional scientific models
and enhance knowledge of the regional earthquake and tsunami hazard. This
scientific study will involve two major processes, a relocation of the Puerto
Rico Seismic Network earthquake catalog for the years 2015-2017 and a three-
dimensional seismic tomography. This time period has been specifically selected
to create a synergetic dataset with a current seismic experiment in the
Dominican Republic (eastern Hispaniola). The direct data tie between this
project and the project in Hispaniola will permit the future combination of the
two separate datasets, the creation unified products, and promote scientific
partnerships in the region. This project will generate a relocated event catalog
dataset to sharpen the structures that are imaged on the PRVIM via seismicity
including the Great Northern Puerto Rico Fault Zone, the subducted North
American plate, and possible slab tears in the Mona Passage and Sombrero Seismic
Zone. Additionally, a three-dimensional tomography using the FMTOMO program will
be performed to image the detailed seismic velocity structure and aid in the
identification/corroboration of significant seismic features related to the
oblique subduction system. The detailed seismic imaging of this relatively
understudied subduction zone will provide insight into the slab structure and
dynamics of this oblique margin. The earthquake relocation and tomographic
imaging aim to provide a high-resolution picture of the subducting slab
structure beneath the PRVIM as well as determine if the two earthquake swarm
locations denote slab tears similar to what has been imaged on the south side of
the Caribbean Plate by the BOLIVAR project. The high-resolution imaging will
also provide seismic constraints for future geodynamic models. In addition to
increasing the understanding of the dynamics of oblique subduction zone, the
products of this proposal will permit the identification of the most active
faults within the PRVIM, especially in Great Southern Puerto Rico Fault Zone and
Great Northern Puerto Rico Fault Zone. Consequently, this will aid in the
process of updating the Puerto Rico seismic hazard map which has not been
revised by the USGS since 2003. The updated three-dimensional seismic velocity
model will be used to determine if the current Puerto Rico Seismic Network one-
dimensional velocity model used for earthquake requires an update. The results
of this study will be presented to the general public as short articles in the
University of Puerto Rico Mayag端ez website and Puerto Rico Seismic Network
outreach materials, which impacts hundreds of school children and teachers
throughout Puerto Rico every year. This research will also enhance participation
of underrepresented students and faculty in the geosciences. The master's
student at University of Puerto Rico Mayag端ez (a Hispanic Serving Institution)
will be funded to conduct the research as part of his/her thesis. The student
and primary investigator will also present their research in national meetings
and publish in peer-reviewed journals.