* 1722157
* SBIR Phase I:  Robust Nanofiltration to Enable Challenging Chemical and Pharmaceutical Separations
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Shreya Dave, Via Separations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,999.00

The broad impact of the proposed SBIR project is in the development of Graphene
oxide based filtration membranes in industrial applications, such as
pharmaceutical and chemical production. Current polymer membranes are not
meeting specific industrial needs and are unlikely to do so with incremental
innovation. On the other hand, converting from distillation and evaporation to
membrane-based separation has the potential to reduce energy consumption in the
US by 10%. The proposed graphene oxide based material is a robust nanomaterial
that is capable of separating streams at the molecular level while withstanding
the challenging environments of chemical separations. Successful implementation
will increase process intensification and energy efficiency for pharmaceutical
and chemical producers, while simultaneously enabling previously inaccessible
separations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Graphene Oxide (GO) membranes enable a new
materials platform for fine liquid filtration in harsh environments. These
temperature stable, solvent resistant, and oxidizer tolerant membranes will
accomplish nanofiltration (NF) separation of a range of feed streams. With
immediate benefits in reducing cleaning time and downtime for dairy and food
production and high impact for energy savings in pharmaceutical and chemical
separations, materials innovation for membranes represents a large opportunity
for energy and cost savings. GO is synthesized at near ambient temperatures with
low-cost synthetic chemistry methods and thus is many orders of magnitude less
expensive than graphene. This proposal focuses on further developing the
graphene oxide material for the high value pharmaceutical and chemical streams
in order to transition from heat-based or low-throughput distillation,
evaporation, and chromatography methods towards the significantly lower cost and
energy-efficient membrane alternative.