* 1722796
* Conference:  2017 Gordon Research Seminar on Nucleic Acids at University of New England in Biddeford, ME
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Eric Phizicky, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2018
* USD 7,000.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the Gordon Research Seminar at the University of New England,
Biddeford, ME on June 3-4, 2017. The meeting is organized and chaired by two
graduate students. The format of the meeting is a combination of talks and
posters, which will promote scientific exchange in both formal and informal
settings. Two keynote lectures will be featured, one from a leading researcher
in the field and one focused on practical aspects of grant writing. There will
be ample opportunity for sharing latest research results and for exploring
collaborative possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of nucleic acids
research is diverse, encompassing research related to the biology of both RNA
and DNA. Recent advances in the field reflect this diversity and will be
highlighted in this conference, which will bring together scientists who do not
often have the opportunity to interact and learn from each other. Among the
topics for discussion will be discovery and investigation of an expanding array
of non-coding RNAs, as well as new technologies that are being applied to probe
reactions and interactions in the molecular machines responsible for diverse
processes, including mRNA splicing, protein synthesis, DNA replication, and
recombination. Cutting-edge or late-breaking research will be highlighted in
short talks chosen from the abstracts and in posters. The primary purposes of
this conference are to provide a venue for scientific exchange of new research
results and ideas among young researchers, to foster learning about emerging
paradigms and how they contribute to future goals for research on RNA and DNA
biology, and to encourage career development of a new generation of nucleic
acids researchers, including those who are underrepresented in science.