* 1722646
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Context-Awareness and Personalization for Intensively Adaptive Smoking Cessation Messaging Interventions
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Santosh Kumar, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 196,446.00

According to the Centers for Disease Control, tobacco use remains the leading
preventable cause of death in the US, causing approximately 480,000 deaths each
year, and incurring over $150 billion in healthcare costs. As a result,
scalable, low cost, and effective smoking cessation interventions are clearly
needed. This research aims to develop and validate new messaging-based smoking
cessation support intervention systems that will leverage recent advances in
smart wearable technologies to significantly enhance efficacy. The system will
integrate wearable sensors that continuously estimate an individual's level of
stress and craving as well as the occurrence of smoking. This information will
be used to enhance the context awareness of the intervention system, allowing it
to continuously adapt both the content and delivery timing of intervention
components for each individual. By developing scalable messaging-based smoking
cessation support interventions with improved personal relevance, this research
has the potential to lead to direct benefits to society by more effectively
helping individuals to quit smoking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the
goal of providing effective, personalized smoking cessation interventions, this
research will develop and evaluate the models, algorithms, and wearable-phone-
cloud computational infrastructures required to support the context inferences,
personalization, and delivery timing optimizations required. Starting from the
team's extensive prior work, this research will contribute to (1) advances in
mobile health sensing and context inference with low-cost, low-power sensors;
(2) advances in real-time, stream-based active learning for personalizing
context inference models; (3) advances in contextualized recommender systems to
personalize message selection based on inferred contexts; and (4) advances in
robust, real-time wearable-phone-cloud data analytics systems. This work will
also make substantial contributions to enhancing research infrastructure through
open source software releases that can be leveraged by the research community to
yield benefits in other high-profile health areas including heart disease,
obesity, and addiction.