* 1723323
* Collaborative Research: Capacity Building: Building a Cybersecurity Pipeline through Experiential Virtual Labs and Workforce Alliances
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Sadia Ahmed, Northern New Mexico College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 02/28/2018
* USD 433,689.00

This project proposes to implement a cybersecurity concentration embedded in the
Bachelor degree in Information Engineering Technology at Northern New Mexico
College (NNMC). The concentration will consist of two regular core courses, two
Capstone courses, and one internship experience. The program of studies will
also include three cybersecurity-infused prerequisite courses involving
computers, networking, and programming essentials. This effort will be conducted
in partnership with the University of South Florida (USF).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive project has several components. First,
the project will create advanced curricular and training material for 100-level
to 400-level courses enriched with a large number of virtual laboratories
(vLabs) covering the fundamental principles of cybersecurity. The vLabs and
training manuals will be portable, ready to use and deployable in a standard
virtual environment without the need for configuration or package installation,
thus promoting resource sharing. The proposed curriculum will also include a
training standard recognized by the National Security Agency (NSA) and the
Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) to meet the CNSS 4011 training
standard. Second, NNMC and USF will establish an alliance with industry
organizations and with Los Alamos National Laboratories (LANL), including
Engineering/IT divisions at LANL and its National Security Education Center
(NSEC), to create an internship program in cybersecurity. The alliance will
strengthen the collaboration with industry and federal laboratories, in efforts
to bolster national security. Third, NNMC will partner with the New Mexico
Department of Workforce Solutions and a regional rural high-school to strengthen
the cybersecurity pipeline and increase the production of professionals to fill
regional demand. Finally, the educational model and curricular material will be
available and further disseminated through well-established channels, such as
the Western Academy Support and Training Center (WASTC). WASTC provides computer
science and IT training across the country and supports hundreds of higher
education institutions that have interest in adopting vLabs.