* 1723843
* 2017 Coastal Ocean Dynamics Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Ruoying He, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports the participation of U.S. based early career scientists in
the biennial Gordon Research Conference on Coastal Ocean Dynamics and its
associated Gordon Research Seminar. This conference brings together a diverse
group of academic, federal and international researchers to share the latest
advances and identify new challenges in coastal ocean dynamics. The conference
focuses on novel and recent developments in the application of observations,
theory, and numerical modeling and simulation to furthering understanding of
coastal ocean processes and our capabilities for their prediction. It is at the
coast that human activities are most connected with ocean circulation, and ocean
modeling offers great promise for connecting scientific research to societal
needs through such efforts as forecasting for marine operations and maritime
safety, monitoring and prediction of water quality and the transport and
dispersal of water borne pathogens, mapping and characterizing the habitats of
marine life, and downscaling global models of climate variability and climatic
change to infer their impacts in the coastal zone. The most important broader
impact of the conference is the establishment and nurturing of relationships
between senior researchers, junior researchers and students. Nearly half of the
conference time is allocated to informal interactions among participants, to
provide numerous opportunities to build these relationships and exchange ideas
among people in different age groups, different sub-disciplines of the field, or
from different geographic regions. Funds will be used to expand the demographic,
professional and geographic diversity of participants by supporting attendance
by under-represented and under-resourced groups who stand to benefit from the
intellectual environment and networking opportunities of the Gordon Research
Conference and Gordon Research Seminar formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides funding for travel and registration support to U.S. based early-career
professionals and students to attend the Gordon Research Conference on Coastal
Ocean Dynamics which will be held at the University of New England in Biddeford,
Maine, June 10-16, 2017. This conference, convened every two years now that the
former GRC Coastal Ocean Circulation and Coastal Ocean Modeling have been
combined, brings together a diverse group of academic, federal and international
researchers to share the latest advances and identify new challenges in coastal
ocean dynamics. Here the term "coastal" refers to estuarine, littoral zone,
continental shelf, and shelf-break regions, including mesoscale exchange
processes with the adjacent deep-ocean or marginal seas. The topics covered will
include: 1) High-Latitude Coastal Dynamics and Exchange Processes; 2) Coastal
Modeling and Data Assimilation; 3) Recent Advances in Estuarine Dynamics; 4)
Fluxes and Transformation across the Outer to Inner Shelves; 5) Coastal Sediment
Transport Processes; 6) Challenges and Successes in Physical Oceanography for
the Understanding of Fisheries and Other Ecosystems; 7) New Techniques in
Satellite Assimilation and Remote Sensing; 8) Multi-Scale Interactions of
Coastal Physics and Biogeochemistry; and 9) Recent Anomalous Ocean Conditions
and the Coasts Where we Live. In 2017 the Coastal Ocean Dynamics GRC will be
accompanied by a Gordon Research Seminar that specifically targets professional
development of students and early career scientists, thereby greatly expanding
the broader impact of the GRC itself. New in 2017 is a GRC Power Hour, created
to support the professional growth of women in our scientific communities and to
build on GRC's history of inclusion.