* 1723002
* RUI:  Understanding and Control of Strong-Field Molecular Ionization
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Eric Wells, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 164,684.00

Ever since the development of the laser in the 1960's, scientists have sought to
use lasers to directly influence chemical reactions. In this context, a pulse of
laser light can be thought of as a new type of reagent that drives a chemical
reaction. This project will advance the study of laser-assisted chemical
reactions by making three-dimensional images of the products of such reactions.
This science can contribute to the economy and to public well-being because
development of these laser-based reagents could one day allow chemical synthesis
of novel materials and medicines. Progress toward this goal is challenging,
however, because molecules are so complicated and dynamic that it is difficult
to determine the correct laser characteristics to drive a particular process.
This project will use experimental feedback to guide an adaptive search of the
possible laser pulses. This type of method is proven to work, but it is only as
good as the feedback that drives it. The goal of these studies is to develop and
exploit enhanced image-based feedback techniques that refine this approach to
controlling chemical dynamics. Doing this work with undergraduate students also
provides students with motivation for further scientific education and therefore
helps develop a highly skilled workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions
between strong laser fields and polyatomic molecules are at the forefront of
many aspects of ultrafast science. Shaped ultrafast laser pulses can powerfully
influence molecular dynamics, thus allowing access to outcomes not typically
available by other means. The area of emphasis of this research program is
adaptive femtosecond control, in which a learning algorithm is used to guide the
construction of shaped ultrafast laser pulses that produce a desired result. In
order for the adaptive search to succeed, robust, well-defined feedback is
required. To this end, this team developed the capacity to use three-dimensional
momentum imaging of the laser-molecule reaction products. By applying rapid
three-dimensional image-based feedback to the control of photoisomerization in
small hydrocarbon molecules, this team is able to examine how manipulating the
electronic excitation of the molecule influences the nuclear motion, and thus
affects ultrafast chemical processes. Understanding basic strong-field processes
helps to guide these coherent control protocols by allowing this team to link
image-based feedback to specific target states. This team will pursue several
experiments that can advance the understanding of how strong-field ionization
occurs in polyatomic systems, including the role that field-dressed orbitals
with strong Rydberg character have on tunneling ionization in polyatomic
molecules.