* 1723704
* EAGER: MAKER: Maker Fridays: Engaging Rural and Underrepresented High School Students in Pre-Engineering Design and Creativity
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Heidt, Northeast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 281,103.00

There is a continued need to increase the number and diversity of students who
pursue and complete engineering degrees to meet current and future national
workforce needs. The engineering field struggles to develop sufficient interest
and sustained participation across underrepresented demographic groups including
women and individuals from rural, Hispanic, or Native American origin. This
project addresses the shortage of diverse students entering into engineering
fields by developing a course to engage rural and underrepresented high school
students in maker design and creativity and to determine best practices that
attract and retain these students. It is critical to foster interest in
engineering during formative years when students are deciding career paths. The
College created a Fridays@Northeast program that targets high school seniors,
offering them the opportunity to learn from College faculty in Northeast lab
spaces and classrooms to earn early college credit. Using this platform, a Pre-
Engineering Multidisciplinary Design course augmented with the incorporation of
a maker design area is taught at two of the community college's campuses to high
school students. A maker design area outfitted with a set of prototype and model
development tools and equipment allows the students to conduct activities that
increase problem-solving and creativity while the course dispels misconceptions
and transforms careers in engineering into a tangible and viable option.
Variability in the student diversity between the campuses, such as racial,
ethnic, or rural/metropolitan origin, facilitates educational research to
develop a theoretical explanation for the development of interest in engineering
careers for students from diverse backgrounds. Researchers are investigating how
the activities increase problem-solving and creativity experiences, and how they
influence diverse high school student postsecondary career pathway selection
into engineering and STEM related careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the shortage of diverse students entering into engineering fields by
creating a course that engages rural and underrepresented high school students
in maker design and creativity and determines the best practices that attract
and retain these students. The high school students are provided learning
activities and career exploration that help them understand engineering design
and creativity while earning college credit. Educational researchers work with
instructors to collect data through a multi-phase mixed methods design to
develop a theoretical explanation for the development of interest in engineering
careers for students from diverse backgrounds. They collect baseline and
relevant continuing data on student background, academic preparation,
engineering perceptions, career interests, course engagement, and overall
student experiences. This is accomplished through a combination of student
assessments, interest inventories, recorded class sessions reviews, and in-
person class visits. This research will create a theoretical explanation for the
development of interest in engineering careers for students from
underrepresented demographic groups including women and individuals from rural,
Hispanic, or Native American origin. The theoretical models derived by the
project will be shared in state-wide education conferences and nationally to
secondary schools, post-secondary institutions, and industry at National Science
Teachers Association and American Society for Engineering Education conferences.
In addition, project materials including curriculum, technical reports, and de-
identified linked supporting data will be shared with the larger STEM community
at the University of Nebraska Lincoln's Digital Commons open access repository.
To preserve data access, the de-identified dataset and study codebook will be
submitted to the Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research at
the University of Michigan as public-use data files and will subsequently be
created into substantive metadata. Overall, this project supports exploratory
work on untested, but potentially transformative research that will create a
theoretical explanation for the development of interest in engineering careers
for students from underrepresented demographic groups and will advance
understanding of the professional formation of engineers.