* 1723750
* EAGER: MAKER: A Cultural Framework for Equity in Maker Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 298,258.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project seeks to
better understand the creative processes and products of non-dominant cultures
of making, and to create a framework for maker cultures that treats diversity as
an asset. The maker movement has great potential for helping develop a future
generation of scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs, but it currently falls
short of offering equitable access to maker spaces and programs. Using a
comparative case study of makerspaces that includes two different
underrepresented communities, the project seeks to deepen perspectives of making
through close examination of the intertwined nature of maker practices,
identities and community life. The project research will help to construct
theories for a more equitable understanding of cultures of making and the
development of guidelines for the design of equitable makerspaces and maker
practices. These guidelines, as well other resources, will be disseminated to
the maker community, researchers, and other practitioners through Make Magazine,
online networks, and other means. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct
research in two phases: (1) an ethnography of three different communities
representing at least three sets of maker cultures as the basis for a cultural
framework of making, and (2) a design intervention that empowers students to
create and share their own maker activities with other young makers, who may not
have access to the types of making that reflect their cultural experiences. The
project design framework is based on Participatory Design (PD), which
capitalizes on the relationships formed, processes engaged, and products made
during the ethnographic phase, to collaborate with youth engaged in making
practices to design guidelines for others to participate in culturally relevant
making. Using Participatory Design as a framework for democratic innovation, the
project use will the products and ideas of young makers to drive innovation of
guidelines for culturally representative making activities and new ways of using
existing tools that increase equity in making.