* 1723717
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Student Activity and Learning on Cybersecurity Testbeds
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

This project led by the University of Southern California, in collaboration with
Evergreen State College and Lewis and Clark College, aims to develop tools that
automatically assess student learning in practical cybersecurity tasks, both for
individual students and for the entire class. This is currently a challenge
because such tasks are often open-ended and exploratory in nature. Because they
can be completed in many ways, student learning in cybersecurity may not always
be recognized by the instructor. This makes it hard to assess the sophistication
of a student's path to success. Similarly, it may also be a challenge to
identify the reasons why students experience failure, and to provide useful and
timely feedback to students and instructors. The proposed project work will
uncover reasons behind student underperformance in practical cybersecurity
exercises, and will help identify effective interventions. The proposed research
may also help network test beds retain and better serve their users. The impact
of these activities will be three-fold. First, the developed tools will be
integrated with two previously developed platforms for cybersecurity exercises:
DeterLab and EDURange. This will directly impact approximately 2,000 students
annually. Second, the tools will be highly portable to other platforms that use
Linux in practical cybersecurity exercises, and can reach a wider audience.
Third, the tools will help retain talent from disadvantaged and minority
populations, as it will allow for earlier intervention and feedback to complete
challenging, practical tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
ACSLE, a framework for automated assessment of student learning in practical
cybersecurity exercises. ACSLE will engage in constant and extensive monitoring
of student interaction with the computer, and will allow for the correlation
with desired learning outcomes. ACSLE starts with the development of tools that
monitor low-level student activities, such as commands typed, traffic generated
and files and processes created. These low-level records are then synthesized
into high-level indicators of student progress on a given cybersecurity task.
The outcomes will allow for: (1) classification of students into several
learning styles based on proficiency with a task and level of foundational
skill; (2) clustering of solutions to specific learning challenges identified in
student groups that have similar learning styles; (3) collection of successful
learning paths developed over time and methods for identifying struggling
students; (4) identification of causes of failure and delivery of appropriate
learning interventions; and (5) aggregation of performance data for a class as
well as identification of tasks that are difficult for many students. ACSLE will
thus provide useful information for students and teachers, and improve overall
learning in practical cybersecurity exercises.