* 1723814
* Longitudinal Injection of Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Awareness into Engineering Curricula
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Mehmet Gunes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Upcoming smart technologies such as Smart Cities, Internet of Things, and
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles digitize current technologies and require
cybersecurity-aware multi-disciplinary engineering experts to ensure the
security of such devices. As devices become smart and interconnected to provide
improved services, they also become greater targets of cyber-attacks. Ensuring
proper operation of smart technologies requires well-trained, proactive
engineers, who are knowledgeable on core engineering principles, cybersecurity
risks associated with their designs, and risks from other interconnected
disciplines. The goal of this collaborative project is to develop and adopt
interdisciplinary cybersecurity curriculum by fostering a holistic approach
through collaboration across engineering disciplines. By bringing scholars from
different engineering disciplines, this project explores unique ways to engage
students in interdisciplinary cybersecurity-aware engineering education. The
knowledge units developed at the University of Nevada, Reno will be disseminated
to engineering colleges nationwide to sustain long-term research and education
partnerships in secure engineering.

Cybersecurity research and its applications are highly relevant in all areas of
engineering, including computer, electrical, mechanical, civil and biomedical
disciplines. Researchers will develop knowledge units to introduce and reinforce
the importance of cybersecurity to undergraduate students across several
engineering disciplines with a focus on Smart Cities, Internet of Things, and
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. These three broad technological areas require
expertise in multiple engineering fields and go from macro-level view to micro-
level view where each of the sectors encompass the next one. Cybersecurity
awareness will be injected organically in a boot camp for incoming engineering
freshman, a freshman experience course on Introduction to Engineering, and
discipline-specific technical engineering courses, typically during junior and
senior years. The project will bring together engineering faculty to develop
knowledge units that can be seamlessly adopted across various engineering
disciplines. Instruction will be augmented with hands-on activities to create an
interactive cybersecurity education environment and stimulate learning. A
"Connected Cities" playing arena will be developed, comprising various cyber
physical systems that are integrated for hands-on cybersecurity engagement.
Through interdisciplinary educational modules and hands-on activities developed
via this project, students will obtain a solid grasp on the interplay between
different engineering disciplines and obtain critical knowledge and skills
needed to engineer smart technologies that are resilient to cyber-attacks.