* 1723284
* A Unified Crustal Motion Model for Continental East Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Zheng-Kang Shen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2020
* USD 232,500.00

This project aims to improve our knowledge of crustal motion in continental East
Asia, where the Quaternary tectonics is arguably the most active and complex
among global continental deformation zones. Regional GPS data observed in the
past two decades from different networks will be analyzed to produce a unified
crustal motion map that will be provided to the scientific community. The
unified crustal motion model has a wide range of application, from tectonic
deformation study, geodynamic modeling, to seismic hazard assessment. The
project will also update a fault network model for fault slip estimation, which
will be a significant improvement in methodology development for crustal
deformation modeling. The resulting model will improve our understanding of how
deformation is partitioned to faults of various sizes, and help address the
outstanding controversy on deformation style of continental crust/lithosphere.
The estimation of seismic moment accumulation rates on individual faults will
help assess seismic hazard across the region, particularly along the Himalaya,
Tien Shan, and Pamir-Hindu Kush orogens. A graduate student will be trained to
process the geodetic data and conduct research on crustal deformation modeling.
The project will also help strengthen international collaboration with Chinese
scientists and establish new collaborations with Russian and Indian scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than two decades of GPS observations have been
gathered in continental East Asia by various regional geodetic networks, and
their data were analyzed to infer deformation fields at various regional scales.
These data were usually analyzed, however, using different versions of GPS data
processing software and employing different geophysical models and parameters,
in many cases resulting in significant errors and/or inconsistencies between
solutions. This research will collect all the available campaign GPS data
surveyed in continental East Asia, reprocess the data uniformly using the up-to-
date software and orbital and geophysical models with consistent
parameterization. Thus data processing errors within and between campaign
solutions will be minimized, and a set of unified solutions for secular
velocities and coseismic and postseismic displacements will be produced. This
result will be combined with existing continuous GPS solutions, and the final
product will help resolve detailed deformation patterns across multiple regions
with improved solution accuracy, and provide better constraints for slip rates
on faults. A "back-slip" algorithm will be implemented into the fault network
model that the PI group has previously developed. Introduction of the algorithm,
which is usually used for block motion models only, will overcome some of the
deficiencies that other methods such as the block motion and dislocation fault
segment methods have, and better simulate elastic strain buildup around
individual faults, particularly for deformation fields around thrust/normal
faults. The improved method and the code will be used to invert GPS velocity
data for fault slip rates, and help characterize deformation sources, patterns,
mechanisms, and earthquake potentials in continental East Asia.