* 1723248
* Collaborative Research: The Willow AGEP Alliance: A Model to Advance Native American STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Michael Patterson, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,854,323.00

The University of Montana, Salish Kootenai College, and Sitting Bull College
will collaborate in the Willow Alliance to develop, implement, and study a model
for the professional success of STEM instructional faculty and staff who are
enrolled in, or descendants of, Native American tribes. This alliance was
created in response to the Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552) The AGEP program seeks to
advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and
success of historically underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM
education research fields. AGEP Transformation Alliances develop, replicate or
reproduce; implement and study, via integrated educational and social science
research, models to transform the dissertator phase of doctoral education,
postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions within and
across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or STEM education research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent reports indicate that only 700 Native
American science and engineering doctoral degree holders are employed full time
in our nation's universities and colleges. Universities and colleges are
endeavoring to recruit, retain, and promote Native American STEM faculty who
serve as role models and academic leaders for Native American students to learn
from, to work with, and to emulate in order to address the STEM achievement gap
between native and non-native undergraduate and graduate students in our nation.
The Willow AGEP Alliance has the potential to advance a model to improve the
success and retention of Native Americans in instructional STEM faculty
positions, contributing to native STEM role models for native STEM undergraduate
and graduate students at postsecondary academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Willow AGEP Alliance plans to develop,
implement, and study a model for the professional success of Native American
STEM faculty. Participants include Native American STEM faculty working at one
of the three partnering colleges. The project includes three intervention
components in the model: a mentoring program; grant preparation and management
training activities; and an institutional support program, which focuses on
retention efforts. The integrated qualitative research will examine the
personal, relational, and collective experiences of the native STEM
instructional faculty and staff that enhance or inhibit professional development
and career advancement; examine the underlying institutional issues affecting
promotion and advancement; examine the approaches the faculty and staff use to
increase promotion and advancement; examine the how different types of
universities and colleges (tribal vs. non-tribal) support Native American STEM
instructional faculty and staff; and examine the climate of STEM departments to
compare how non-native STEM instructional faculty and staff and native STEM
instructional faculty and staff experience professional development, promotion
and advancement. The formative and summative evaluation plan follows an
indigenous evaluation framework. There is an advisory board for feedback to the
team, and a dissemination plan to include sharing with other tribal colleges and
non-tribal universities in Montana, North Dakota, Idaho and Washington.