* 1723322
* Documenting, Disseminating and Archiving Archaeological Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Michael Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 285,003.00

Dr. Michael E. Smith, Arizona State University, and a team of colleagues from
the United States, Mexico, and Canada, will investigate the nature of early
urbanism at the archaeological site of Teotihuacan, Mexico, one of the largest
cities in the ancient New World. As cities become the dominant form of
settlement in the world today, knowledge about the successful cities of the past
can inform understanding of contemporary urbanism. The spatial patterns of urban
expansion and decline in past cities show how city growth is connected to
broader economic and political forces. This information can help scholars and
planners devise strategies for improving cities and city life today. Much of
this project will take place at the Arizona State University Teotihuacan
Research Laboratory in Mexico, a facility that stores artifacts and anchors
research at the site. The laboratory is a major piece of scientific
infrastructure for archaeological research in Mexico, and its value will be
strengthened by this project. Training will be provided for a postdoctoral
scholar and both graduate and undergraduate students. Dr. Smith will create a
comprehensive data archive for Teotihuacan that will benefit many researchers,
and this work will contribute to the public understanding of science through
various outreach activities designed to educate the public about Teotihuacan and
ancient cities more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of the largest and
most extensively studied ancient cities of the New World, the World Heritage
Site of Teotihuacan holds important clues about ancient urban life. This project
will complete the work of prior research at the site and ensure that the
scientific results of past and present archaeological projects at Teotihuacan
are made available for the public and for scholars now and in the future. Dr.
Smith's team will complete artifact analyses, organize field notes and records
into databases, archive the data on tDAR (The Digital Archaeological Record),
and write reports on the research. These activities will permit a series of
research questions to be answered for the first time. Teotihuacan had a unique
form of social and political organization, including ethnic neighborhoods, and
its residents maintained a remarkably high level of material prosperity. Were
these two features related? How did the city's leaders and residents manage to
create and maintain a successful city over a period of more than five centuries?
What was the relationship between the city's major craft economy - obsidian tool
production - and its growth and decline? More generally, what specific lessons
do early cities have for urbanization today? This project will build on the
foundation of a detailed archaeological map of Teotihuacan and an important yet
incomplete database, to generate new findings and to archive data and results
for future generations.