* 1723295
* Collaborative Proposal: Partnering to Improve Undergraduate STEM Education Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Brian Gerber, Valdosta State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 03/31/2019
* USD 33,949.00

This is a collaborative conference proposal from the four comprehensive
universities in the state of Georgia: Georgia Southern University, Kennesaw
State University, University of West Georgia, and Valdosta State University. The
goal of the conference workshop proposal is to bring these four institutions
together to discuss, plan, and implement changes to improve undergraduate STEM
education across the state. This conference will focus on four strands: gateway
courses, faculty teaching and learning, education research, and undergraduate
research. These four topics are critical to the success of students and their
faculties at these institutions. A theme of the meeting is to establish
collaboration and partnerships among the faculties of these institutions, so
that they can share best practices, initiate change, and study the impact of
change on recruitment, retention, and graduation rates. By focusing the efforts
of these four institutions with guidance from the University System of Georgia,
the workshop outcomes may reach a broad spectrum of STEM faculty (and thereby
students) across the state, to address the low persistence of students who begin
as STEM majors in college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the workshop
conference will establish plans to improve undergraduate STEM education and to
increase research opportunities at these institutions for undergraduate
students. Participants will plan how to evaluate the effectiveness of these
efforts, particularly in increasing the persistence of STEM majors to
graduation. Focusing on all four of Georgia's comprehensive universities is
unique in the sense that these institutions aspire to balance research,
teaching, and service expectations to a greater degree than research and liberal
arts institutions. There is widespread agreement that the comprehensive
universities in Georgia should be working jointly to improve our undergraduate
STEM retention, progression, and graduation and this conference workshop will
serve to initiate this joint work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.