* 1723245
* Collaborative Research: The Hispanic AGEP Alliance for the Environmental Science and Engineering Professoriate in Community Colleges and Associate Degree Programs
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Miguel Velez-Reyes, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,262,377.00

The City College of New York and the University of Texas at El Paso will
collaborate to develop, implement and study a model for training and
transitioning Hispanic Environmental Sciences and Engineering (ESE) doctoral
students, who have completed all coursework and who are dissertating, as they
transition to STEM instructional faculty or staff positions at community
colleges or other associate degree granting institutions. The Hispanic AGEP
Alliance (H-AGEP) was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552) The
AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the
professoriate and success of historically underrepresented minority (URM)
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines
and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP Transformation Alliances develop,
replicate or reproduce, implement, and study, via integrated educational and
social science research, models to transform the dissertator phase of doctoral
education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions
within and across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or STEM education
research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation is confronted with a STEM
achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students,
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM
faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn
from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate
and full professors occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year
colleges and universities and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most
research-intensive institutions. The H-AGEP Alliance has potential to advance a
model to improve the teaching preparation and transitions for Hispanic STEM
doctoral students entering community college faculty positions, and providing
Hispanic STEM faculty, mentors and role models for STEM undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The H-AGEP Alliance plans to develop, implement
and study a model for training and transitioning Hispanic Environmental Sciences
and Engineering (ESE) doctoral students, who have completed all coursework and
who are dissertating, as they progress to STEM instructional faculty or staff
positions at community colleges or other associate degree granting institutions.
Participants primarily include Hispanic-American doctoral students who are
advanced level doctoral candidates majoring in ESE fields, including but not
limited to: civil engineering; electrical engineering; mechanical engineering;
biomedical engineering; earth and atmospheric sciences; ecology, evolutionary
biology, and behavior; computer sciences; electrical and computer engineering;
and environmental science and engineering. The community college partners in the
H-AGEP Alliance are LaGuardia Community College in Long Island City, NY;
Queensborough Community College in Bayside, NY; and El Paso Community College in
El Paso, TX. The project includes developing and testing three primary
intervention components in the model: a training and mentoring program for
effectively teaching ESE courses at community colleges; training to mentor
undergraduate student researchers; and a professional development program to
address career advancement in ESE and academia. The integrated research will
examine the factors that influence the success of Hispanic doctoral students as
they complete doctoral degrees and enter their professions. The formative and
summative evaluation is being conducted by Drs. Ellen Meier and Dawn Horton, at
the Teachers College, Columbia University's Center for Technology and School
Change. An external advisory committee will provide feedback to the team on the
effectiveness and outcomes of the project activities to develop, implement and
test the H-AGEP Alliance model.