* 1723123
* Developing A Strategic Plan For A Global Change Research And Education At Flax Pond Marine Lab
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Dianna Padilla, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2021
* USD 24,898.00

This project will support the development of an innovative strategic plan to
broaden the user base, develop new capabilities, and help Flax Pond Marine
Laboratory remain an epicenter for cutting edge global change research. Flax
Pond Marine Laboratory (FPML -
http://www.somas.stonybrook.edu/about/facilities/flax-pond-marine-laboratory/),
operated by Stony Brook University, is located on a quiet salt marsh nestled
within one of the few forested areas in the New York City metropolitan area.
Unlike many marine laboratories that have remote locations, FPML is 50 miles
from New York City on Long Island, NY, the home of nearly 8 million people and
the most densely populated area in the US with over 2,151 people /km2. Over 40
state and private colleges and universities are within 60 miles of FPML and
since its establishment in 1969, many colleges, state and federal agencies, high
schools and non-profit environmental organizations have used and continue to
rely on this facility. As scientific research priorities evolve, so too must the
facilities needed to answer these complex questions. Modernizing accessible
scientific facilities like FPML are critical to address the most important
research priorities while at the same time meet the needs of a diverse group of
users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present and future users of FPML have identified
facilities improvements that would modernize FPML, but there is no community
consensus on which improvements should have priority, and how such improvements
will help FPML users achieve short-term and long-term goals. A strategic plan
for Flax Pond is critical to develop transformative multidisciplinary research
and facilitate collaborations that will take best advantage of local research
and training talent and interests. To devise an effective strategic plan this
project will identify and prioritize needs of FPML users regionally and
nationwide through a series of workshops and surveys. Site visits to other
marine labs throughout the country will also be used to inform a 10-year
strategic plan to upgrade facilities at Flax Pond.