* 1723666
* Expanding the Pipeline: Immersive Learning Curriculum Development for High School Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Anastasia Trekles, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 482,926.00

Purdue University Northwest is developing an innovative cybersecurity curriculum
to provide high school students with hands-on activities in an immersive
learning environment. The following activities will be developed for
cybersecurity teaching in high school environments: virtual reality three-
dimension games, robotic programming games, practical ethical hacking labs, and
cyber forensics labs based on simulated cases. This project is expected to
provide an immersive, learning-based curriculum for high school cybersecurity
education. One of the goals is to minimize preparation efforts, and requirements
of cybersecurity skills and content knowledge from teachers looking to
incorporate cybersecurity into their classroom education. This will address the
lack of cybersecurity educators and will make cybersecurity education more
accessible to students in rural areas. Through the proposed outcomes, more
students will be exposed to cybersecurity education during high school and are
likely to be more motivated to pursue higher education and careers in this
field, which will ultimately strengthen future cybersecurity workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual reality three-dimension games will be
developed to simulate system vulnerabilities, attacks, security protection
techniques and social engineering scams. Robotic programming games will be
developed for robots, such as Sparki and Raspberry Pi, to simulate robotic
functionality and security attack scenarios that take advantage of programming
security vulnerabilities. Cyber forensics investigation cases and cybersecurity
attack labs will be developed based on a virtual network system that simulate a
classic enterprise system with business functioning and security components. The
virtual reality three dimension games, robotic programming games, cyber
forensics cases, and cybersecurity attack labs are expected to be integrated
with other instructional methods to promote student education through
interactive practices. The cybersecurity curriculum and instructor companion
materials developed through this project will be shared and disseminated to the
cybersecurity education community via sharing with GenCyber student and teacher
summer camps, and in K12 teacher conferences and organizations.