* 1723520
* EAGER: MAKER: Nebraska Innovative Maker Co-laboratory
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Bradley Barker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2019
* USD 358,835.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project will
design, develop and test a Makerspace engagement model that connects
geographically dispersed learning communities and mentors participating in Maker
activities and spaces to provide informal STEM learning pathways and to broaden
participation for STEM activities for youth and their community. The project
will establish a dedicated public library-based Makerspace in a rural,
relatively isolated and underserved community with close connections to an
anchor space at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln that supports open-ended,
self-directed learning, idea exploration, technical skills, entrepreneurship,
and collaborative projects. The project design will bring together experts from
a wide variety of fields (e.g., engineering, textiles, photography, robotics,
and STEM education) to provide youth with hands-on opportunities in six focus
areas, electronics, textiles including e-textiles with wearable electronics,
computers, digital media creation, music technology, and digital fabrication.
 Youth will select a project and learning pathway based on their interests.
Youth will then complete mini-courses and receive certification on the equipment
and skills relevant to their chosen project. The expected synergy between
virtual collaborative spaces and robotic telepresence will provide opportunities
for teams of youth and mentors to collaborate regardless of geographic location
and to creatively collaborate, problem solve and innovate. (Telepresence robots
are defined as platforms that allow users to perceive that they are operating in
another, typically remote physical space via technology.)
 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on using two main strategies; a)
virtual collaborative spaces and b) robotic telepresence, to provide rural youth
access to the Maker movement. This model will provide a replicable strategy of
reaching rural underserved youth audiences within their communities so that they
may establish wider learning communities with experts and mentors and thereby
fully participate in the maker experience. The use of telepresence robotics for
focused one-on-one collaboration and guidance in the Makerspace will
particularly help to address the physical needs of such mentoring. Virtual
innovative lab spaces will allow youth to develop project ideas and engage in
collaborative problem solving. The spaces will be accessible via mobile phone
based Head-Mounted Displays. Student surveys, observation, social network
analysis, and the systematic coding of interactions between youth and mentors
will be used to research the nature of the collaboration, problem solving and
innovation that occurs through shared making activities.