* 1723596
* Revamping a Traditional Computer Science Program to Meet Modern-day Cybersecurity Education Challenges
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sadegh Davari, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,995.00

There is a growing national need for strengthening cybersecurity education
efforts so that the workforce is ready to defend against current and future
cyber threats. Colleges and universities need to increasingly produce well-
rounded computing professionals that are aware and capable of mitigating cyber
threats. The goal of the project from the University of Houston - Clear Lake
(UHCL), is to develop a feasible approach to revamp traditional computer science
degree programs. The broader impact of the proposed work includes: i) a tested
approach for modernizing the nation's traditional computer science degree
programs to incorporate cyber threats awareness and cybersecurity knowledge and
skills; ii) faculty and curricular development in cybersecurity; iii) updated
labs and course materials for other small colleges and universities to adopt
when revamping cybersecurity programs; iv) expanded academia-industry
collaboration; v) increased opportunities for students in a Hispanic-serving
institutions such as UHCL to pursue professional careers in cybersecurity.

The project will establish collaboration with cybersecurity and educational
professionals to sustain effective development and evaluation of course modules,
courses, and degree programs. In addition, it will investigate NSF-funded
programs and other resources to create an inventory of available course
materials, hands-on labs, and degree program information to support Cyber
Defense education. Further, the project will devise a plan to effectively
integrate cybersecurity education into the existing programs by engaging
educators in a variety of programs, and analyze the potential impact of the
planned changes on existing program accreditations. The approach will seek to
engage undergraduate and graduate students in various aspects of the proposed
project. As a result, this project will produce a rigorous and adoptable
approach of modernizing a traditional computer program to meet the nation's need
for educating more capable cybersecurity professionals.