* 1723715
* CAPA: Collaborative Research: A Multi-Paradigm Programming Infrastructure for Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Adrian Sampson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 501,000.00

Heterogeneous computing with extensive use of hardware accelerators, such as
FPGAs and GPUs, has shown great promise to bring in orders of magnitude
improvement in computing efficiency for a wide range of applications. However,
such heterogeneous platforms are difficult to program, especially with FPGAs,
limiting their use to only a small subset of programmers with specialized
hardware knowledge. The intellectual merits of this research are to develop a
highly productive multi-paradigm programming infrastructure for heterogeneous
architectures that integrates convenient heterogeneous programming models,
automated compilation for high-level domain-specific languages, novel runtime,
and debugging support. The project's broader significance and importance are to
introduce the latest research into multiple graduate and undergraduate courses
and tutorials at major conferences, with the goal of training a new generation
of diverse students and professionals to use heterogeneous programming models.
These programmers will be able to apply the developed infrastructure effectively
to many important compute-intensive applications in our society to further the
digital revolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project has four
innovative research components: (1) a new programming model, named HeteroCL,
that enables programming of heterogeneous systems in a single unified program,
(2) a reusable methodology to efficiently transform high-level DSLs to HeteroCL,
(3) an efficient runtime system that support the HeteroCL programming model and
high-level DSLs, with unique capability of dynamic and intelligent co-scheduling
of workloads to CPUs and accelerators at multiple levels of computing hierarchy,
and (4) novel FPGA performance debugging tools for instrumentation and
performance monitoring.