* 1723154
* Expanding Research, Education and Outreach: Planning Proposal for The Notre Dame Linked Experimental Ecosystem Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 24,570.00

Water is the basis for life on this planet, making aquatic ecosystems some of
the most critical in the world, but they are also the most imperiled. ND-LEEF is
a globally unique field site where scientists and engineers can find solutions
to some of our greatest environmental challenges, especially threats to aquatic
systems. The facility represents a unique combination of interconnected streams,
ponds, and wetlands in the form of experimental watersheds. Researchers can
manipulate ecosystem types, individually or linked, while still being embedded
within the natural environment that bridges a critical gap between laboratory
and field scales. Set within a local park in St Joseph County (IN), ND-LEEF's
location facilitates access to the public and allows for meaningful research
translation and outreach. In four years, programming has reached &gt;1400
individuals, including 800 local k-12 children. This project will maximize the
scientific, education and outreach potential of ND-LEEF by identifying potential
users, roadblocks that may be limiting current use, and help develop a plan to
overcome hurdles to maximize the impact and efficiency of ND-LEEF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a five-year
strategic plan for ND-LEEF to inform further infrastructure growth, identify
potential users, draw these users to ND-LEEF, facilitate regional scientific
collaborations, provide a platform for undergraduate education and enhanced
local STEM outreach. The plan will include identification of potential users
within a 150-mile driving distance. The project team will conduct interviews to
identify barriers for usage, and identify strategies to increase use by
researchers and their students. The project includes a one-day regional workshop
for current and identified potential researchers/educators that will (i) explore
the growth potential of ND-LEEF in greater detail, (ii) identify required novel
infrastructure, (iii) identify current barriers to use, (iv) promote regional
collaboration across research and educational interests, and (v) lay the
groundwork for growing an ND-LEEF community.