* 1723769
* Science Policy Research Report:  Entrepreneurial Career Opportunities for Science and Engineering Postdoctoral Researchers
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Christopher Hayter, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2018
* USD 41,352.00

Academic postdoctoral research positions were originally intended to provide
additional training in preparation for tenure-track university faculty
positions. Many postdoctoral researchers are currently unlikely to obtain a
faculty job. These individuals possess scientific knowledge of value to science
and technology-based companies. This project examines evidence on university and
government programs that promising career alternative in the private sector. The
project documents the needs of current and potential employers to understand
factors that will better prepare postdocs to work in the private sector. The
project recommends new programs and policies to prepare and assist postdoctoral
researchers for careers in corporations and
startups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project reviews research that
examines the purpose and structure as well as the career-related benefits and
challenges of these positions. This project will conduct original case studies
of existing career development programs focused on preparing postdocs to work in
corporations and startup companies. The research will also focus on how non-
academic career outcomes may vary for postdocs based on their race and gender,
which are two critical considerations for leveraging the benefits of a diverse
science and technology talent pool. Based on these findings, the project will
result in policy recommendations for government and university leaders to
improve postdoctoral researcher career outcomes and increase the public return
on its research investment.