* 1723506
* I-Corps: Application of Rhizobium bacteria with light-dependent nodulation efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2017
* Roberto Bogomolni, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2017
* USD 16,409.00

The broader/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to significantly
improve fertilization and crop yields in legume agriculture and other crops.
Application of light-activated inoculates for crop fertilization will result in
an increased legume production and will potentially benefit other crops that are
grown in the same fields after harvesting the legumes, as legume crop remnants
left in the fields may fertilize those additional crops. The potential customers
for this novel technology are the soybean farmers of the Midwestern states and
the alfalfa growers in the southwestern USA. The expected yield enhancements
using this technique will potentially result in higher profit margins in these
important crops.

The I-Corps project develops an innovative way to process bacterial inoculates
currently used to fertilize legumes. Legume crops are sprayed with bacteria that
live inside the plant roots providing the plant with fertilizing compounds that
they produce from air nitrogen. The core technology involved is based on a
recent discovery that illumination of these bacteria is required to activate
their capacity to penetrate the roots. Spraying the fields with light-activated
inoculates constitutes a new, state of the art methodology that could
significantly improve fertilization and crop yields over current yields.