* 1723185
* Study of water solubility in bridgmanite at the lower mantle conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Jiuhua Chen, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2022
* USD 423,286.00

Nearly all minerals can take at least small amount of water in their structure
although the capability of water uptake varies from mineral to mineral. Due to
the huge mass of mantle dominant minerals, even very small solubility of water
in the minerals may produce a massive water reservoir in Earth's interior. For
example, 2-3 weight % solubility of water in the transition zone major minerals
(wadsleyite and ringwoodite) results in a capability of water storage in this
part of Earth's interior equivalent to two and a half total oceans on Earth's
surface. Knowledge about the water solubility in difference minerals helps
people understand fate of water brought into Earth's interior by subduction
processes, deep water cycling and its influence on seismic wave propagation in
the corresponding area. While water solubility in the upper mantle and
transition zone minerals are well investigated, related studies on the lower
mantle dominant mineral, bridgmanite, especially the influence of pressure and
water fugacity, are very limited. This project will systematically study the
capacity for water uptake in the bridgmanite crystal structure as a function of
pressure and water fugacity. The research activities will be carried out mainly
at Florida International University, a Minority Serving Institution (MSI) and
the largest Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) in mainland US. Progress of the
research will be introduced to the undergraduate and graduate students through
classes taught by the PI under the topic of how many oceans are there inside the
Earth to draw the interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) among students of underrepresented minorities. Such a natural connection
has been proved very effective for the PI to attract students to become involved
in Research Experiences for Undergraduates and/or Independent
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will determine the parameters in the
general formula in water concentration calculation for bridgmanite. The samples
will be synthesized from a mixture of oxides and hydroxide (SiO2, MgO, FeO,
Al2O3 and Mg(OH)2) with saturated water content. A multi-anvil press with hard
tungsten carbide and sintered diamond anvils will be used to produce samples
with large crystal size for water concentration characterizations. Both Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and secondary ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS) will be used for determining the water contents in the synthesized
specimens, minimizing the uncertainty due to possible inclusions of H2O fluid or
hydroxyl bearing phases. The project will characterize the water storage
capability in the deep mantle, provide critical mineral physics data for
geodynamic modeling, and therefore advance our knowledge and understanding in
geophysics and geochemistry of Earth's deep interior. The project takes the
advantage of new developments in the multi-anvil apparatus to reach pressures
far higher than that at the top of the lower mantle using sintered diamond
anvils. The larger sample size with respect to diamond anvil cell (DAC)
experiments will ensure the quality of analytical characterization of water
concentration in the recovered specimens. Comparative analyses using FTIR and
SMIS will help for distinguishing the structural bound hydroxyls from molecular
water in crystal inclusions.