* 1723420
* SCH: EAGER: RUI: Collaborative Research: A novel 3D image predictive model for osteoarthritis disease
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Juan Shan, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 208,107.00

Knee osteoarthritis (OA) affects 10% of older adults and is a major cause of
work absence, early retirement and joint replacement. Knee OA is a disease
characterized by deterioration of the cartilage in the knee. Using current
technology, it is hard to predict how fast or how much deterioration will take
place because cartilage loss is a slow and gradual process and can only be
detected through medical images. This project will explore a novel 3D image
model that can predict the accurate change of knee cartilage, to facilitate
early detection and personal treatment for OA. If successful, the project could
benefit 35 million people in the United States by reducing the high economic
cost related to OA treatment, and improving the quality of life for these
people. The PIs plan to disseminate the research to local medical communities
and design a new course to involve undergraduate students into the research. The
novel 3D image predictive model should have a wide variety of imaging
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore a
novel 3D-information-fusion mechanism for medical imaging and a novel 3D image-
to-image predictive model using deep neural networks as the core. The project
will integrate cartilage information from MRI sequences. To handle size
differences and perform image registration, a universal coordinate system will
be defined to form a continuous and complete representation of the cartilage
plane. Using the coordinate system, deep neural networks will be trained to
learn the underlying correlation between the 3D cartilage maps. Unlike the
traditional image-to-single-value prediction, the model will make image-to-image
prediction; that is, from a current 3D cartilage map to a future 3D cartilage
map, for different lengths of time (2, 4, 6, and 8 years respectively),
leveraging a large imaging database. Finally, the team will construct the future
3D knee models from the cartilage maps to display the trajectory of cartilage
change in a 3D view.