* 1723269
* Enhancing Research and Scholarly Training at the Desert Studies Center, California
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Darren Sandquist, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2020
* USD 24,980.00

The Desert Studies Center (DSC) is a field station supported by the California
State University system. Through NSF-FSML support for strategic planning, the
role of the DSC in desert research and scholarly training will be strengthened.
An important part of the plan will be to increase the DSC's influence on future
generations of STEM scientists by increasing racial and ethnic diversity of the
STEM workforce. The plan will also emphasize cultivation of a broader set of
research skills through cross-disciplinary research and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of inter-linked tasks will be used to
achieve these goals. A survey of, and visits to other FSMLs that face similar
challenges as the DSC will be used to refine the current DSC Strategic Plan.
This Plan will guide development of an Operations Plan for improving
infrastructure and logistical support of research at the DSC. The final step
will be to educate arid-land scientists about opportunities provided by the DSC,
especially those of a cross-disciplinary nature, with an emphasis on recruiting
use by faculty and students of minority-serving institutions. These plans and a
written summary of best-practices for increasing research and training at FSMLs
operated by primarily-undergraduate institutions, as well as data associated
with this program, will be made available through the DSC website
(http://nsm.fullerton.edu/dsc/).