* 1723328
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Long Term Human Response to Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Fred Valdez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,148.00

The dynamic relationship and consequences of humans and their environment during
critical times of change in the past will be investigated by a University of
Texas research team (Valdez, Aebersold, and colleagues). People have
significantly modified the earth's habitable spaces and have generated
pronounced effects on natural processes. Behaviors typically associated with
agriculture including adaptations of increased sedentary lifestyles,
cultivation, domestication, deforestation, and controlled fire are the beginning
of a world-wide trend in reshaping the earth?s environmental systems. The
archaeological record is not only useful in understanding humanity through
material culture, it doubles as an environmental proxy for the study of human-
environmental relationships. Within this framework, this research contributes to
a global narrative of how humans begin to engineer and transform their natural
and social environments during the emergence of major civilizations. Methods
presented in this research project have wide applicability in geoarchaeology and
Neotropical research areas. This research also expands on paleobotanical
analysis interpretations in pre-ceramic archaeological contexts, which are
understudied in the Neotropics. As a strong advocate for higher education for
women and the Hispanic community, Luisa Aebersold shares this environmental
research in the Austin, TX bilingual community through various outreach programs
such as Â¡Ciencias!, GirlStart: Girls in STEM, and Con Mi MADRE (Mothers and
Daughters Raising Expectations). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
study the magnitude and timing of impacts concerning initial human-environmental
interactions during the early stages of the Anthropocene, specifically,
geoarchaeological evidence concerning the transition of subsistence strategies
from nomadic hunter-gatherer into more intense agricultural subsistence
strategies in the Maya Lowlands during the Archaic (8000 to ca. 3500 B.P.) to
the Preclassic Period (beginning ca. 3000 B.P.). This research requires
archaeologists and paleoenvironmentalists to critically consider the effects of
initial human-environment interactions and how people have continued to thrive
in built environments despite environmental stress. This research is guided by
Human Niche Construction theory, a framework that informs the understanding of
early small-scale populations that is heavily influenced by intentional human
behaviors. Combined with the term Anthropocene, these frameworks can be used to
understand and evaluate the deep influence of ancient Maya cultural activities
and environmental engineering on neotropical forests, wetlands, soils, and water
systems. Evidence gathered using a multi-proxy approach will address questions
related to early anthropogenic change resulting in deliberate and unintentional
human niche construction. This research brings together archaeological,
paleoenvironmental, and sedimentological lines of evidence which contribute to
dialogues of sustainability and environmental solutions. Researchers will
delineate evidence of transformative behaviors, which have long-term effects on
the environment and its subsequent inhabitants.