* 1723459
* EAGER: MAKER: Collaborative: Beyond Rubrics: Moving Towards Embedded Assessment in Maker Education
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Justin Reich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project is supported by the STEM+Computing (STEM+C) program, which advances
applied research integrating computational thinking and computing activities
within disciplinary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics teaching
and learning in early childhood education through high school (PreK-12). Because
of its fundamental focus on collaborative, iterative, process-based learning--
key 21st century skills--maker education's learning outcomes cannot be
adequately tracked by tests, the traditional means of assessment in classrooms.
The project will develop embedded assessment techniques, co-designed with and
implemented by teachers, to collect rigorous forms of evidence of student
learning, without constraining or interrupting complex making processes.
Embedded assessment refers to a form of assessment where assessment is directly
incorporated into the learning environments and activities, so student learning
can be monitored and supported in real time. Embedded assessment has been widely
adopted in digital contexts to design tasks within a system that can elicit
evidence of desired outcomes, and to automatically and rapidly capture rich data
generated in the process of performance. Leveraging the same methodology in
maker learning is promising, however hands-on learning environments do not have
the same data affordances as digital environments. Through this necessary
reframing and redesigning of assessment, we can begin to answer the question of
how maker-centered learning can truly benefit the broader education system, both
for students and for teachers. This knowledge will improve the quality of
learning in school-based maker environments, and enable more schools to bring
these valuable experiences to their students.

The project will develop and evaluate practices of embedded assessment in maker-
centered learning which will lead to assessment practices better suited to the
processes and desired outcomes of maker education. There are currently no well-
documented assessment protocols or processes for maker education. The project
will conduct design-based research that involves two lines of connected work.
First, the project will iteratively develop embedded assessment toolkits with
maker educators and teachers. Second, the project will establish a
transformative process where participating teachers can successfully adopt
embedded assessments within middle school STEM curricula.