* 1723278
* High-resolution sensing of nitrate in Monterey Bay and surrounding waters
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Thomas Connolly, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 140,299.00

Nitrate is an important nutrient in the ocean that sustains the use of energy
from sunlight by photosynthetic organisms. Along the U.S. west coast, strong
winds bring water that is rich in nitrate from the deep ocean to the sunlit
ocean surface. This coastal upwelling process fuels growth and productivity at
the base of the marine food web, but is also linked to low-oxygen conditions and
harmful algal blooms along the coast. In addition to wind-driven upwelling along
the coast, runoff of nitrate from land can cause excess enrichment of organic
matter in estuaries, leading to low-oxygen conditions and habitat degradation.
Traditional measurements of nitrate use chemical methods that are time consuming
and limit the quantity of samples to those that can be physically collected in
bottles. Recent advances in optical sensor technology have made it possible to
collect nitrate data rapidly (up to one sample per second), allowing the
collection of data with much greater detail. The purpose of this project is to
make high-resolution sensing of nitrate a standard measurement at Moss Landing
Marine Laboratories (MLML, https://www.mlml.calstate.edu) in central Monterey
Bay, CA. Measuring nitrate alongside other observations of ocean conditions and
water quality will provide a more complete picture of how nutrient availability
changes over the course of days and months, and at small spatial scales down to
meters in Monterey Bay and nearby estuaries. The use of high-resolution nitrate
sensing at MLML will bring advanced technology into the classroom and provide
new opportunities for student research. Training in the use and calibration of
modern nitrate sensing technology will take place in the classroom, and students
will have access to equipment and data for independent research. The nitrate
sensors will support research on harmful algal blooms, regional impacts of ocean
acidification, sustainable aquaculture, and estuarine water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrate concentrations are influenced by many
physical, biogeochemical and anthropogenic processes, including coastal
upwelling, internal waves, photosynthesis, aerobic respiration, denitrification,
and agricultural runoff. Nitrate fuels primary productivity, which is often also
associated with low oxygen, eutrophication and harmful algae. However, the
complex spatial distributions of nitrate, and the wide range of time scales of
variability, are difficult to characterize with traditional methods. Recent
advances in sensor technology have made it possible to measure variability in
nitrate concentrations at the short temporal and spatial scales that
characterize estuaries and coastal upwelling regions. The goal of this project
is to make high-resolution sensing of nitrate a standard measurement on four
observing platforms at Moss Landing Marine Laboratories (MLML,
https://www.mlml.calstate.edu): 1) a seawater intake system that continuously
measures subsurface water properties, 2) a vertically profiling rosette on a 56
ft. coastal research vessel, 3) an underway data acquisition system that
continuously measures surface water properties on the same vessel, and 4) a
portable underway data acquisition system that can be readily deployed on any
small boat or pier. These research platforms already support an array of
physical, biological and chemical sensors for interdisciplinary research in
Monterey Bay and surrounding waters. Installing nitrate sensors on four
complementary observing platforms would provide researchers in the Monterey Bay
region with a strong foundation for understanding how nitrate and phytoplankton
biomass vary both in time and space.