* 1723752
* EAGER: MAKER: Promoting "Culturally Relevant Making" and Utilitarian Scientific Literacy to Increase Student Retention in Technology Rich Disciplines Brian Lawrence (PI), Lycurgus
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Brian Lawrence, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,958.00

Culturally-relevant experiences prove invaluable to the recruitment and
retention of undergraduates from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines,
and likewise, can encourage and provide students with the requisite skills for
science and engineering beyond college. Despite this, best practices do not
exist for the development of culturally-relevant programing, be it formal or
informal, in the emergent field of "Making." This project is designed to meet
this need through the creation of a MakerSpace culture that confers culturally-
relevant utilitarian scientific literacy skills necessary for student success in
STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal will be achieved, in part, by creating an
online module ("Literacy in Ideation, Design, and Making") that is culturally
relevant to underrepresented STEM populations and widely available through the
Internet for use by anyone (e.g. individual, high school, institution of higher
education etc.) interested in engaging in the rapidly expanding Maker Movement.
This module will introduce undergraduates to MakerSpace Culture and Technology
through important elements of Making such as Ideation, Creativity, Design
Thinking, Innovation and Entrepreneurship. The approach is expected to lead to
an appreciation for the intrinsic value of Making (as opposed to "tinkering")
that helps better prepare underrepresented students for a career in science and
engineering. It is expected that by improving student learning through Making,
the attendant increase in recruitment and retention of underrepresented students
in STEM will serve as a key step toward ensuring the future diversity and
preparedness of the nation's science and technology workforce.