* 1723192
* Detecting offshore seismicity by combining back-projection and matched filter analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Lingsen Meng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 12/31/2019
* USD 244,981.00

Most megathrust earthquakes involve significant slip in the offshore area,
leading to strong ground shaking and/or tsunami hazards. A better understanding
of the offshore deformation is crucial for model evaluation and hazard
mitigation of large earthquakes and tsunamis. The episodes of seafloor
deformation can be detected by ocean-bottom instruments such as absolute
pressure gauges or ocean bottom seismometers. However, due to either the high
cost or difficulty in separation of tectonic signals from oceanographic effects,
long-term characterizations of offshore deformation with these instruments are
still challenging. In this project, we propose to integrate two recently
developed methods to improve our understanding of offshore deformation and their
relation to megathrust rupture. The project takes full advantage of the
increasing availability of global dense seismic networks including the
Earthscope USArray, Hinet in Japan and supports the PhD work of a female
graduate student. The research results are being shared via conferences and
journals, as well as via outreach to public schools and undergraduate
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of slow slip in the nucleation stage of
large earthquakes remains enigmatic. An important manifestation of the pre-
seismic slow slip is the precursory micro-seismicity, which is difficult to
detected directly by landward seismic instruments. Recent advances in array-
based methods allow to improve the capability of detecting missing events in
routine catalogs. To better characterize the offshore seismicity, this research
proposes to combine two recently developed detection methods: Back-projection
(BP) imaging and Matched-filter (MF) detection. The BP method is effective in
retrieving offshore seismicity in the coda wave of large earthquakes. The BP
inferred events can be then used as templates to detect even more offshore
microseismicity in the MF processing of array seismic data. The goal of this
research is to obtain a more complete picture of the long-term seismicity rate
and repeating earthquakes (which can be used to infer slow-slip episodes) around
recent megathrust earthquake rupture zones. These observations may provide key
constraints of the interaction of small events and/or slow slip with megathrust
earthquakes.