* 1723722
* I-Corps: Robust Equation-oriented Chemical Process Optimizer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Michael Baldea, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project focuses on applying rigorous optimization tools to solve
process design optimization problems. For example, the broader impact/commercial
potential of this I-Corps project can be associated with giving chemical process
designers access to modern optimization techniques. While critical to all
chemical companies, optimizing the design of a chemical process (in terms of
choosing the process temperatures, pressures, flow rates, etc., that give the
best economic performance) is still largely carried out empirically by design
engineers. The workflow is typically iterative, labor-intensive and time-
consuming, and the optimality of the outcome is not guaranteed. The proposed
activity will place at the fingertips of engineers in the chemical,
petrochemical, natural gas and other process industries a new computational
framework that uses rigorous optimization tools to find the best process design.
The commercial potential ranges from increasing the number of process
alternatives that can be considered at the design stage, to supporting optimal
investment decisions in new production facilities or upgrading existing ones.
The proposed activity also has important potential societal impact: investment
in US-based chemical production facilities (spurred by recent developments in
accessing domestic shale gas and oil resources) will create new jobs and advance
the training and development of the current and future workforce engaged in the
design and operation of chemical plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applying rigorous
optimization tools to solve process design optimization problems has been
hindered by numerical challenges posed by solving the process model - a set of
very nonlinear equations corresponding to material and energy balances for
reactors, distillation towers, heat exchangers, etc. found in a chemical and
other process plant. The project relies on a recently-invented computational
approach for solving and optimizing process flowsheet models. The approach
involves a systematic mathematical reformulation of the model equations,
resulting in equivalent expressions that can be solved reliably using common
numerical methods. A library of unit operation models which can be linked
together to create a mathematical model of an entire process is also available,
and has been extensively validated on the design optimization of academic and
industrial test problems. The commercialization of this work will bridge the
large gap that currently exists between industrial practice and the numerous
recent advances in optimization theory.