* 1723399
* CSforAll Knowledge Forum x CSNYC: Engaging Research for Practice in CS Education
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Leigh DeLyser, The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 12/31/2018
* USD 89,840.00

The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education (CSNYC) proposes to
engage prominent researchers, practitioners, and funders of CS education in
discussions on how best to use and to conduct research in support of the
implementation of CS education for every child. In 2016, CSNYC held a similar
event -- a Knowledge Forum focused on defining the initial agenda for the
research and evaluation for New York City's implementation of CS4All. That Forum
had two findings: implementation should be a priority for K-12 CS research, and
the K-12 CS research community values opportunities to learn directly from
decision-makers and practitioners. Here, CSNYC proposes the 2nd Annual Knowledge
Forum to build on the experiences and insights from 2016, and to leverage the
knowledge of the wider, national community being developed through the recently
launched CSforAll Consortium (csforall.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year,
the Knowledge Forum will focus on how best to use and to conduct research in
support of the implementation of CS education for every child. The agenda will
include short talks and panel discussions featuring key representatives from the
both the CS and wider K-12 education communities, as well as small-group
breakout sessions to surface and prioritize specific issues related to using
research for designing and conducting formative reviews of K-12 CS
implementation in practice. Throughout the day CSNYC representatives will
document conversations, elicit questions and priorities, facilitate connections
and identify how best to support both the work through greater engagement and
transparency among researchers, system-leaders and school-level practitioners.
The outcomes from the workshop will focus on research-practice partnerships for
the sustainable implementation of K-12 CS education. They will result in a
report that provides principles for forming and sustaining partnerships, and
describes models and mechanisms for conducting research for improving
implementation. The report will delineate implementation research priorities to
guide the design, organization and delivery of K-12 CS education in diverse
settings, and define ways the research community can be supported in building
partnerships with practitioners that promote the implementation of CS education.