* 1723633
* Oceanographic Instrumentation: Sea Education Association (SSV Corwith Cramer &amp; SSV Robert C. Seamans)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Paul Joyce, Sea Education Association
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2018
* USD 16,462.00

Proposals from SEA are fundamentally different form others is this panel because
SEA does not support any NSF-funded science. Rather the program is a shipboard
educational experience that has offered high-quality academic programs to
college, high-school, and graduate students, as well as K-12 teachers, for 45
years. The National Science Board recently named SEA the recipient of its 2016
Public Service Award for making a substantial contribution to increasing public
understanding of science and engineering. NSF recognizes that many SEA alumni
are professionals working and teaching in the marine sciences and related fields
and for that reason have allowed for limited support through the Instrumentation
Program. The panel considered this when it evaluated the requests and found that
all items were adequately justified and important to the operations of SEA. The
proposal was rated as Very Good. Nevertheless, in an uncertain budget year and
without compelling NSF-funded work to call on, the Program will offer limited
support for the proposal. Of the six requests, the Program will recommend the
top two priorities. The remaining four should be submitted next
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program recommends an award of $16,462 for the
purchase of the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Deionized Lab Water System
$7,445&lt;br/&gt;2) Two (2) Water Sampling Carousel Frames $9,017