* 1723016
* Direct and Inverse Problems for Cardinality Questions in Additive Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Georgios Petridis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2021
* USD 87,381.00

Combinatorics is arguably the most accessible branch of pure mathematics. At its
core lie elementary questions that might excite a high school student as much as
an expert. For example, imagine that one colors the edges and diagonals of an
icosahedron red or blue. Can one always find a triangle whose edges are all red
or a triangle whose edges are all blue? While combinatorics has traditionally
found applications in computer science, information theory, and mathematical
models, this project aims to further investigate its applications to what must
be the oldest part of mathematics: number theory. The PI will involve high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students in the project. The problems under
study are suitable for training in research as they are easily accessible and
offer an excellent setting for grasping some of the core techniques used in
combinatorics. Parallel to and supported by the research activities of the
project, the PI's goal is to write a short book on the application of
combinatorics to number theory aimed at undergraduates in mathematics.

Inverse theorems have catalyzed the development of additive combinatorics in
recent years. However, some very basic inverse questions remain largely
untouched. This project focuses on the study of open questions where
combinatorial methods are likely to be of use. Three indicative examples, which
are easy to formulate and hence will reach a wide mathematical audience, are:
what structural information can be derived for finite sets in a commutative
group that have near maximum number of h-fold sums; what can be said about
finite sets of integers whose exponential sum has nearly minimum norm; and what
can be deduced about the number of distinct differences that are formed from
pairs of elements of a finite set, when the number of distinct sums is known? It
is hoped that a combination of recent advances in the field and novel ideas will
lead to progress. As these questions are representative of the challenges one
must overcome in a wider variety of cardinality questions in additive
combinatorics. It is hoped that any discoveries will be applied to other
contexts as well. The project's methodology has a strong interdisciplinary
component, which could unearth new connections between combinatorics and
harmonic analysis.