* 1723367
* Engineering exotic phases of matter in solid state systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jason Alicea, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2021
* USD 358,223.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in exploring and realizing exotic quantum phenomena in
engineered solid-state devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthesizing controllable
phases of matter in the laboratory is essential for advancing both fundamental
science and quantum technologies. As a prominent recent example, certain phases
have been predicted to support exotic particles that are expected to display
uniquely quantum behaviors; this new physics can, in turn, be exploited to
create quantum computers that wildly outperform modern machines for certain
tasks. One powerful route forward towards realization in the laboratory combines
well-understood systems to force electrons into novel states of matter that
might otherwise be difficult to realize. The PI's research will pursue this line
of attack to explore a variety of engineered systems, with applications ranging
from quantum computing to tabletop simulations of black-hole physics and quantum
chaos. The results will help in bridging novel theories with tangible
experiments, while also streamlining the realization of new technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be complemented by a multifaceted
education and outreach program. Training of undergraduates and graduate students
in modern theoretical research topics will comprise a major component. Research
advances will be broadly disseminated, to specialists and non-specialists alike,
through research articles, seminars, commentaries, blog posts, special summer
schools, and courses. In order to promote interest in science at an early age,
the PI's group will also host elementary-, middle-, and high-school students
visiting Caltech from nearby schools, which serve many economically
disadvantaged and underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education in exploring and realizing
exotic quantum phenomena in engineered solid-state devices. The project will
specifically investigate the following areas: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i) Nanowire-
based realizations of interacting Majorana-fermion models that exhibit profound
connections to black holes, chaos, and holography. Viewing the problem from this
hardware perspective has the potential to reveal new insights that further link
high energy, quantum information, and condensed matter physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ii) Plausible avenues toward new non-Abelian phases in
topological-insulator surfaces and quantum-Hall systems. This research will
begin to bridge the gulf between theory and experiment in these areas while also
deepening connections between topological insulators and quantum-Hall systems
that have recently come to light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iii) Practical issues
for existing and upcoming experiments pursuing topological quantum computing.
Research here includes simulating experimental protocols that probe fusion of
non-Abelian anyons, and developing transport theories that will guide
experiments towards realizing Majorana zero modes, parafermionic
generalizations, and graphene-based topological insulators. These activities
will support ongoing efforts at stabilizing non-Abelian anyons in engineered
architectures and will help quantify their utility for quantum-information
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be complemented by a
multifaceted education and outreach program. Training of undergraduates and
graduate students in modern theoretical research topics will comprise a major
component. Research advances will be broadly disseminated, to specialists and
non-specialists alike, through research articles, seminars, commentaries, blog
posts, special summer schools, and courses. In order to promote interest in
science at an early age, the PI's group will also host elementary-, middle-, and
high-school students visiting Caltech from nearby schools, which serve many
economically disadvantaged and underrepresented students.