* 1723550
* EAGER: Turbulent Ventricular Cerebrospinal Fluid Flow Dynamics in Physiological and Pathological Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* William Liou, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 243,804.00

Computational models are being applied at increasing rate toward better
understanding and assessment of deleterious human physiological effects. This
project is a simulation study of the turbulent flow of cerebrospinal fluid.
Cerebrospinal fluid is believed to circulate in the central nervous system,
protecting the brain from trauma by providing buoyancy. Abnormalities in
cerebrospinal fluid, its containment space, and its circulations have been
related to diseases. The biomechanics of the turbulent mixing of the
cerebrospinal fluid flow in the ventricular space is of paramount importance.
The potential transformative impacts the cerebrospinal bio-turbulence physics
has on improving the medical diagnosis and treatment of neurological disorders
of the brain are significant. The objectives of this project include gaining a
thorough understanding of the roles the physics of turbulent cerebrospinal fluid
flow dynamics play in the pathologies of central nervous system disorders. A
successful completion of the broader objectives produces a clinically validated
computation framework for turbulent cerebrospinal fluid flow. An advanced
understanding of the physics of the cerebrospinal fluid flow will improve the
efficacy of cerebrospinal fluid-related medical diagnosis and treatments, and
the well-being of individuals in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerebrospinal
fluid flow is believed to present throughout the lateral, the third and the
fourth ventricles before entering the subarachnoid space, which surrounds the
brain, the spinal cord, and other important systems, such as the optic nerve
system. In this proposed project, the PIs focus on capturing and quantifying the
dynamics of the observed turbulent cerebrospinal fluid flow in the third and the
fourth ventricles. Cerebrospinal fluid will be represented by an incompressible
Newtonian fluid with the same density and viscosity as those of water at the
normal body core temperature. The cerebrospinal fluid flow will be resolved
using a modern lattice Boltzmann method. An immersed boundary method will be
applied to properly account for the non-lattice conforming shape of the complex
cerebrospinal fluid flow passages. An intracranial vascular flow model will be
developed for the cerebrovascular flow dynamics. The outcomes of the subject-
specific simulations will be compared with those based on Magnetic Resonance
Imaging data. Subject-specific applications of the computational model in a
healthy and a diseased condition will be conducted.