* 1723058
* 2017 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference (MTSM)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Jonathan Whitmer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This grant is to provide partial support for the 2017 Midwest Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference to be held on the campus of the
University of Notre Dame on June 4-6, 2017. The MTSM Conference has historically
provided a forum for researchers working on theoretical and experimental aspects
of Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics to come together, present their work
and exchange ideas. Most participants will be from chemical engineering and
chemistry departments, although students and faculty from physics, materials
science, mechanical engineering, and computer science departments have also
participated in this conference in the past.

Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics are an important area of research that
has a wide spectrum of applications in chemical, biological and natural systems.
The MTSM Conference series has a 29-year history and attracts participants from
academic institutions, industry and national laboratories. Most attendees are
from institutions located in the Midwest region of the US, which has a large
concentration of researchers working in the field of Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics. The Conference participants will have the opportunity to
attend state-of-the-art invited presentations by leading experts in the field
and debate controversial points with their peers. The conference participants
supported by this grant will have the opportunity to network with peers from
other institutions and exchange ideas about the current status and future
directions in research and education in an important area of research:
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics. A distinctive feature of The MTSM
Conference is its focus on researchers in the early stages of their academic
careers, such as undergraduate and graduate students, postdocs, and junior
faculty. Because the meetings are regional and organization costs are kept to a
minimum, faculty members are often able to travel with their entire group to the
meeting.