* 1723203
* Acquisition of a Coupled BioInert LC/Triple-Quad ICP-MS System for Critical Equipment Upgrades, Innovative Marine Biochemical Research, and Graduate Training
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Johan Schijf, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2018
* USD 386,876.00

Chesapeake Biological Laboratory (CBL), part of the University of Maryland
Center for Environmental Science (UMCES), was founded in 1925 and is the oldest
state-supported marine laboratory on the US East Coast. CBL has internationally
recognized strength in fisheries science and studies of marine, coastal, and
wetland ecosystems. Its mission is to conduct basic and applied research with a
truly global reach and some emphasis on the Chesapeake Bay, as well as graduate
education conducted within the Marine Estuarine Environmental Sciences (MEES)
program of the University of Maryland. The research of the chemistry group at
CBL ranges from environmental pollution to climate change, and from tropical
coral reefs to the High Arctic, while relying firmly on advanced analytical
techniques such as mass spectrometry (MS). Because increasing analytical
capabilities at CBL is important to its continued success, a powerful MS
instrument will be acquired with a second, linked device that separates organic
compounds. Together, these instruments will allow innovative studies of
specific, biologically important molecules. The new equipment will upgrade and
replace two older instruments, significantly improving the sensitivity of
measurements and the ability to analyze very challenging samples, such as
seawater, wastewaters, and sediments. It will strongly support ongoing studies
of important toxic metals (mercury, selenium, cadmium) but also open up entirely
new fields of research. In addition, the new equipment will be used to train
graduate and undergraduate students for a highly competitive job market and to
stimulate educational outreach to local schools and the general public, in part
through the CBL Visitor Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A triple-quadrupole
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-QQQ), coupled directly to a
metal-free 'BioInert' liquid chromatograph (LC), will be purchased at CBL. This
new equipment will impel a forward leap in analytical capability to advance and
reinvigorate marine biochemical research for its geochemistry group, as well as
for numerous affiliated faculty and students inside and outside UMCES, over the
next 5-10 years. The acquisition will enhance interdisciplinary marine research,
professional training, and public awareness of environmental bioscience. The
unique coupled LC/ICP-QQQ instrument enables characterization and quantification
of nanomolar amounts of biogenic compounds containing specific combinations of
elements, for example sulfur-based ligands bound to Hg, or iodinated
organochlorines. The ability to exclusively target such compounds will remove a
major analytical hurdle in the research of many CBL faculty. The ICP-QQQ exceeds
the mass resolution of more expensive sector-field ICP-MS, yet with greatly
superior detection limits, and will complement ultrahigh-resolution organic MS,
compound-specific stable isotope MS, photochemical, chromatographic, trace
metal, biomolecular, and genetic techniques already available at CBL and three
other UMCES research units. Fundamental and longstanding questions to be
addressed include the roles of non-volatile organic sulfur compounds in the
marine sulfur cycle, of sulfur-based ligands in microbial Hg methylation, and of
metal-specific organic ligands in marine primary production. The Chesapeake Bay
is eminently suited for this research due to the seasonal anoxia of its deep
waters and the regular emergence of summertime dead zones, its proximity to the
Atlantic Ocean, and its abundance of tidal wetlands. The new instrument will
expose graduate students to state-of-the-art molecular/mass spectrometric and
chromatographic techniques and will allow CBL faculty to explore novel
directions in marine biogeochemistry, ecotoxicology, proteomics, climate science
etc. More detailed descriptions of CBL, its scientists, research, and facilities
can be found on the website http://www.umces.edu/cbl