* 1723483
* EAGER: SCH: Distributed and Adaptive Personalized Medicine
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Yong-Jun Shin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 288,056.00

The quality of medical practice can be improved by the use of clinical data.
However, current empirical approaches are developed on population averages and
individual differences are often ignored. Furthermore, these approaches are
static and fail to learn and change over time in an adaptive fashion. As a
result, the science of medicine is not yet personalized and adaptive based on
all the available data. Integrating medicine, engineering, and state-of-the-art
information technology, this project aims at studying distributed and adaptive
personalized medicine that collectively learns from an individual's clinical
data in real time. This approach is inspired by collective and adaptive learning
observed in nature (for example, honeybee swarming behavior, bird flight
formation, etc.). The outcome of this project will enable smarter diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention tailored towards individual patients. It will be
disseminated widely through publications, seminars, workshops, and MOOC (Massive
Open Online Course) development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of clinical data
is at the core of medical practice today and, while various mathematical and
computational approaches have been developed, conventional approaches are not
geared towards individual patients or the dynamics of constantly changing
clinical data. Inspired by studies of multicellular dynamics, this project
explores distributed and adaptive personalized medicine which collectively
learns from an individual's clinical data in real time through localized
interactions. To make these efforts possible and scalable, this project will
exploit a microservice (actor model)-enabled cloud cyberinfrastructure for
increased accessibility, adaptability, interoperability, extensibility,
scalability and sustainability. In addition, the result of this project,
including the mathematical framework, can be applied to other domains, such as
education, energy, telecommunications, and transportation. It will also be
disseminated to academia through publications, seminars, workshops, and a MOOC
to integrate the results of this work into interdisciplinary biomedical
informatics research. All tools and documentation will be made available on
GitHub so that a sustainable community can be formed around the project.