* 1723734
* M(CP2): Minnesota Cybersecurity Pathway Curriculum Partnership for K-18
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Faisal Kaleem, Metropolitan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 04/30/2023
* USD 499,287.00

The Metropolitan State University (Metro State) and Advance IT Minnesota have
established a Cybersecurity Center with the mission of conducting research and
educational activities intended to contribute to advances in formal and informal
cybersecurity education. The NSF funded project, M(CP2): Minnesota Cybersecurity
Pathway Curriculum Partnership for K-18, will be completed by the members and
partners of the Cybersecurity Center. The outcome of the M(CP2) is an integrated
curriculum pathway including course modules for K-12, A.S., B.S., M.S., and
certificate programs. The modules and pathway will align with the forthcoming
Association for Computing Machinery's Cybersecurity Curricula 2017: Curriculum
Guidelines for Post-Secondary Degree Programs in Cybersecurity, and with
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) accreditation on
cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M(CP2) will employ an innovative public-
private partnership approach to prototype the first industry-aligned integrated
pathway curriculum for K-12 through M.S. By leveraging collaborative partners
across industry, education, and the public sector, the proposed work will
operationalize best practices in public-private cooperation for cybersecurity
education developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology -
National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) to expand comprehensive
resources to develop and expand the pipeline of cybersecurity professionals.
This work will provide educators and employers with a standardized pathway
model, which will reduce inefficiencies among programs at various educational
levels and enable schools and industry to better evaluate the training needs of
current and future cybersecurity professionals. Furthermore, M(CP2) will serve
as an example for existing programs to use as they align with the new
guidelines; provide research-supported program plans and resources that new
programs can replicate or customize; and, support integration of cybersecurity
concepts into Computer Science for All projects by aligning project resources to
the K-12 computer science pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.