* 1723949
* Engineering Sustainability 2017: Innovation and the Triple Bottom Line (ES17)  Location: Pittsburgh, PA; Date:  April 9-11, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2018
* USD 44,675.00

CBET - 1723949 PI: Beckman, Eric J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mascaro Center for
Sustainable Innovation at the University of Pittsburgh and the Steinbrenner
Institute for Environmental Education and Research at Carnegie Mellon University
will host Engineering Sustainability 2017: Innovation and the Triple Bottom Line
(ES17) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania from April 9-11, 2017. This conference will
bring together engineers and scientists from academia, government, industry, and
non-profits to share results of cutting edge research and practice directed at
development of environmentally sustainable buildings and infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together engineers, architects,
economists, and urban planners and managers. Plenary talks and concurrent oral
and poster sessions will be organized around the following themes: green
building design and construction; greening the indoor environment; sustainable
distributed power for the built environment; sustainable urban drinking water,
stormwater, and wastewater infrastructure; design of more sustainable
transportation grids; using principles of sustainability to foster innovation
and new product development. There will also be numerous planned opportunities
for informal exchanges and networking, This conference will enhance
interdisciplinary dialogue on environmental sustainability research with cross-
cutting applications in both basic and applied sciences. The conference will
have significant participation from students and young faculty members, so
important to the next generation of innovations.