* 1723662
* 75th Device Research Conference (DRC) 2017. To Be Held at The University of Notre Dame, from June 25 to June 28, 2017.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 11/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This is an NSF support for increasing the diversity of speakers and enhancing
student participation at&lt;br/&gt;the 75th Device Research Conference (DRC).
The DRC has a University setting (this year at the&lt;br/&gt;University of Notre
Dame), and a strong tradition of involvement from researchers around the world.
Yet,&lt;br/&gt;the DRC and the device research community as a whole stands to
benefit from an increase in the invited&lt;br/&gt;speakers at the conference
that are underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;The DRC, now celebrating its
75th anniversary year, is the preeminent forum for new and
emerging&lt;br/&gt;device technologies. The DRC has a tradition of participation
from researchers from throughout the&lt;br/&gt;world in addition to strong
graduate student participation. To continue this trend, speakers are
invited&lt;br/&gt;from various research fields and ethnic/cultural backgrounds
in an effort to improve the diversity of&lt;br/&gt;conference. Further, DRC
offers student travel support and as a particular highlight, the Best
Student&lt;br/&gt;Paper and Poster Awards for attracting more student
involvement. The funds will enable the organizers to &lt;br/&gt;offer travel
support for invited speakers who are underrepresented minorities in the
device&lt;br/&gt;research community. Additionally, will offer the opportunity to
discount student registration to increase&lt;br/&gt;student participation. The
technical program will provide student participants with the opportunity
to&lt;br/&gt;gain exposure to new materials and devices, their basic physics,
and their engineering applications.