* 1723896
* I-Corps: Label-free Optical Sensor for Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Ali Adibi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 07/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project in the area of
healthcare is significant. The proposed technology can potentially improve the
quality of life and life expectancy by allowing the detection of severe medical
conditions (such as cancer) at the early stages. The technology can also be
extended to diagnose a large variety of medical situations (such as
cardiovascular diseases) at the point of care through optimization of the
nanophotonic sensor for the detection of a given set of biomarkers. Beyond
point-of-care diagnostics, the possibility of detecting multiple blood
biomarkers at a low cost enables transformative fields such as predictive health
and personalized medicine. The wide range of potential transformative
applications and the extensive range of target customers give a compelling
commercial potential to the proposed technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is focused on the development of a transformative medical
diagnostic technology for the point-of-care detection of blood biomarkers that
play a crucial role in detection of medical conditions such as cancer. The
target diagnostic system is a low-cost optical bio-chip that can drastically
decrease the assaying cost by eliminating or reducing the need for costly and
time-consuming amplifications steps in the existing detection technologies. The
use of nanophotonic technology for detection of different medically relevant
biomarkers enables the development of ultra-compact highly sensitive, and highly
multiplexed sensors that are urgently needed for multiple medical diagnostic
scenarios, including cancer. The ability to detect multiple blood biomarkers in
a reasonable time with high sensitivity and specificity at a low cost will have
a potentially transformative impact on healthcare by bringing diagnostic tools
at the point-of-care. Among various nanophotonic solutions, the use of highly
miniaturized plasmonic nanostructures has the advantage of higher sensitivity
and lower cost. By proper engineering of these nanostructures into an array,
higher sensitivity can be achieved.