* 1723749
* EAGER: Exploring the Influence of an Asset-Focused Intervention on Students' Interest, Motivation, and Sense of Belonging in the Life Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2017,10/31/2019
* A. Boykin, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 10/31/2019
* USD 359,981.00

This intervention will explore whether technology enhanced professional
development will provide third and fifth grade science teachers with the
knowledge and skills needed to prepare and inspire students to become more
interested and motivated to pursue careers in STEM fields. The professional
development will provide teachers with instructional strategies that promote
students' relational mattering and sense of belonging that will help retain
students in the STEM pipeline. The project will target low-income African-
American students from three high need schools in Washington, DC, through
engagement in life science lessons with the ultimate goal of increasing
students' awareness and interest in STEM. This intervention will offer
continuous professional development to promote teachers' use of asset-focused
instructional strategies that take into account students' cultural practices,
values, and lived experiences evident in the children's home or community
environments. Professional development will be offered through face-to-face
summer and academic year professional development academies and the Torsh TALENT
technology online platform. Both pathways feature ongoing review of
instructional and student learning practices, immediate feedback between
trainers and teachers, more opportunities for teachers to view and reflect on
their craft, and space for virtual life science communal exchange across
participating schools. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers, through research
and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the
DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods
research design will be used to collect focus group and survey data, as well as
conduct classroom observations, to determine if the foreground variables of
students' relational mattering, sense of belonging, and engagement are
interrelated. Research literature has shown that students' engagement in the
learning process is an important predictor of ultimate academic performance
outcomes. It is anticipated that the students' socioemotional perceptions should
positively relate not only to each other but to student engagement levels as
well; hence helping to confirm the academic relevance of such socioemotional
considerations. The Student Socioemotional Perception Tool will be modified to
assess students' perception changes given their teachers' participation in the
professional development intervention. The study of these social emotional
factors with elementary age African-American students in high needs school
settings has the potential to advance the knowledge of largely unexplored
conceptual directions in need of systematic empirical scrutiny. The Talent Quest
Model, based on the human capacity framework, is actualized in how teachers
elicit and use student assets with regard to lessons, learning activities, and
life science subject matter inside classrooms on an everyday basis. Hence, a
major outcome will be modifying a developmentally appropriate measurement tool
to gauge elementary level students' perspectives on their relational mattering
and sense of belonging during life science lessons beyond its early development
and pilot stage.