* 1723586
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Secure Mobile Software Development (SMSD) Through Curriculum and Faculty Development
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Fan Wu, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 179,987.00

The computing landscape is rapidly moving towards mobile computing, and security
threats to mobile devices are also keeping up pace. Most security
vulnerabilities should be addressed in the mobile software development phase;
however, many development professionals are not aware of the importance of
mitigating security vulnerabilities, and lack the requisite security knowledge
and skills to prevent them at the development stage. The combination of the
prevalence of mobile devices and the rapid growth of mobile threats has resulted
in a shortage of mobile-security professionals. Education for secure mobile
application development is in big demand in IT fields. More and more schools are
teaching mobile application development or related courses. However, educational
materials and curricula focusing on Secure Mobile Software Development (SMSD)
are still sparse. In this project, three universities with prior collaboration
records and complementary expertise in mobile security and computing education:
Tuskegee University, Kennesaw State University, and Worcester Polytechnic
Institute, are collaboratively building research and education capacity in
secure mobile software development through three venues: (1) curriculum
development and enhancement with eight transferrable learning modules including
companion hands-on labs on mobile coding; (2) institutional and faculty
development with annual onsite faculty summer workshops and online webinars; and
(3) an innovative open source SMSD API plugin for real world Android Studio
IDE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are developing instructional
materials, including eight transferable modules with hands-on labs that cover
key topics in SMSD, an open source SMSD API plugin for the popular Android
Studio IDE, as well as integrating the modules into existing computer science
and information assurance courses such as Mobile Security, and hosting workshops
and webinars to disseminate the curriculum materials to faculty at other
institutions. Through these efforts, the project aims to: (1) build
institutional capacity on curricula, student learning, and faculty collaboration
and development; (2) broaden participation of minority students in SMSD; and (3)
build the capacity in SMSD education among the academic community nationwide
with the modular nature of the developed materials.