* 1723587
* SaTC: EDU: Online Digital Forensics Courses and Labs for Students and Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Cliff Zou, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2017
* USD 298,955.00

In the current Internet-connected world, most companies, government agencies,
and the public heavily rely on the cyber world for information and data
management, processing, and exchange. Information leakage and data breaches have
become increasingly damaging to businesses, the government, and people's lives.
Correspondingly, hackers have more incentive to attack for financial and
political gains. While the existing cybersecurity curricula focus on defensive
solutions, this proposed online program from the University of Central Florida
attempts to provide both defensive and post-attack digital forensics curriculum
for dedicated digital forensics students and professionals. This project will
enrich the future cybersecurity workforce with both preventative and post-attack
digital forensics skills to effectively counter the cause and effect of cyber-
attacks. This program will also help alleviate shortages of qualified digital
forensic researchers and practitioners in cybersecurity
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in this project, the researchers will
build an online digital forensics program including two introductory courses and
seven hands-on labs. The program will help build the necessary background for
students and professionals to perform high pressure, skilled post-attack digital
forensics analysis and incident responses. Students and professionals will
acquire digital forensics knowledge to tackle future challenges in emerging
cyber-systems such as networked critical infrastructures. Meanwhile, as
computers and smart devices penetrate every aspect of our life, digital
forensics training should not only cover traditional personal computers but also
emerging smart devices, including smart phones and Internet of Things (IoT).
Upon this request, this program also includes course materials and hands-on labs
on forensic analysis of smart phones and IoT devices. The principal outcomes of
the project will be enhancing cybersecurity curricula to include digital
forensics courses and hands-on lab modules that focus on evaluating and
analyzing cyber-attacks and countermeasures at the post-attack stage. Through
this project, students and professionals will be prepared with the digital
forensics knowledge necessary for them to undertake specific roles in future
cybersecurity and digital forensics careers. Further, hands-on labs are
emphasized in the project since these can help students solidify their knowledge
from coursework and will eventually prepare them for real-world cybersecurity
challenges.