* 1723344
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Probabilistic Inference in the Real World
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Sontag, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,999.00

Statistical models provide a powerful means of quantifying uncertainty, modeling
prior beliefs, and describing complex dependencies in data. The process of using
a model to answer specific questions, such as inferring the state of several
random variables given evidence observed about others, is called probabilistic
inference. Probabilistic graphical models, a type of statistical model, are
often used in diverse applications such as medical diagnosis, understanding
protein and gene regulatory networks, computer vision, and language
understanding. On account of the central role played by probabilistic graphical
models in a wide range of automated reasoning applications, designing efficient
algorithms for probabilistic inference is a fundamental problem in artificial
intelligence and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Probabilistic inference
in many of these applications corresponds to a complex combinatorial
optimization problem that at first glance appears to be extremely difficult to
solve. However, practitioners have made significant strides in designing
heuristic algorithms to perform real-world inference accurately and efficiently.
This project focuses on bridging the gap between theory and practice for
probabilistic inference problems in large-scale machine learning systems. The
PIs will identify structural properties and methods of analysis that
differentiate real-world instances from worst-case instances used to show NP-
hardness, and will design efficient algorithms with provable guarantees that
would apply to most real-world instances. The project will also study why
heuristics like linear programming and other convex relaxations are so
successful on real-world instances. The efficient algorithms for probabilistic
inference developed as part of this project have the potential to be
transformative in machine learning, statistics, and more applied areas like
computer vision, social networks and computational biology. To help disseminate
the research and foster new collaborations, a series of workshops will be
organized bringing together the theoretical computer science and machine
learning communities. Additionally, undergraduate curricula will be developed
that use machine learning to introduce students to concepts in theoretical
computer science.