* 1723163
* Infrastructure to measure and manipulate drought and warming impacts in Mediterranean systems
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2020
* N. Maggi Kelly, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2020
* USD 232,348.00

Between 2012 and 2014, the California Floristic Province, a priority hotspot for
global biodiversity conservation, has experienced the hottest and driest period
on record. Evidence is rapidly mounting indicating that these co-occurring
periods of precipitation deficit and warm temperatures are likely to increase
over the next century and pose a serious threat to biodiversity and the critical
services these ecosystems provide society. While the impacts of a warmer and
drier future on these and similar ecosystems are expected to be severe, some
species and ecological communities may be more vulnerable to these changes than
others. Understanding the factors that drive differences in vulnerability is one
of the preeminent scientific and societal challenges of our time as this
knowledge is essential for prioritizing conservation efforts and for identifying
practical adaptation strategies that can conserve or enhance critical services
these ecosystems provide society under changing environmental conditions. To
address this need, this project develops linked infrastructure at the UC Sierra
Foothill Research and Extension Center (SFREC) that will allow researchers to
(1) measure how exposure to drought and elevated air temperatures varies over
time and across the topographically complex landscapes and (2) experimentally
apply different levels of drought and air temperature to key plant communities
and species that are critical drivers of services these ecosystems provide
society. The infrastructure developed here not only allows multiple lines of new
research around drought and warming impacts to be pursued but does so while
greatly reducing start-up costs for researchers, thus overcoming a major barrier
to greater participation in climate change research by students and scientists
from underrepresented institutions. This project also adds key capacity to
expand K-12 STEM education and science content training for educators to diverse
and rural agricultural communities in northern California having markedly less
access to STEM and science education training opportunities than most areas in
the state.

While the need to deploy an integrated framework for assessing species
vulnerability to climate change is widely acknowledged, globally we have minimal
field infrastructure that allows us to simultaneously assess impacts due to
climate change exposure and impacts due to climate change sensitivity. To
address this need, this project establishes linked research infrastructure
distributed across the University of California Sierra Foothill Research and
Extension Center (SFREC, http://sfrec.ucanr.edu/) that supports continuous
measurements on local exposure to climate change and experimental assessment of
multiple factors that drive variation in species sensitivity to these changes.
Specifically, this research infrastructure includes (1) a distributed wireless
network of meteorological and hydrological sensors to measure and model how
regional climate exposure is modified by topographic complexity and (2) a
distributed field system for experimental manipulations of precipitation and
warming that will provide researchers extensive ability to develop mechanistic
understanding of factors (e.g. ecophysiological traits, genetic diversity,
plasticity) and interactions (competition, biological invasions, soil microbial
community) that ultimately drive variation in species and population sensitivity
to climate change. The wireless mesh system will be constructed using
commercially available wireless technology and environmental sensors. This
system also will allow future researchers the ability to add project specific
sensors. For experimental manipulations of field conditions, experimental
warming will be achieved using large (7 x 7 m) passive warming structures
designed to minimizes airflow disruption and provide sufficient space for
multiple experiments to be run simultaneously in a cost-effective manner.
Precipitation manipulations will be achieved using a polycarbonate roof system
coupled to an automated precipitation redistribution system that will allow
researchers to increase or decrease precipitation inputs relative to ambient
inputs on an hourly basis. This infrastructure extends our current global
research capacity by providing researchers an experimental framework to
establish mechanistic and causal linkages between regional climate change and
local changes in biodiversity and ecosystem function. This research
infrastructure also provides an unparalleled ability to test and model
conservation benefits of various biodiversity management tools and strategies.
Ultimately this infrastructure should support major positive steps for
biodiversity conservation in these and similar Mediterranean systems across the
globe.