* 1723440
* SaTC: EDU: Learning Moving Target Defense Concepts: Teaching and Training Curricula Development Based on Software Defined Networking and Network Function Virtualization
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Dijiang Huang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2022
* USD 279,845.00

Moving Target Defense (MTD) is a new security concept to increase uncertainty
and complexity for attackers, reduce their window of opportunity and increase
the costs of their attack efforts. MTD solutions involve a wide-range of
advanced technical expertise, which current education models lack. The project
from Arizona State University proposes to develop an MTD courseware for both
senior undergraduate level and graduate level in computer science focusing on
network-based MTD technologies. Additionally, a cloud-based hands-on laboratory
will be established to support MTD labs, which will increase access to students
and educators in lab environments with limited computer networking and system
security capabilities. The proposed MTD curricula will be published as a
textbook associating with a MTD lab repository allowing instructors to build a
new MTD course or pick part of the teaching materials to incorporate them into
their current curricula. The project team will also work with industry partners
to develop the course content and provide a Teacher Training workshop to
disseminate the course materials. All the created course content and labs will
be freely downloadable by instructors and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MTD
solutions involve technologies in machine learning, artificial intelligence, and
big data analysis models, and current education resources in this realm should
address these fields. The proposed project will address the research challenge
on how to build-out a much-needed hands-on learning module that can be easily
deployed on existing cloud service platforms to learn and experiment with new
computer networking and security technologies such as Software Defined
Networking (SDN), Network Function Virtualization (NFV), and MTD. This project
will focus on four interdependent tasks: (a) building the MTD education
capability by creating software components to support SDN, NFV, and MTD, and
establishing MTD lab repository and APIs to enhance MTD learning outcomes; (b)
developing both long-term semester-based course curriculum, and short-term
training oriented MTD teaching contents; (c) conducting a comprehensive
evaluation plan by involving both internal and external independent evaluators
to use the developed course content and labs; and (d) working with industry
partners and hosting a Teacher Training workshop to maximally disseminate
developed MTD learning contents and hands-on exercises.