* 1723653
* EAGER: Maker: BioFabLab: Making as an Entryway to the Life Sciences for Early Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Jim Vigoreaux, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,685.00

This project explores the potential for elements of Making to improve attraction
to and retention in life science disciplines among undergraduate students.
BioFabLab is a one-semester class in which first time-first year undergraduate
students, who start college with no declared major, work in teams to address a
biological research question through the design, iterative fabrication, testing
and description of a novel experimental apparatus. The class harnesses the rich
collaborative and innovative space created by the Maker movement, and builds on
the growing Maker culture in Vermont. This study places particular emphasis on
those students who may possess an aptitude for creative thinking and an
enjoyment of "tinkering" and innovation, but might for other reasons pass over
opportunities to major in the life sciences. BioFabLab makes use of local Maker
resources, but also aims to echo the Maker ethos of encouraging creativity,
collaboration and lifelong learning. To achieve this, the project is built on
the concepts of guided, student-centered group learning and design thinking, and
explores Making as a conduit for self-directed learning of fundamental
biological principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active learning educational
strategies outperform traditional lecture approaches in student engagement,
retention, and performance. Making incorporates many elements of active learning
such as Problem-Based Learning, but studies do not show how such learning
processes work, particularly when incorporated into formal STEM education.
Furthermore, the Maker Movement attracts followers with diverse interests and
backgrounds, but it is unknown how or whether this success translates to
increased interest and persistence in undergraduate STEM coursework. BioFabLab
is a problem-based course that challenges undeclared first-year students to
address real scientific research questions within the setting of a thriving
local Maker community. Using both quantitative and qualitative educational
research approaches, we will study a) how scientific learning happens in such an
environment, and b) its effects on student persistence and retention. This
project has the potential to introduce and engage a wide range of learners,
including meritorious students, from low income, rural communities in Vermont to
Making specifically, and to STEM more broadly. This in-context
engagement/introduction to Making will present a pathway for learners to pursue
STEM degrees. This project is a part of NSF's Maker Dear Colleague Letter (DCL)
portfolio (NSF 15-086), a collaborative investment of Directorates for Education
and Human Resources (EHR), Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering
(CISE), and Engineering (ENG).