* 1723967
* Collaborative Research:  Encoding and learning of internal models by the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Reza Shadmehr, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,002.00

The brain does not need the cerebellum to make movements. Rather, it needs the
cerebellum to make accurate movements. The cerebellum endows the organism with
the ability to internally monitor and correct ongoing motor commands. This
monitoring requires the cerebellum to be able to predict errors that are about
to happen, and correct for them before they occur. That is, the brain relies on
the cerebellum to have accurate internal models that learn to predict sensory
consequences of motor commands. However, it has been difficult to decipher how
the cerebellum represents internal models: for many forms of behavior, including
saccadic eye movements. By examining the relationship between simple spikes of
Purkinje cells (P-cells) and behavior, this project will advance our
understanding of computations in the cerebellum. Results of these studies could
provide new avenues of rehabilitation for patients with cerebellar damage.

The new idea in this proposal is that the basic unit of computation in the
cerebellum may not be a single P-cell or a randomly selected population of
P-cells, but rather a specific group of P-cells wherein all the P-cells share
the same preference for prediction error. Using this idea, the collaborative
team of investigators from Johns Hopkins University and University of Washington
has found that during saccades, the simple spikes of P-cells predict with
exquisite accuracy future behavior of the eyes. The aim of this project is to
understand how the cerebellum learns to make such accurate predictions. The
investigators present a new paradigm, one in which sensory errors are
perpendicular to the direction of motion of the eyes. This paradigm is
interesting because behavior shows considerable richness: motor commands that
arrive early in the movement appear to change little following error, but those
that come late show both high learning and rapid forgetting. Using a combination
of experiments and computational modelling, the investigators will test ideas
that behavioral changes are due to the neural changes in the P-cells: micro-
clusters that do not prefer the error express their learning in the acceleration
phase of the movement, whereas those that prefer the error express their
learning in the deceleration phase.