* 1723191
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Data Assimilation for Nonlinear, Non-Gaussian, and High-Dimensional Combustion Problems on Supercomputers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Milija Zupanski, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,509.00

Clean combustion is in urgent need for sustainability due to its direct and
intimate connection with tropospheric air pollution, energy security, and
climate change today. However, the combustion community still lacks a
theoretical description that is accurate enough to make turbulent combustion
models rigorous and quantitative for engineering application. Data assimilation,
a powerful and versatile methodology, can maximize the utility of information
from model predictions and measurements, and help reduce the uncertainty of the
state of the modeling system. The project will create a new adaptive data
assimilation methodology by confronting the mathematical challenges of applying
data assimilation to combustion. This research will ultimately lead to the
development of accurate, tractable, and predictive models for combustion
engineering, which will help reduce the turn-around time for the expensive
design and development cycle of clean combustion technologies. Software
resulting from the project will be applicable, beneficial, and accessible to the
broad research communities of combustion, fire, plasma, or
biofluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion is a new application for data
assimilation. Most, if not all, data-assimilation problems in combustion are
strongly nonlinear, likely non-Gaussian, and very high-dimensional. This
presents challenges to current data assimilation methods. Although nonlinear
non-Gaussian data assimilation is becoming reality in some fields (e.g.,
meteorology, oceanography, and geosciences) with increasing computer power and
advances in mathematical and statistical techniques, these data assimilation
methods, unfortunately, are often subject to one or more constraints. For
example, among successful data assimilation methods that can address
nonlinearity and non-Gaussianity are the maximum likelihood ensemble filter
(MLEF) and implicit particle filters (IPF). However, the former still implicitly
assumes Gaussian probability density distribution at some points in the
algorithm and the latter can be catastrophically expensive for high-dimensional
problems. Therefore, to ensure a successful data assimilation application to
combustion problems, new data assimilation methods must be created to
effectively address nonlinearity and non-Gaussianity, efficiently solve high-
dimensional systems, and simultaneously achieve high performance on
supercomputers. This project aims to develop a new adaptive data assimilation
method based on MLEF and IPF for nonlinear, non-Gaussian, high-dimensional
systems. The new method will be demonstrated on a large-eddy simulation of flame
in a slot burner of interest to combustion science and engineering.