* 1723314
* Dissertation Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Stephanie Adams, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,317,435.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Dissertation Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of
diversification of engineering faculty poses serious threats to the replacement
of an aging engineering faculty, the retention of underrepresented minority
students, the development of a diverse workforce, and the well-being of the
nation. While there have been many initiatives to increase the representation of
underrepresented minority faculty, systematic efforts have not been designed to
address the completion of doctoral degrees amongst this population. Data show
that students, particularly underrepresented students, are leaving before
obtaining a degree because of the long, arduous, and uncertain road to
graduation. These data also suggest that individuals, graduate schools, and
society would benefit from efforts to reduce time-to-degree and degree
completion rates. Therefore, the primary goal of this project is to offer a
practical and timely experience particularly for underrepresented doctoral
students in engineering (African American, Native American, Pacific Island and
Hispanic American) to address issues germane to shortening time-to-degree and
degree completion rates. The specific aims are to: 1) conduct research to
understand the motivational factors that promote and detract from degree
progress and 2) to develop and offer the Dissertation Institute (Institute) to
provide underrepresented doctoral students in engineering with motivating,
helpful strategies for avoiding pitfalls that prolong completion times,
particularly those at the dissertation proposal preparation and dissertation
completion stages. Current efforts to support underrepresented doctoral students
have tended to be local opportunities within specific programs or universities.
This project is different from existing efforts because it will systematically
examine and positively impact the motivational factors that promote dissertation
completion across multiple sites to consider and incorporate contextually
relevant factors such that the Institute is transferable across contexts and not
limited to local implementation. This transferability is critical to developing
a sustainable future program to support underrepresented students. This project
addresses strategic goals of the National Science Foundation (NSF) and critical
needs of the nation related to enhanced global competitiveness and an improved
national economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is grounded in the
expectancy-value theory of motivation and will result in two sets of outcomes:
research outcomes and direct benefits to participants. Using quantitative and
qualitative research methods, the research outcomes will include: 1)
contextually relevant and nationally representative research-based data we can
use to inform the Institute's design regarding the success beliefs and values
that contribute to and detract from students' dissertation success, 2) measures
of Institute effectiveness in terms of participant's increased beliefs about
succeeding in and the value of completing a dissertation, and 3) a list of
variables to which academics should pay attention when designing transferable
versions of the Institute. To achieve the outcomes of our study, we have
designed a multi-method, multi-phased study. We will examine and draw on
stakeholder needs to develop an Institute that is consistent with literature
suggestions and effective practices but also contextually relevant for
participants. Finally, we will comparatively analyze the data across sites to
allow us to identify the key elements on which we should focus in considering
transferability of the Institute to additional sites and/or through online
means. The research will directly impact approximately 170 underrepresented
doctoral students and will contribute to the long-term sustainability of other
Institute models. In addition to improving basic writing habits and skills,
Institute participants will gain practical strategies for: 1) distinguishing
between behaviors that foster or hinder success, 2) increasing engagement in
positive behaviors and eliminating destructive behaviors, 3) developing plans to
maneuver through the dissertation phase from selecting a topic to completing the
dissertation, and 4) establishing realistic program completion goals and plans
for implementing those goals. As a result of participation, students will gain
specific skills in synthesizing and evaluating findings from the literature to
aid in developing a dissertation proposal or for writing a dissertation. They
will learn how to identify helpful, credible resources (people, physical and
online) and how to use them effectively. Participants will also learn about
developing and writing conference papers and publishable manuscripts from the
dissertation, an important part of being ready for future employment. In
combination, the project outcomes will have immediate impacts on participants
while setting the stage for longer-term benefits.