* 1723608
* THEMIS.COG: Theoretical and Empirical Modeling of Identity and Sentiments in Collaborative Groups
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Kimberly Rogers, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,748.00

The proposed research will provide new insights into the dynamics of self-
organized collaborations, in which people come together organically to work on a
common problem, without prompting by a third party. Understanding the social
forces behind self-organized collaboration is increasingly important in today's
society. Technological and social innovations are increasingly generated through
informal, distributed collaboration processes, rather than in formal,
hierarchical organizations. This project will use a data-driven approach to
explore the social and psychological mechanisms that motivate self-organized
collaborations and determine their likelihood of success or failure, focusing on
the example of open, collaborative software development in online collaborative
networks like GitHub (github.com). We offer a mathematically precise model for
predicting and testing collaborative dynamics, which builds on a long tradition
of sociological theory and research. By accounting for noise and uncertainty in
processing social events, this work will make it possible to study the reach of
social psychological mechanisms to forms of interaction other than face-to-face
communication, where interpretations of events are far less certain, and to
cross-cultural interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds on a
powerful sociological theory of group processes known as affect control theory
(ACT) and a recent probabilistic generalization of it, Bayesian affect control
theory (BayesACT). BayesACT applies insights from Bayesian probability theory to
explain how people learn and adjust meanings through social experience, and show
how stable interaction dynamics emerge from individuals' uncertain and noisy
perceptions of their own and others' identities. The model rests on the idea
that humans are motivated in their social interactions by affective alignment:
They strive for their social experiences to be coherent at a deep, emotional
level with their sense of identity and the cultural beliefs they share with
others. BayesACT makes explicit predictions about online interactions in a
collaborative group, based on the notion that each group member holds an
identity that is learnable, mathematically describable, and complementary to
those of other group members. These predictions allow for deeper and more
focused data mining, enabling the identification of interactions of specific
types in order to answer questions about the very nature of collaboration within
online collaborative networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generated
through this project will be widely disseminated online, and through
professional presentations and publications. In addition, the project will
provide training and mentoring for a postdoctoral fellow and a diverse group of
undergraduate research assistants. It will also contribute to education in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made as part of Round 4 of the
Digging Into Data Challenge, an international funding opportunity designed to
foster research collaboration across countries and to encourage innovative
approaches to analyzing large data sets in the social sciences and humanities.
The U.S based researchers will collaborate with scholars in Canada and Germany
to achieve the goals of this project.