* 1723280
* High Performance Research Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* John Largier, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2019
* USD 368,366.00

The University of California Davis Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML) will establish
a fiber-optic local area network that is high-performance, fault-tolerant, and
adaptable. BML is located in a remote region of the Northern California coast,
despite the remote location, BML has access to available bandwidth up to 10 GB/s
through AT&T's fiber service, comparable to bandwidth offerings in major
metropolitan areas but the aged, internal local area network infrastructure
(developed when the WAN bandwidth was 1.5Mbps) is a severe limitation. BML's
fiber internet connection is currently analogous to a "new superhighway",
however BML's internal connection to the outside (WAN) is analogous to a "bumpy
gravel road" slowing down the advantage that the external high speed
infrastructure can provide. The new high performance internal architecture is
designed to support research, instruction, public education, and data
acquisition/dissemination; both across the facility and beyond. BML is situated
in a scientifically relevant location. It is the primary open-coast research
facility for research in upwelling environments along the California coast.
Sophisticated technical resources include ample bandwidth (external internet
access), network storage, video conferencing capability, access to long-term
atmospheric, oceanographic, and biological data, BML- and agency-operated sensor
networks, an ocean-observing node, University library resources, seawater
system, pathogen containment facilities, climate change research facilities,
access to the 362-acre Bodega Marine Reserve, and specialized laboratory
instruments and microscopy.

Enhanced network capacity provides both UC Davis researchers, visiting
researchers, post docs, and students with bandwidth sufficient to easily
explore, discover, analyze and utilize data at other sites as well as local data
sources. Further, education and outreach programs, both at BML and elsewhere
will benefit directly from the enhanced infrastructure. Public education
programs will be able to disseminate science directly to the public and public
visitors to BML will learn about research via high-quality, interactive
computer-driven interpretive displays that will access data products across the
local area network. Research at UC Davis BML is highly interdisciplinary
particularly in the impacts of climate change on ecosystems, with a strong
linkage between physical land-sea interface data (e.g. oceanographic,
meterological) and biological responses. Strong collaborations between the
Bodega Ocean Observing Node and the Bodega Ocean Acidification Research group
means that large physical data sets are shared and integrated into biological
(genomic and transcriptomic) data on a routine basis. The critically endangered
white abalone captive breeding program under a federal ESA permit is located at
BML and generates very large High Definition and 360-degree video and image
files for analysis of larvae and feeding by broodstock. For data of this scale,
the current LAN inhibits routine file transfer or backup during working hours.
Often backup or simple file transfer between labs can take overnight. Examples
of 'big data' challenges at BML include accessing computing clusters for genome
and transcriptome analyses of populations of marine invertebrates as well as
proteomic analyses from endangered species (white abalone) for assessment of
reproductive conditioning. High-resolution numerical models and management of
high-resolution ocean-observing data (e.g., high frequency radar, pCO2, O2,
conductivity, fluorescence, etc.) provide the basis for biological responses to
climate change as related to changes in normal upwelling patterns.
Interdisciplinary environmental research intensity, diversity and collaborations
are growing rapidly in part due to the coalescence of more than 90 marine
science and policy faculty at UC Davis as part of the new Coastal and Marine
Sciences Institute.