* 1723272
* Simulation and Inference Algorithms for Stochastic Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Harish Bhat, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

In fields such as neuroscience, biochemistry, molecular and cellular biology,
statistical physics and finance, many researchers have invested time to build
first-principle mathematical models. Stochastic differential equations (SDE), a
subset of such models, naturally account for the combined effects of
nonlinearity and noise, effects observed in many systems of contemporary
interest. Such models often have large numbers of parameters that cannot be
directly observed. Researchers collect data from the system they are studying
and seek to use this data to infer parameters in their models. Alternatively,
researchers who begin with data from a particular system typically desire
forecasts regarding the future behavior of the system and, especially in
scientific contexts, explanations as to why the system behaves the way that it
does. In this project, the PI will develop algorithms, methods, and open-source
software packages that significantly improve a researcher's ability to infer
parameters in stochastic models, and to develop stochastic models with strong
predictive and/or explanatory power. The new methods will naturally accommodate
data with one or more pathologies, such as irregular observation times, large
volume, and non-Gaussian (i.e., heavy-tailed) features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
crux of the inference problem is the computation of the likelihood function
associated with time series observations of an SDE model. Prior work has shown
that, among deterministic methods for this inference problem, methods based on
Fokker-Planck solvers are the most accurate. For SDE driven by standard Brownian
motion, density tracking by quadrature (DTQ) computes likelihoods orders of
magnitude faster than comparable Fokker-Planck solvers for the same level of
error. Building on this foundation, this work seeks to develop DTQ-based
inference methods that are more accurate, efficient and scalable than existing
techniques. The PI will generalize DTQ to Levy-driven SDE, increase DTQ's
efficiency through higher-order approximations, design scalable adjoint methods
to compute gradients of the likelihood, and apply these adjoint methods to
maximize log likelihoods and log posteriors. The PI will also conduct a thorough
comparison of SDE inference techniques, including approximate inference through
methods such as expectation maximization and variational Bayes. A key part of
the project is the development of software infrastructure in the form of open-
source packages for use with frameworks such as R, Python, and Apache Spark.
These packages will enable all interested researchers, especially those with no
advanced training in stochastics, to make use of DTQ-based simulation and
inference methods. All new codes developed in this project will be thoroughly
documented and tested. The PIs also plan to release the software developed as
open source and build a user community around the language by ensuring that
interested researchers are able to contribute to the codebase of the software
developed. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This aspect is of
special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this award.