* 1723524
* Partnership for Undergraduate Life Sciences Fellows Annual Project Coordination meeting
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Kathryn Miller, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 01/31/2018
* USD 41,036.00

An award has been made to Washington University in St. Louis to conduct a
workshop from February 13-16, 2017 to promote the mission of the Partnership for
Undergraduate Life Sciences Education (PULSE). PULSE is a national network of
current and former department chairs and administrators from a variety of
institutional types. The PULSE Fellows seek to catalyze improvement in
undergraduate life science education through promoting adoption of the
recommendations in the Vision and Change Report (2011). This important report
highlights that biology students are more successful when they learn underlying
organizing concepts, rather than an accumulation of facts and information; when
they develop important skills such as effective communication of ideas,
designing experiments and interpreting data; when they learn in classrooms that
engage them actively in the process of constructing their own understanding; and
when they have the opportunity to participate in high impact practices such as
undergraduate research or internships. Despite this wealth of data, most biology
departments have not embraced this approach, but progress is being made. PULSE
has already worked with over 180 institutions since 2013 and seeks to expand
this number significantly over the next few years.

The next PULSE workshop will be held at HHMI Headquarters in Chevy Chase, MD and
will include approximately 50 PULSE Fellows, invited experts in institutional
change and effective teaching and learning, and several facilitators. The goal
of this meeting is to ensure that PULSE's multiple programs are well coordinated
for maximum effect and that they will be assessed appropriately to identify
interventions most effective in catalyzing improvement in undergraduate
education. The PULSE project seeks to promote department-wide change in
educational practices. PULSE works with departmental faculty, including
departmental leaders, to help them reach consensus about their vision. PULSE is
also testing theories of change by assessing the long-term impact of its
activities on changes in departmental pedagogies, curriculum, and co-curricular
programs. By establishing which types of interventions are most effective at
motivating sustained change, the project will enhance understanding of change
strategies that advance the goal of better teaching and learning in life
sciences and across STEM. PULSE's agenda will be measurably promoted by an in-
person meeting of Fellows to coordinate their activities, to plan for transition
to a financially self-sustaining organization, and to further integrate newer
Fellows into the organization's programs. With the goal of tipping the balance
in biology departments toward adoption of best educational practices, PULSE's
programs have the potential to accelerate the reform of undergraduate biology
education nationwide.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences.
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).