* 1723744
* EAGER: MAKER: Making Prosthetics for Kids - Socially Relevant Making to Catalyze Diversity and Engagement in STEM Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Wilson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 298,186.00

This exploratory research project is studying socially-relevant Making in the
context of an on campus&lt;br/&gt;university Makerspace. Project studies are
developing best practice models of how&lt;br/&gt;informal STEM learning through
Making can be leveraged to improve the effectiveness of both&lt;br/&gt;informal
and formal learning approaches, as well as to increase retention and
broaden&lt;br/&gt;participation in STEM education for students and faculty. This
is being studied across both&lt;br/&gt;secondary and post-secondary levels in
partnership with a local engineering-focused high school.&lt;br/&gt;Project
research is grounded in a specific socially-relevant challenge problem:
designing and&lt;br/&gt;fabricating prosthetic hands for children who need them.
Challenge problem activities are&lt;br/&gt;connected directly to real world
context and outcomes in partnership with a nonprofit&lt;br/&gt;organization that
specializes in facilitating and providing 3D printed recreational
prosthetic&lt;br/&gt;hands free of charge for children with limb
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research is defining novel
integrations of informal and formal STEM learning pathways,&lt;br/&gt;providing
case studies, learning materials, lessons learned, and scalable design templates
for&lt;br/&gt;learning ecosystems at other institutions. The focus on design
thinking supports learning&lt;br/&gt;benefits from cross-disciplinary
interaction, particularly in interdisciplinary peer learning of&lt;br/&gt;STEM
concepts, exposing non-STEM learners to STEM concepts, and disrupting
traditional&lt;br/&gt;teacher-student roles. Project outcomes are catalyzing and
sustaining diverse learner transitions&lt;br/&gt;to a Maker STEM-based affinity
identity by identifying best practice design patterns for
learning,&lt;br/&gt;focused by the challenge problem, which can be applied more
generally to foster synergetic&lt;br/&gt;interactions between formal and
informal learning within educational environments.