* 1723253
* Collaborative Research: The Texas A&amp;M System AGEP Alliance: A Model to Advance Historically Underrepresented Minorities in the STEM Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Lee Clapp, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 562,907.00

Four Texas A&amp;M System Universities, The Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU)
College Station, TAMU Corpus Christi, TAMU Kingsville and Prairie View A&amp;M
University, are collaborating in the Texas A&amp;M System Alliance to develop,
implement and study a model to develop, implement and study a model for
historically underrepresented minority STEM doctoral candidates completing
degrees, transitioning into postdoctoral fellowships, and then successfully
entering and progressing in faculty careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alliance
was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552) The AGEP program seeks to
advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and
success of historically underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM
education research fields. AGEP Transformation Alliances develop, replicate or
reproduce; implement and study, via integrated educational and social science
research, models to transform the dissertator phase of doctoral education,
postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions within and
across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or STEM education research
careers. This Alliance is also funded by the NSF Research Traineeship Program
(NRT) and the NSF's Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM
achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM
faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn
from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate
and full professors occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year
colleges and universities and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most
research-intensive institutions. The Texas A&amp;M System AGEP Alliance has
potential to advance a model to improve the success of URM graduate students and
post-doctoral scholars as they enter and advance in the STEM
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas A&amp;M System AGEP Alliance is
developing, implementing and studying a new model for advancing dissertating
STEM doctoral candidates as they complete their doctorates, enter postdoctoral
fellowships, and succeed in faculty positions. Participants include women and
men who are either African American, Hispanic American or Native American and
who are majoring in the fields of Biomedical Engineering, Chemistry, Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Marine Biology, and
Wildlife Science. The model development, implementation and testing, focuses on
a unique set of interventions, including using individualized development plans
for participants as they transition from dissertator to postdoctoral scholar to
faculty; providing participants with professional development opportunities
related to communication, writing, networking and job preparation/transition;
supporting participants with mentors at the institutional and field-specific
expert levels; and offering participants opportunities to experience academic
culture and activities at historically black colleges and universities. The
integrated research will address the effects of stigmatization on male and
female adults who are non-STEM and STEM African Americans and Hispanic
Americans. The formative and summative evaluation is being conducted by Drs.
Erin Burr and Kimberle Kelly, from the Oak Ridge Associated Universities. There
is an external advisory committee which will provide feedback to the team on the
effectiveness and outcomes of the project, as well as a separate external
advisory group for the integrated research studies.