* 1723635
* Bridging the Disciplinary Gaps in Cybersecurity Curricula through General Education, High Impact Practices, and Training for Incoming Freshmen
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Hongyi Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,994.00

Experts agree that cybersecurity is a multifaceted problem that should be
addressed through an interdisciplinary framework; however, most of cybersecurity
curricula are offered within specific disciplines. Developing interdisciplinary
programs can be challenging with issues such as: student isolation, a disconnect
between faculty from the disciplinary programs, a lack of coordination in course
delivery, gaps in providing student support, and a lack of a basic
interdisciplinary foundation among faculty and students alike. To address these
challenges, the "Bridging the Disciplinary Gaps in Cybersecurity Curricula
through General Education, High Impact Practices, and Training for Incoming
Freshman" project will fully integrate student-focused high impact practices
into an interdisciplinary cybersecurity major and minor at Old Dominion
University. In addition, an interdisciplinary cybersecurity training module for
incoming freshmen will be developed and delivered, and another interdisciplinary
general education cybersecurity course will be made available through open
education resources (OER). Developing an interdisciplinary general education
cybersecurity course will provide students the foundation they need to learn
about the topic through a multi-faceted lens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating
high impact practices into interdisciplinary curricula is a novel approach that
will bolster the quality of cybersecurity academic programs. These will include
learning communities, service learning, internships, undergraduate research
projects, and e-Portfolios. The learning communities will include freshmen
learning communities, sophomore learning communities, and living learning
communities. Each learning community will have a peer mentor assigned. A process
will be developed so cybersecurity majors can develop an electronic portfolio in
their first-year general studies cybersecurity course, providing a framework for
usage over the course of their studies. The development of an open education
resource (OER) general studies cybersecurity course will provide a framework
that other higher education institutions can use to develop similar courses.
Integrating high impact practices into the curricula will provide a framework
that can be replicated in other institutions. Graduates of these curricula will
be able to fill those occupational cybersecurity positions that require an
interdisciplinary background in multiple fields, as well as strong
communications and critical thinking skills. In addition, relationships with
regional agencies/employers will be formalized to develop service learning,
undergraduate research, and internship opportunities.