* 1723559
* EAGER:MAKER: Piloting a BioDesign Maker Space and Curriculum for K-12 STEM Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Paul Sproll, Rhode Island School of Design
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 279,110.00

Researchers from the Rhode Island School of Design will create a BioDesign Maker
Space, providing an immersive environment for K-12 students and other learners
to engage in hands-on design projects that cultivate a working knowledge of
biology and natural systems. The space will leverage strategies from biophilic
design, including features and patterns observed in the natural world shown to
improve student focus, productivity and wellbeing. A BioDesign curriculum,
developed for use in the space, will explore the use of ecosystem services to
design solutions to urban issues such as air and water pollution and food
security. Students from area public schools will receive the cumulative benefits
of learning in a biophilic space and an approach to STEM learning that
emphasizes practical, inquiry-based, design and design thinking methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this initiative is in its bio-
centric approach to the design and construction of learning, living and work
environments, leading to improvements in human and environmental health. Through
new perspectives on the presence of nature in human spaces, and the power of
studio/Makerspace pedagogy, the proposed effort introduces an innovative
approach to STEM education that identifies the human-nature connection as
integral to engaging students in STEM fields, and preparing them to meet social
and environmental challenges. A catalog of BioDesign Maker Space strategies, as
well as curriculum modules, will be widely
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a part of NSF's Maker Dear
Colleague Letter (DCL) portfolio (NSF 15-086), a collaborative investment of
Directorates for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE),
Education and Human Resources (EHR) and Engineering (ENG).