* 1723160
* Prediction and characterization of novel Earth-forming minerals using advanced ab initio simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* John Parise, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 346,000.00

Humans have greatly advanced in the study of the outer space and inner workings
of atomic matter, but the very planet upon which we live remains a mystery.
Hidden from us and impossible to probe directly, Earth's deep interior has
defined the face our planet and profoundly influences our daily life (through
earthquakes, volcanism, and the magnetic field that saves life from solar wind).
Progress in studies of the Earth's deep interior can only be made through a
combination of seismology, geochemistry, and mineral physics. Computational
mineral physics has made great progress recently, with the development of
quantum-mechanical methods allowing one to study complex chemistry pertinent to
the Earth, and make unbiased predictions of novel chemical phenomena that take
place under high pressures and temperatures typical of planetary interiors. This
project aims toward a better understanding Earth's chemistry and physics with
the help of advanced quantum-mechanical methods. Such methods are quite
universal and recently have led to breakthroughs in the computational design of
novel materials, which have a potentially transformative value for our society.
This research bridges several the fields of geosciences, materials science,
physics, and chemistry, and focuses on problems that excite curiosity of humans
("what is the Earth made of", "how was the Earth formed"). Such studies are
impossible without the energy of young scientists who will get unique training
in this multidisciplinary field of science and will be perfectly equipped to
serve the world in any of these fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the
Earth's deep interior is one of the most fascinating fields of modern research.
Currently, based on several decades continuing works by geoscientists,
reasonable mineralogical models of the deep Earth are finally constructed.
Thermal and compositional variations in the deep Earth can be well estimated by
data from seismic tomography and mineral physics. Mineral physics provides
information about the physical properties of Earth-forming minerals together
with their dependence on temperature and composition, and phase diagrams of
mineral systems. Exploration of the Earth-forming minerals is one of the most
critical issues in Earth sciences. Despite tremendous progress in experimental
high-pressure techniques, most physical measurements at pressures of the Earth's
deep mantle and core are problematic. Recently, (Mg,Fe)SiO3 perovskite, long
believed to be stable in the Earth's deep lower mantle, was found to decompose
into MgSiO3 perovksite and an Fe-rich hexagonal phase (H-phase, the crystal
structure of which is still debatable). The PI's preliminary results show the
surprising result that both ilmenite MgSiO3 and perovskite MgSiO3 are
thermodynamically unstable at 30 GPa 0 Kelvin in the Mg-Si-O system, and no
other ternary stable compounds exist at 30 GPa at all, which indicates a very
important unexpected phenomenon can be observed and significant implications for
enigmatic seismic features might be expected. Furthermore, besides the well-
known seismic discontinuities at 410, 520, 660 km, another seismic discontinuity
at 800 km is also seen in widely varying regions, but so far has no reasonable
explanation, and another unknown phase might be expected. Minerals in the mantle
are probably more complex than what we know currently. Theoretical simulations
based on quantum mechanics have played an increasingly important role in Earth
sciences. Therefore, the PI will apply the most advanced and recently developed
tools in computational physics to address problems related to the mantle, core
and core-mantle boundary region.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on three problems:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) Methodology development toward the prediction of materials with
variable stoichiometry in ternary and even higher multi-component systems. The
PI's recent work has shown that the prediction of binary systems based on the
evolutionary approach is tractable. Since a number of important minerals in the
context of earth sciences have puzzling stoichiometry, the remaining challenge
is to predict stable ternary, quaternary and even higher multi-component systems
at high P-T conditions. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Prediction of Earth-forming minerals in
the Mg-Fe-Ca-Al-Si-O and Fe-Si-C-S-H-O systems under given P-T conditions. Since
the perovskite and post-perovskite phases in the real mantle have complex
compositions, additional elements, like Ca, Al and C, can also affect the
structure and stability field of phases. Therefore, crystal structure
predictions for multicomponent systems will be addressed. Properties of Earth-
forming minerals in the mantle and core will be computed. The nature of
unexplained seismic discontinuities and H-phase are expected to be uncovered and
some novel minerals are highly likely to be discovered in the mantle and
core.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Chemical reactions between the mantle and core. This study
should greatly deepen our understanding of iron-based alloys, will lead to
better understanding of chemistry and mineralogy of the Earth's core, as well as
its peculiar properties (such as strong seismic anisotropy). Understanding of
possible reactions at the core-mantle boundary region may shed light on some of
the anomalous properties of that region. &lt;br/&gt;In short, this project will
look at materials of the most enigmatic regions of the Earth using advanced
quantum-mechanical simulations. Central to this study is the PI's evolutionary
algorithm USPEX, interfaced with first-principles electronic structure
calculations. This approach has produced many important predictions in
mineralogy and physics, successfully confirmed by subsequent experiments.