* 1723687
* SaTC: EDU: Advancing Cybersecurity Education through Self-Learning Cybersecurity Training Kit
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Swaroop Ghosh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 308,000.00

There is an exponential growth in the number of cyber-attack incidents resulting
in significant financial loss and national security concerns. A secure
cyberspace has been designated as one of the National Academy of Engineering
Grand Challenges in engineering. Broadly, security threats are targeted on
software programs, operating systems and networks with the intention to launch
cyber-attacks. There is a need to increase student-centered, inquiry-based
teaching approaches in cybersecurity as these are known to improve student
learning outcomes. A comprehensive understanding can be achieved with a hands-on
course on cybersecurity, where students can learn key concepts and get hands-on
experience making changes to hardware, software, operating systems, and, network
policies. This project proposes a self-learning, hands-on Cybersecurity Training
(CST) Kit, which will be accompanied by Do-It-Yourself training modules that can
be used to model and investigate cybersecurity issues and strategies for
prevention. It can be customized to a wide range of cybersecurity stakeholders,
including undergraduate and graduate students, K-12 science and technology
teachers, industry professionals and the community at large. This project will
advance cybersecurity education among students and professionals through the use
the CST Kit and training modules, which will allow students to immediately apply
newly acquired knowledge as part of the learning
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CST kit will cover all aspects of
cybersecurity issues including, hardware, software, operating system and network
security. A 3-tier coursework will be developed to provide cybersecurity
education to Junior and Senior-level undergraduate students, graduate students
and professionals. Pilot Tier-1 and Tier-2 courses will be introduced to assess
the learning modules and the CST Kit. The Kit hardware and software will be
customizable to allow for easy adoption in a wide range of academic and
professional levels. The components of the CST Kit will be used to foster
interest in cybersecurity with underrepresented and underserved students at the
high school and community college level. Approaches for cybersecurity education
will be enhanced by increased student engagement though the proposed Classroom
Cybersecurity Challenges. The developed training modules combined with the
Challenges activity will provide quality curriculum for K-12 computer science
courses linking computer science and broader areas of STEM education.