* 1723102
* A Remote-Video Artificial Stream System for the Ecological Research and Education Center, University of Kentucky
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Philip Crowley, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 414,649.00

Rapidly advancing technology has made important scientific issues and questions
that were previously out of reach accessible to contemporary research. The
ability to visualize, measure, and test the understanding of the movements and
spatial distributions of animals in real time and space is especially important
at a time of rapid environmental change, with altered habitats and seasonal
patterns and important consequences for organisms and ecosystems. Performing
experiments that mimic natural conditions and interactions with built-in
repetition can demonstrate patterns and evaluate predictions to a very high
standard of scientific rigor. This new stream system will allow this level of
repetition in multiple stream channels to document the behavior of stream
organisms like fish, crayfish, snakes and their food very precisely. The
behavior and distributions of these and other stream organisms determines
whether certain populations that may be important for ecosystem function or
recreational use will survive or perhaps spread beyond their present limits and
displace native species. Knowing how these organisms fare when faced with
natural and human-caused disturbances like floods, droughts, chemical
pollutants, and sedimentation requires just this kind of facility to obtain
clear answers. This work involves a close connection with students in local
schools, who in some cases will be able to participate directly in these studies
or can watch behavior of animals in the stream system from their classrooms.

This project builds on the emergence of the Ecological Research and Education
Center (EREC) field station at the University of Kentucky (see
http://darwin.uky.edu/~erec/) by incorporating enhanced analytical capabilities
through the construction of a new facility. The goals are to accelerate the
development of research programs already associated with the station and its
field research area ERF (= Ecological Research Facility) and to attract
additional productive researchers and strengthen links with other universities,
colleges, and K-12 schools in the region. An artificial stream system will be
constructed with remote-controlled video that will be flexible enough to
accommodate a diversity of questions and focal organisms and will allow control
over physical conditions essential to mimicking the corresponding natural
environments. The system will have enough independent streams to allow two or
even three studies to run simultaneously at modest levels of replication or one
study at high replication. The video tracking, controlled for position and zoom
from off-site, can transmit high-resolution video from one or all 10 cameras to
a single video screen for real-time day/night observation, storage, and
analysis. A computer linked to the system by an underground fiber-optic cable
will enable visualization of behavior in the streams in real time, store the
large amount of data generated, and facilitate data analysis and sharing with
collaborators, schools, and other researchers. This combination of capabilities
will allow rapid advances in our understanding of the under-studied animals and
ecosystems of streams, a high priority in Kentucky's stream-rich landscapes.