* 1723998
* CRCNS US-German-Israeli Collaborative Research Proposal: Hierarchical Coordination of Complex Actions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Dagmar Sternad, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 10/31/2022
* USD 319,919.00

There are many arenas where humans outperform machines. For example, when
coordinated interaction with the physical environment is needed, humans (and
animals) vastly out-perform modern robots. This occurs despite the biological
systems having far slower 'hardware' and 'wetware' and much greater complexity
than even the most modern robots. This research project seeks to understand the
role of complexity in human sensory and motor performance. Human walking under
challenging balance conditions will be studied and the use of canes to enhance
stability will be included. The investigators emphasis on learning to balance in
challenging environments should lead to new rehabilitation therapies (with or
without robotic assistance) to aid recovery of balance and walking (e.g., after
stroke). The researchers will create educational units suitable for online
presentation to K-12 students and will devise exhibits based on their research
for the Museum of Science in Boston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis
to be tested in this project is that complex movements involving physical
interaction with objects are organized as a hierarchy formed of modules or
primitives. Experiments will study how unimpaired humans learn to walk on narrow
beams. Beams of different roundness will vary the challenge. Hand-held canes
will alter the available support (like training wheels on a child's bicycle).
Computer simulations combined with machine learning will study the benefits and
drawbacks of organization as a hierarchy. New mathematical tools will be
developed and tested to see if they enable insightful description of human
performance in challenging conditions. The research involves a multinational
collaboration among scientists from the U.S., Israel, and Germany, each with
complementary expertise. The bridge between experimental and theoretical work
and the diverse Principal Investigators will help to attract women into the
traditionally male-dominated fields of computational neuroscience, robotics and
control engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Companion projects are being funded by
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF) and the US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation (BSF).