* 1723859
* Expanding HBCU Participation at the National Association of Black Geoscientists Annual Technical Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 49,800.00

This award will support approximately 60 student to attend the Annual National
Association of Black Geoscientists (NABG) conference. The meeting will take
place September 6-9, 2017 in Atlanta, GA. Participants will be recruited from
two dozen environmental science degree programs at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities. Students in these programs are historically under-represented
at the NABG annual conference. Thus, the objective is to expand the disciplinary
representation of NABG to include more people of color interested in
environmental issues. Expanding NABG membership in environmental sciences will
also significantly increase membership in NABG, enhancing the stability and
long-term viability of the organization.

A primary aim of this project is to engage faculty and students in HBCU
environmental sciences programs and aid their participation in a national
conference of importance to placing them in the 21st Century geosciences
workforce. The project will provide support for key faculty in these programs
and their students to attend the conference, develop a network of persons of
color with whom they may interact going forward, and become active members in a
vibrant minority-serving STEM organization. Students will also receive important
instruction in development of non-technical competencies (also known as soft
skills). "Soft skills" are defined as desirable life and employment skills
crucial to workplace success and career progress. This project offers support
for participating students from all academic levels to attend the pre-meeting
"soft skills" workshop and opportunity to practice learned skills throughout the
conference through interactions with professional attendees.