* 1723588
* Quantifying Energetic Electron Precipitation Driven By Magnetospheric Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Wen Li, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 511,518.00

Waves exist in space plasmas just as in the oceans and the atmosphere. In these
plasmas, collisions between charged particles are rare. As a result, plasma
waves are a major means of transferring energy from one charged particle
population to another. Charged particles "surf" the waves. To first order, those
that are moving slightly faster than the waves are energized, while those moving
slower lose energy to the waves causing them to grow. There are a wide variety
of plasma waves with different properties and different source mechanisms. Three
of these (plasmaspheric hiss, chorus, and electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC)
waves) are widely believed to play significant roles in the depletion of the
electron radiation belts but how this happens and how each contributes with
local time and radial distance are still-open and strongly debated questions of
fundamental importance. During their interactions with the waves, electrons are
scattered out of their trapped orbits and sent on trajectories into the dense
atmosphere where they are lost through collisions. The work will independently
examine experimental observations and, most importantly, use theoretical tools
to understand the interactions leading to the precipitation. The science
questions to be addressed in this proposal are particularly important, since
electron precipitation leads to chemical changes in the upper atmosphere, and is
critical in regulating ring current and radiation belt electron dynamics. The
grant will support the further training and development of a promising female
early-career scientist. The results will be useful to the broader space physics
and upper atmosphere communities, to researchers studying the chemistry of the
middle atmosphere, and for space environment applications, such as active
mitigation techniques for both natural and artificial radiation in space.

Testing theoretical ideas about particular wave-particle interactions and the
variations in the space environment that effect them has been difficult because
the waves are measured at large radial distances in the magnetosphere while the
electron precipitation that they produce must be viewed from low-earth orbit. To
complicate matters, the mix of plasma waves depends on the radial distance and
magnetic local time but in addition is an as yet to be determined function of
the severity of space weather storming, and the phase of the storm. The
principal investigator (PI) has developed an innovative technique to analyze the
physical relationship between wave intensity and wave-driven electron pitch
angle scattering loss, which can be directly implemented using conjugate
observations from near-equatorial and low-altitude satellites. This project,
which uses both theory and observation, will provide a definitive understanding
of the quantitative contribution of each type of plasma wave to electron
precipitation within various energy ranges and in different L-MLT regions. The
results will provide a highly important contribution to our wider understanding
of the mechanisms that regulate the hazardous radiation environment surrounding
the Earth.