* 1723141
* Establishment of a core facility for genome editing at the Marine Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Joshua Rosenthal, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2020
* USD 184,235.00

Model organisms are important to biological research because they enable refined
hypothesis testing through precise, repetitive experimental manipulations.
Historically, marine labs have played a leading role in providing a broad range
of animal models that have been used to answer some of the most fundamental
questions in biology, and neuroscience. For example, a fluorescent protein
isolated from jellyfish has revolutionized our ability to image the mammalian
nervous system and a nerve cell from squid has taught us how electrical signals
are created in the brain. Biological research benefits when it embraces
diversity. This is because each of the tens of millions of species that exist on
earth offers a different insight into a specific biological process. Marine
species have existed for much longer than their terrestrial counterparts, and
have evolved to occupy far different environments. Accordingly, they offer
unique opportunities for science. None of the current major genetic models is a
marine organism. This initiative will create a genome editing core facility
(GEC) at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL http://www.mbl.edu) in Woods Hole
which will catalyze the production and development of genetically tractable
marine models. This will enable new avenues of genetic research on diverse
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having the facility at the Marine Biological
Laboratory will maximize its effectiveness and impact. Every year over 1500
scientists and students visit the Marine Biological Laboratory to conduct
research or attend courses, and all of them will have access to the genome
editing core facility. The core facility's purpose is to allow the MBL's large
community of researchers and students to deliver genome editing reagents to
embryos from diverse marine organisms. The facility will consist of three
microinjection rigs, apparatus to fabricate injection pipettes, and an
electroporator. The rigs will be flexible. They were designed by expert
embryologists with years of experience injecting marine embryos and will
accommodate specimens that differ in size and material properties. GEC will be
housed in the Marine Resource Center, a facility equipped with state-of-the-art
equipment to culture a wide variety of marine organisms, including the genetic
models that we propose to develop. Because the facility will be open to the
entire MBL community, it will be used for both research and education. GEC will
support the MBL's strategic aim of creating genetically tractable marine model
organisms to catalyze the next generation of novel research in marine biology.