* 1723746
* SaTC: EDU: Establishing Digital Citizenship by Implementing Cyber Safety Curriculum with Middle School Students
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Weichao Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The project from the University of North Carolina at Charlotte will prepare
students to demonstrate digital citizenship and cyber safety. The goal of this
project is to increase cyber safety knowledge and skills among middle school
students, teachers, and technology facilitators, while creating cyber safety
awareness among parents of middle school students. This project will assist in
designing a suite of instructional materials and application activities (e.g.,
e-learning modules, online course and videos) dedicated to bridge the gap in
cyber safety education in schools. The project will also provide
interdisciplinary research experiences in cyber safety, technology education,
and pedagogical practices to both graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address the following
objectives: 1) develop five e-learning modules on cyber safety topics (e.g.,
cyber bullying, digital footprints, digital identity, digital privacy and
digital Netiquette) to communicate the importance of digital citizenship to the
students; (2) design and deliver an online course on digital citizenship to 20
technology facilitators and 30 middle school teachers; (3) apply the train-the-
trainer model by which the technology facilitators will train the teachers in
their schools and classroom teachers train the students after the summer course
on digital citizenship; (4) pilot the cyber safety e-learning modules with 200
middle school students in three different school districts and a charter school;
and (5) help students create videos on cyber safety and disseminate the videos
to their parents and a larger audience through social media. The instructional
modules and online course content created will be shared with institutions
outside the current scope of the project. Further, the project will establish a
teacher education and training pipeline to attract more K-12 educators to the
program, equip them with much needed cyber security knowledge and skills, and
prepare them for the challenges of educating the next generation.