* 1723529
* SCH: EAGER: New Approach: Early Diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease Based on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) via High-Dimensional Image Feature Identification
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Xiuzhen Huang, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 257,785.00

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a form of progressive neurodegenerative dementia and
one of the most common diseases in the aging population. Early diagnosis of AD
is strongly recommended for several reasons. First, it can helps to
significantly reduce the social and economic impacts caused by AD and allow
people to better manage and plan ahead. Second, it may provide more information
for researchers seeking new scientific approaches for early treatment and
intervention. However, in current clinical practice early diagnosis is often a
challenge. While neuroimaging is routinely collected in hospitals, it is very
hard for radiologists to manually read the high-dimensional image data for
analysis and interpretation. This project proposes untested but potentially
transformative research approaches to identify high-dimensional image features
for AD early diagnosis based on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). This project
will advance the research in machine learning, optimization, statistics, image
science and bioinformatics, and potentially be used to address other high-
dimensional images besides brain images. The project also has broader impacts
through cross-disciplinary research, training and education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project has the following two aims: 1) Develop sparse coding
based algorithms to identify features of structural MRI images for classifying
AD patients and other diagnostic groups. This will allow the key structural
features of images that separate AD patients, individuals with mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) or healthy individuals to be identified. 2) Develop
optimization and machine learning algorithms based on tensor Tucker core
decomposition for high-dimensional image-marker detection from longitudinal
functional MRI images. This approach should reduce the high computational
complexity of marker detection from the longitudinal MRI images of AD patients.
It is anticipated that the developed algorithms will enhance high-dimensional
neuroimaging marker detection and diagnostic classification. This research
project, if successful, will greatly impact the current practice of AD diagnosis
by providing clinical doctors with the information from a larger population and
also significantly easing the burden of radiologists.