* 1723250
* SaTC: EDU: Captivology-Stimuli-based Learning (CAPITAL) of Big Data Security (BigSec): Towards a Science/Engineering, Career-Oriented Training
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Fei Hu, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,959.00

Big data applications are widely utilized today in a variety of scientific and
social studies. The International Data Corporation (IDC) reports that more than
50% of all big data business revenues originate in the United States. Big data
requires "bigger responsibility" in terms of protecting the storage, sharing,
and access of the privacy-sensitive data. In today's higher education, there are
limited big data security (BigSec) educational activities that target
comprehensive and profound understanding of BigSec attack models, as well as
defense solutions, at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Some available
BigSec training materials are mostly online, used for short-term training, and
only cover general concepts from a business management viewpoint. The nation is
currently experiencing a shortage of cybersecurity professionals, including the
experts in big data security. The goal of this project from the University of
Alabama Tuscaloosa is to utilize new pedagogy, called Captivology-Stimuli-based
Learning (CAPITAL), for active education and training on big data security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make two significant
contributions to enhance BigSec education. The first is the development of a new
series of BigSec course materials, including an undergraduate course, CECS
400/500 Big Data Security, which targets fundamental knowledge of big data
security issues, as well as a graduate course, CECS 600 Advanced Topics on Big
Data Security and Privacy, which aims to enhance the cybersecurity research
skills of graduate students. The second is the implementation of CAPITAL
pedagogy in BigSec education. This includes implementation of the flipped
classroom model, Virtual Reality based security games, Capstone design showcase,
student cybersecurity design competitions, and patent-targeted thesis projects.
This project will conduct the pioneering "active" education to train a BigSec-
literate workforce. All the BigSec created education materials will be
disseminated to other schools.