* 1723393
* BRIGE: Damage Evaluation and Life-Cycle Assessment of Reinforced HPFRC Beam-Column Joints under Multi-Axial Loading
* ENG,EEC
* 08/16/2016,08/31/2017
* Bora Gencturk, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2017
* USD 4,223.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant advances in
structural materials, catastrophic beam-column joint failures in reinforced
concrete (RC) buildings persist in being a problem during earthquakes. The
behavior and failure mechanisms in RC joints have been extensively studied in
the past and are well understood under simple (planar) loading conditions.
Current practice tells us to increase the joint dimensions or the amount of
reinforcing steel to enhance the capacity of the joints and prevent premature
failure. However, this approach is definitely not sustainable. Additionally, as
observed in recent earthquakes, this practice does not always prevent
catastrophic failures in the joint region, leading to the conclusion that the
behavior of joints under complex (multi-axial) loading conditions is still not
well understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, high-performance fiber
reinforced concrete (HPFRC) will be selectively used at the beam-column joints
to improve the structural performance of buildings while keeping the additional
costs at a minimum. Using experimental and computational methods, a comparative
damage evaluation and life-cycle cost assessment of building with RC and HPFRC
joints will be conducted. Analysis of joints is a difficult task because of the
complex load transfer and the behavior of materials under multi-axial loading.
Therefore, two multi-axial (6 degree-of-freedom) loading units will be used to
impose realistic loading and boundary conditions on the joints, and a digital-
image correlation system for non-contact deformation measurements (DIC) will be
used to obtain full-field 3-D strain maps to study critical deformation states
that lead to the initiation of damage as well as its progression until complete
failure. These research activities are anticipated to yield critical new
knowledge and understanding of the behavior of RC and R-HPFRC joints, and
reliable computational tools to study the RC/reinforced-HPFRC material and joint
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed novel approach is expected to
transform the design and construction of RC beam-column joints over the long-
term. A direct benefit of this project to society is the improvement in public
safety in response to earthquakes. An additional benefit is increased
sustainability in the form of reduced direct and indirect economic losses and
environmental impacts. The achievements in this project will be a large step in
reaching the ultimate goal of resilient and sustainable civil infrastructures.
The proposed joint concept also has broad applicability in other types of
concrete construction, including offshore and nuclear structures. The data
collected from these novel testing and measurement approaches will serve as
benchmarks for the development of new theories for numerical modeling and
engineering simulations, which could not be considered previously because of the
lack of supporting experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening
Participation Activities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Houston (UH) is
a Hispanic-Serving Institution. The UH student body of nearly 40,000 students is
one of the most diverse in the United States. Educational modules will be
developed and introduced in three courses to influence the education of more
than 100 students per year. Because of the inherent campus diversity, these
educational initiatives will naturally reach a diverse audience. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be recruited from underrepresented groups. In
collaboration with a local high school with more than 90% underrepresented
students, a field trip will be organized every year for 25 students to visit the
UH campus and participate in hands-on training. In addition, one high school
teacher will be recruited every summer to gain exposure to research activities
and help develop a course module for high school physics courses. Through the
developed education activities, high school teachers, high school students, and
undergraduate and graduate students will have an opportunity to interact and
learn from each other. The course modules will directly derive from the research
findings and be implemented in high school and college level courses, thereby
naturally integrating research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has been funded through the Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants
in Engineering solicitation, which is part of the Broadening Participation in
Engineering Program of the Engineering Education and Centers Division.