* 1723256
* FSML Planning Grant: Developing a Strategic Plan and Infrastructure Needs Assessment for Washington State University's Meyer's Point Environmental Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Larry Hufford, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 24,939.00

The Meyer's Point Environmental Field Station, including 95 acres of undeveloped
land and 2,100 feet of Puget Sound shoreline, was bequeathed to Washington State
University (WSU) in 1990. This bequest stated that Meyer's Point should be used
to promote environmental education, research, and the arts. Meyer's Point
currently boasts substantial natural resources including extensive terrestrial,
wetland and aquatic habitats. For the past 26 years, in keeping with this
bequest, WSU and its many partners have utilized Meyer's Point for a range of
environmental research, education, and outreach activities, including studies of
shoreline native plants, marine invertebrates, butterflies, salt marshes and
birds, water quality and ecosystem restoration. But these prior research,
education and outreach efforts have generally been 'stand-alone' projects and
not well coordinated. There is an opportunity to focus WSU's (and other
institutions') research efforts in some high-profile and high-impact areas. WSU,
the state's land-grant research university, has growing expertise in three new
thematic areas relevant to the urban/rural interface that could guide the build-
out of Meyer's Point: 1) Water Science; 2) The Interface between Agriculture and
Ecosystems; and 3) "People and Place" in the Arts, Humanities, and Sciences.
More broadly, WSU will adopt a consistent, intentional and interactive process
at Meyer's Point for: 1) educating and training undergraduate and graduate
students (e.g. hosting the "New REU Site: Landscape Ecology and Ecosystem
Dynamics: Integrating Terrestrial and Aquatic Perspectives" project), 2)
engaging with K-12 teachers and students (e.g., the Olympia High School Earth
Corps" has for many years cleared invasive plants and re-planted native late-
succession tree species over several acres of land at Meyer's Point), and 3)
reaching out to engage and inform the public (e.g., Meyer's Point is currently
home to a community-based, non-profit oyster farm collaborative, that educates
and provides hands-on experience developing, managing and distributing fresh,
native oysters harvested from the site). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
is to build Meyer's Point into a leading environmental research, education and
outreach center for the Puget Sound Area, and by extension, the state of
Washington and the nation, that is focused on environmental issues at the
urban/rural interface. The three primary objectives for this planning grant are
to: i) Learn about the needs, capabilities and aspirations of stakeholders,
potential partnering institutions, and regional field stations, via a series of
site visits; ii) Work with stakeholder and partner institutions to identify
goals and outcomes for the next 5-years of growth at Meyer's Point, via a
professionally facilitated workshop; and iii) Produce a detailed 5-year
strategic plan that can guide WSU and its partners in facilities enhancement and
fundraising for Meyer's Point.