* 1723289
* EAGER: MAKER: Developing Digital Makers in the Coding Makerspace to Include Boys of Color in Computer Science Learning and Cybersecurity Workforce Development
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Phillip Eaglin, PhD, Changing Expectations Corp
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The Coding
Makerspace is providing hands-on digital maker projects and support for boys of
color to earn certification in Python, the computer programming language related
to cybersecurity. The Makerspace is also exposing boys of color ages eight and
above to research-based and best practices in computing and cybersecurity
education. Additionally, the Makerspace is collaborating with local cyber
security companies to gain real-world experience through shadowing and/or field
placement opportunities. As a result, the Makerspace is addressing the
longstanding underrepresentation of racially diverse students in computer
science and increasing their interest in cybersecurity opportunities in higher
education, employment, and entrepreneurship.

The Coding Makerspace has great potential to advance knowledge on ways to
achieve the goals of equity, diversity, access, and inclusion of racially
diverse students in computer science education. The Makerspace is providing boys
of color with that support to be creators, not consumers, of computing and
cybersecurity innovations that will contribute to society. The project is also
facilitating the development of new knowledge on how to broaden the impact of
the hands-on computer science education needed to increase racially diverse
student interest and cybersecurity workforce preparation. In addition, the
Makerspace is addressing the increasing need for all students, particularly
underrepresented young men of color, to prepare for the expected growth of
cybersecurity jobs that protects the country's national security.