* 1723052
* Collaborative Research:  Connecting Submodularity and Restricted Strong Convexity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Georgios-Alex Dimakis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 90,000.00

Structured estimation problems arise in a variety of contexts including
astronomy, genomics, and computer vision. This project aims to develop methods
that can use the additional structure in order to estimate statistical models
effectively, while also using the structure for computational improvements. This
work seeks to connect ideas in combinatorial optimization and statistical
estimation to develop computationally tractable methods for performing
structured statistical estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an
integrated program to explore and connect combinatorial optimization and
statistical estimation. Modern statistical challenges have become increasingly
dependent on understanding both the computational and statistical issues. Many
modern statistical estimation problems rely on imposing additional structure in
order to reduce the statistical complexity and provide interpretability.
Unfortunately, these structures often are combinatorial in nature and result in
computationally challenging problems. In parallel, the combinatorial
optimization community has placed significant effort in developing algorithms
that can approximately solve such optimization problems in a computationally
efficient manner. The focus of this project is to expand upon ideas that arise
in combinatorial optimization and connect those algorithms and ideas to
statistical questions. The research directions of this project are split into
three main thrusts unified by the concept of weak submodularity: (a) cardinality
constrained optimization and its applications to general statistical
optimization problems; (b) matrix estimation problems including low-rank matrix
estimation and semi-definite programming problems as well as problems in sparse
dictionary learning; and (c) a general theoretical understanding of weak
submodularity and specifically analyzing how to develop algorithms in this
regime that work well for large-scale datasets.