* 1723602
* Secure and Privacy Preserving Big Data Analytics Curriculum Development
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,992.00

Organizations own and generate massive amounts of data that can be analyzed to
generate understanding on customers as well as optimize consumer services.
Computation on Big Data may require massive computational resources and, while
an organization may have the capability to carry-out these analyses, it may use
a third-party service to outsource some computations to be cost-effective. In
these cases, data may be transferred to a third-party service, giving rise to
concerns associated with the trustworthiness of the third-party computational
devices and the security of sensitive information. When a third-party server is
used for computation, data inherently becomes available in untrusted
environments, for example: to a hacker during data transmission, or to
adversaries at the third-party location where the computation is performed. Data
owners may need to protect their data, and require cryptographic guarantees
about data security and integrity of computational output from these third-party
services. The proposed project from the University of Texas at Dallas (UT
Dallas) will address this need by developing an experimental education program
for Big Data Security and Privacy (BDSP). The project will develop a set of
laboratory exercises and course modules in BDSP that will be shared with
academia, government and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advancements in
embedded hardware technology to support trusted execution environment (TEE) have
generated exciting opportunities for research in the field of cloud computing,
trusted data analytics, and applied cryptography. By protecting code and data
within a secure region of computation, a cloud service can ensure
confidentiality and integrity of data and computations. There is a need to
establish a scientific foundation for data analytical models to leverage TEEs,
evaluate their limitations, explore performance overhead, and analyze security
implications such as side channels. The proposed project will generate a BDSP
laboratory for students to carry out experimentation in trustworthy analytics.
The results will be incorporated into several of the existing courses in Cyber
Security at UT Dallas. In addition, the project will generate a capstone course
in BDSP. The goal is to develop a skilled workforce in BDSP to securely analyze
the vast amounts of data that are used to provide better services in government,
industry and academia. Further, with the established Center for Engaging Women
in Cyber Security at The University of Texas at Dallas, this project will
encourage, motivate and provide opportunities for female and minority students
in cyber security. The project will leverage the Center to recruit highly
qualified female and minority students into the education program in BDSP.