* 1723774
* Science Education Alliance-Phage Hunters Advancing Genomics and Evolutionary Science (SEA-PHAGES) at Northwest Indian College (NWIC)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2021
* John Rombold, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,996.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge on the genomics
of bacteriophages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwest Indian College students will
collect and isolate their own mycobacteriophage (phage) from samples collected
on or near campus. Students will purify the elected phage and isolate its
genomic DNA, and then conduct a restricted digest analysis of a portion of phage
genomic DNA to confirm genomic DNA integrity and to examine if the restriction
pattern is similar to previously characterized phages. Students will also
prepare electron microscopy grids fixed with their purified phage and work with
Western Washington University to determine their phage morphology using a Vega
TS 5136MM electron microscope. The genome of one phage will then be sent to the
Department of Energy's Joint Genome Institute (JGI) for genomic sequencing, and
during the second half of the course the students will use gene-searching tools
to identify and annotate the probable genes. Students will also compare the
results of their gene calling to known, characterized mycobacteriophage genomes
before uploading their completed product to GenBank, an online database of
genetic sequences maintained by the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI).