* 1723073
* Strategic Planning for the Bartlett-Crowe Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Laura Hainsworth, Emory and Henry College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2018
* USD 25,000.00

Emory & Henry College has been awarded a planning grant to develop the inaugural
five-year strategic plan for the newly-established Bartlett-Crowe Field Station.
Founded in 2015 through a generous donation by Dr. Charles Bartlett, the mission
is to provide education, research, and service opportunities in the Appalachian
forest and river ecosystems by offering innovative field-based education
programs and multipurpose research facilities. Situated on a 72-acre property
located on the Middle Fork of the Holston River in southwest Virginia, the field
station offers students and researchers a remarkable variety of southern
Appalachian terrestrial and aquatic habitats for study. The surrounding region
hosts some of the most unique and diverse assemblages of salamanders, fishes,
and freshwater mussels in North America. Through the development of a
comprehensive strategic plan, the Bartlett-Crowe Field Station will contribute
to the critical baseline of scientific field-based knowledge that informs our
understanding of the natural world and human impacts on the environment. In
addition, Emory & Henry College, the leading educational institution in
southwest Virginia with a focus on civic engagement, will use the Bartlett-Crowe
Field Station as a unique resource for enhancing STEM education initiatives by
creating field-based integrative STEM opportunities for teachers and students.
The result will be to expand opportunities for STEM undergraduate research, STEM
outreach, informal science education, and sound environmental stewardship in
rural southwest Virginia.

Strategic planning for the Bartlett-Crowe Field Station will begin with the
development of partnerships. An advisory council comprised of stakeholders,
educators, and science advisors will guide and shape the science and education
plan. Key personnel from model field stations and expert science advisors will
be consulted on planning research activities, resource and data management, and
field station operations. Workshops on Educational Planning, Research Planning,
and Field Station Operations will be hosted to facilitate collaborative
discussion among Bartlett-Crowe personnel, local stakeholders and invited
consultants. The resulting strategic plan will provide a framework for decision-
making that emphasizes robust, long-term science and education objectives, and
will guide the management and operation of the station in a way that is
efficient, effective, and sustainable.