* 1723996
* S&amp;AS: FND: Learning-Enabled Autonomous 3D Exploration for Underwater Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Brendan Englot, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 12/31/2022
* USD 353,334.00

There are often high costs and safety risks associated with humans performing
work underwater, which is frequently required to inspect the health of our
subsea infrastructure and environment. This motivates a need for smart and
taskable autonomous robots that can monitor and inspect the subsea environment,
as well as explore their surroundings when they do not have access to an
accurate prior model. Without precise instructions on where and how to explore,
the ideal taskable robot should be able to produce comprehensive, accurate maps
of its surroundings, make repeated decisions about where to travel next, and
ensure that it avoids collisions in the process of doing so. This project will
leverage machine learning techniques to produce and deploy new algorithms with
the potential to enhance both the speed and efficiency with which underwater
robots explore unknown environments, and to enable further gains in performance
as the exploring robots gain more experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project will introduce machine learning techniques to (1) build more
descriptive occupancy maps from the sparse and noisy sonar data that typifies
the subsea domain; (2) to save computational effort in the potentially
exhaustive evaluation of many candidate sensing actions; and (3) to learn
effective behaviors for exploring complex, unstructured environments that truly
require three-dimensional spatial reasoning. The real-time, 3D exploration task
will be managed in concert with other relevant objectives, such as minimizing
localization and map uncertainty, and the time and energy expenditures
associated with travel. A related goal is to develop robot systems whose
performance improves with experience, dynamically choosing the most effective
decision-making tools in its portfolio and self-parameterizing the most
appropriate map representations for the task at hand. &lt;br/&gt;