* 1723300
* Spatiotemporal Inhomogeneity of Tropical Waves and Their Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Zhaohua Wu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2021
* USD 540,812.00

Tropical waves, also referred to as equatorial waves, are a key component of the
weather of the tropics, and are known to play important roles in monsoon
variability, El Nino events, and the formation of hurricanes and typhoons. The
basic characteristics of tropical waves, including their size, shape and
frequency, can be derived by solving an idealized model of their fundamental
dynamics. The resulting solutions are expressed in terms of sinusoidal waves,
with successive ridges and troughs repeating uniformly around the equator.
Analysis methods that assume such extended wave trains can detect equatorial
waves, and these methods confirm that observed waves largely match theoretical
predictions. But observed waves typically span a limited region and it can be
desirable to study them using methods which make no assumptions regarding their
global nature or longitudinal extent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
tropical waves are identified and studied using the Multi-dimensional Ensemble
Empirical Mode Decomposition (MEEMD), a time series analysis method pioneered by
the PI and others (see AGS-1139479). MEEMD is used to identify variability at
each longitude along the equator at frequencies roughly corresponding to
frequencies for particular waves. Additional information about the expected
latitudinal shape of the waves is used to separate wave types which have similar
frequencies. Once the waves are identified in the data their behavior is further
analyzed using techniques to determine characteristics such as equivalent depth,
a measure of the depth of wave motions that can be related to the generation of
waves by condensational heating in clouds. The MEEMD technique has some
advantages for representing the interaction of waves of different frequencies,
and the MEEMD technique has been used to develop holo-spectral analysis, a
method for quantifying wave interactions and studying their energetics. One
application of holo-spectral analysis here is to examine the modulation of
equatorial waves by the Madden-Julian Oscillation, a much larger form of
tropical variability which fluctuates slowly over the course of a month or
two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the importance of
equatorial waves for the weather and climate of the tropics, as noted above. The
MEEMD and holo-spectral analysis tools developed in the project will be made
available to the research community to ensure the scientific broader impacts of
the project. These tools have applicability in a variety of research fields
beyond tropical meteorology, for example in the study of brain wave anomalies in
neural disorders. In addition, the project would provide support and training
for a graduate student and a postdoc, thereby promoting the next generation of
scientists in this research area.