* 1723454
* EAGER: Synthesizing Notes from Electronic Health Records to Make Them Actionable for Heart Failure Patients
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2020
* USD 332,000.00

This Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research aims to help patients and
caregivers have increased access to electronic health information. The research
focuses on the Electronic Health Record (EHR). In 1996, the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act entitled patients the right to obtain their
medical records on request. With greater patient access, patients may become
more invested in the management of their own health care and take better care of
themselves. While there have been some advances in communicating EHR content to
patients, physicians' and nurses' notes are not easy to convey due to
communication intent of clinicians and the social and cultural issues that
surround diagnosis and care. Advances from this work will reduce gaps in the
care process, potentially impact consumer side patient care, and become the
basis for future systems development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
investigates new and more effective presentations of this information to
patients (e.g., graphic, abstracted, actionable). The project includes the
following activities: 1) collect patient notes and the communicative intent for
both clinicians and patients to reveal the gap between intention and
interpretation; 2) iterate on new textual and visual summaries by hand until
they achieve the intended communication with patients. The proposal team's
expertise will be leveraged in designing abstractions of information to help
people make decisions and positively change their behavior under stress or
uncertainty to undertake these activities.