* 1723283
* HMSC Cyberinfrastructure upgrade
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Robert Cowen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 229,418.00

Marine habitats, nearshore ecosystems and coastal communities face daunting
pressures that threaten their sustainability. The bold, innovative approaches
needed to manage the ocean's resources wisely are increasingly data driven, with
marine researchers now generating and analyzing vast datasets. The OSU Hatfield
Marine Science Center (HMSC - http://hmsc.oregonstate.edu) brings 50 years of
collaborative marine research to bear on these critical issues, with innovative
ideas but aged facilities not designed for the Big Data needs of the present and
future. This HMSC communication cyberinfrastructure modernization project will
improve the fiber network connections between all federal, state and university
buildings on the HMSC campus to remove barriers to collaboration and Big Data
transfer at HMSC, and complement upcoming investments by Oregon State University
(OSU). Training the next generation of leaders who can utilize these data
intensive tools to bridge the social and natural sciences in designing multi-
pronged, 21st century solutions is imperative to a sustainable future for our
nation. As a land grant/sea grant university, OSU's Hatfield Marine Science
Center excels in research and training, as well as public education and outreach
for youth, families, and adults. The Visitor Center hosts &gt;150,000 visitors
and 40,000 students from K-12 classes annually, and through extensive
partnerships including with the Center for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence,
Pacific Partnerships (COSEE) and the Oregon Coast STEM Hub (K-12), is uniquely
positioned to rapidly communicate research findings to visitors and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will replace an aging and minor
fiber infrastructure built for the pre-ethernet days with a fiber installation
designed to allow an immediate 20X increase in bandwidth ? but also allowing for
virtually unlimited scaling increases for the future. This new
cyberinfrastructure will be capable of fully supporting current, as well as
future science and education needs through expandability. The project will first
build a conduit network between HMSC buildings to replace an ageing direct
buried fiber infrastructure. This will be done with a modern backbone vault and
conduit design to permit future improvements without significant reinvestment.
Then, bundles of single mode fibers will be deployed through the vaults and
conduits to each building. Finally, modern switching equipment will be
implemented to realize the full potential of this new fiber, making it possible
to provision and aggregate high speed connections to individual ports in HMSC
buildings. In addition, this equipment will support MPLS and fully integrate
HMSC into the MPLS-based architecture of OSU?s new core network including the
research network OSU has built through an NSF CC-NIE grant. These improvements
will enable full utilization of an OSU-funded dark fiber network path planned
between HMSC and the main OSU campus 50 miles away, which will allow virtually
unlimited bandwidth growth on demand to HMSC. They will also enable full
integration of HMSC with the core network on OSU?s Corvallis campus, including
the 40 Gb/s research network built through an NSF CC-NIE (Campus
Cyberinfrastructure - Network Infrastructure and Engineering) grant. This
project will be the final piece enabling all components of this modern
cyberinfrastructure for HMSC to become fully operational and integrated at the
maximal capacity needed for current and future Big Data needs.&lt;br/&gt;