* 1723042
* NNSFGEO-NERC: Collaboration: The Role OF Asperities and Slow Slip in Subduction Zone Rupture and Aftershock Sequences: Insights from the 16 April 2016 Pedernales Ecuador Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Anne Meltzer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 244,941.00

The large faults that separate oceanic plates from continental plates in
subduction zones generate the largest earthquakes and giant tsunami. Examples
include earthquakes with magnitude 9.0 and larger in Chile in 1960, Alaska in
1964, Indonesia in 2004, and Japan in 2011. These giant earthquakes have
significant economic and social impact causing loss of life and livelihoods,
damage to buildings and infrastructure, disruption of business, and changes in
communities that can take years for recovery. Modern instrumentation provides
scientists the opportunity to study these faults and the earthquakes they
generate in new ways. In April 2016, the Pedernales Earthquake ruptured the
subduction zone along the coast of Ecuador in a large Mw 7.8 earthquake. An
international rapid response effort deployed a seismic array to record
aftershocks following this large earthquake that expanded long term observations
of the national seismic and geodetic network in Ecuador. Analysis of these data
provide an opportunity to link variations in structure and seismic properties
along the subduction zone to the distribution of slip behaviors observed before,
during, and after the earthquake. The broader impacts of this research have the
potential to benefit society through improved hazard assessment and mitigation
strategies for subduction zone earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A spectrum of
fault slip behaviors (earthquakes, non-volcanic tremor, slow slip events, low-
frequency earthquakes and very low-frequency earthquakes has been observed in a
number of subduction zones globally. While a general framework has developed
characterizing the variation in slip behaviors in the dip direction along the
plate interface, a direct link between seismic properties and slip behavior and
the relationship between slow-slip events and megathrust earthquakes has yet to
be established. In April 2016, the Pedernales Earthquake ruptured an
approximately 130 km long, 100 km wide segment of the subduction zone along the
coast of Ecuador in a large Mw 7.8 megathrust event. Immediately after the
earthquake a coordinated international rapid response effort deployed a seismic
array (on land and offshore using ocean bottom seismometers, OBS) above the
rupture zone and adjacent fault segments where large earthquakes occur on
decadal time scales and slow slip events have been observed. The dense on land
array combined with offshore OBS instruments provides an exceptional dataset to
study the earthquake and aftershock sequence. The seismic array is complemented
by rapid response geodetic efforts and long term observations from permanent
national seismic and geodetic networks in Ecuador. The researchers will use
subduction of the Nazca Plate beneath Ecuador and the Pedernales Earthquake and
aftershock sequence to link along strike variations in structure and seismic
properties to the distribution of slip behaviors observed (pre-, co- and post-
seismic) to determine the relationship between slow slip and megathrust rupture.
The integrated analyses from a variety of broadband seismic techniques will be
used to examine the persistence of asperities for large to great earthquakes
over multiple seismic cycles, the role of asperities in promoting or inhibiting
rupture propagation, and the relationship between locked and creeping parts of
the subduction interface. Broader impacts of this research will contribute to
improved risk assessment from subduction zone earthquakes. In addition we are
partnering with Build Change, a non-profit NGO, to develop materials to educate
local communities on earthquake hazards and construction techniques to improve
resiliency. This project supports academic research infrastructure in seismology
and computation, and professional development and training for early career
scientists. Results from this research will be integrated into STEM education at
both the graduate and undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;This project is cofunded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering.