* 1723972
* S&amp;AS: FND: COLLAB: Probabilistic Underactuated Motion Adaptation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Thomas Howard, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 09/30/2022
* USD 274,739.00

Unconventional, underactuated robots, such as humanoids or legged platforms more
broadly, offer the potential to move through and perform work in constrained,
three-dimensional environments that are currently inaccessible to existing
autonomous agents. However, this potential has been largely unrealized because
it is difficult to reliably adapt the behaviors of these platforms to account
for the changing and uncertain task and environmental conditions in the "real
world." Although many of the fundamental principles that govern contemporary
task and motion planning techniques are applicable across different platforms,
the practical implementation of these principles has been largely platform
specific. In contrast, this project will adopt a probabilistic planning
framework which learns common structure for the motion patterns of different
platforms performing related tasks, then uses this structure to generate
generalized, inherently platform independent, motion primitives. At runtime, the
primitives will be grounded and adapted where necessary to specific robot models
given local task and environmental conditions. The primary benefit of this
project will be an increase in the utility of autonomous platforms for tasks
such as urban search and rescue, industrial inspection, and planetary
exploration. The analytical techniques that will be developed will have further
impacts on locomotion science and learning-based approaches to motion
coordination. The PIs will additionally be involved with K-12 outreach involving
robot demonstrations at FIRST Robotics Competitions and the Rochester Museum and
Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically address
fundamental limitations in the tractability of real-time task and motion
planning for underactuated robots over diverse objectives and distributions of
environmental conditions. Probabilistic models will be developed to efficiently
reason over and adapt the nominal behaviors of different highly-articulated,
underactuated robots. The behavioral inference will make it possible to 1)
select appropriate pre-existing behaviors (developed over the course of the
project) where relevant, 2) use novel combinations of nominal behaviors to form
compound, task-specific behaviors, and 3) leverage similar, but not necessarily
the same, kinematic structure across heterogeneous platforms to transfer
behaviors between them. To ensure the success of the practical, online
implementation of the developed models, the PIs will develop algorithms that
combine probabilistic inference, nonlinear dimensionality reduction, and dynamic
movement primitives to produce a novel combination of efficient motion
generation and robust online adaptation. In addition to varying task and
environmental conditions, the adaptability of the probabilistic models to
changes in the internal kinematics and dynamics of robot platforms, such as
those that would arise from degraded motor performance or structural failures of
joints or entire limbs, will also be explored. The models will be trained and
validated using a combination of simulation and experimental results on two
physical platforms: the Carnegie Mellon Hexapod and the Robotis OP2.
Furthermore, the PIs will develop software tools and release open-source
products related to generalizable probabilistic models for motion adaptation of
underactuated systems.