* 1723891
* CAREER: Supervised Learning for Incomplete and Uncertain Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Alina Zare, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2021
* USD 327,359.00

This CAREER project will advance the state of the art in supervised machine
learning to allow for incomplete, uncertain and unspecific label information.
Supervised machine learning algorithms produce desired outputs for given input
data by learning from example training data. The methods generally rely on
completely and accurately labeled training data to drive the learning algorithm.
However, many applications are plagued with labels that are incomplete,
uncertain, and unspecific (lack precision). Current techniques do not adequately
handle such data.

For example, analysis of satellite imagery to identify the content of each pixel
is often conducted by coupling unsupervised learning methods (that do not rely
on labeled training data) with manual exploration. This is time-consuming,
error-prone, and expensive. Imagine, instead, easy-to-use tools that could
understand the content of each pixel in satellite imagery. Extremely large
amounts of road map data (for example from Google Maps or OpenStreetMap) and
social media information (for example geo-tagged photographs, video clips, and
social networking posts) are continually collected and stored. These data could
be used as sparsely-labeled training data (with varying degrees of specificity
and uncertainty) to guide understanding of satellite imagery.

Although the data is available, algorithms have yet to be developed to combine
these data sources and identify the content of pixels in satellite images. This
work will advance this and other potential applications of machine learning
where incomplete, uncertain and unspecific labels in training data challenge the
development of effective machine learning algorithms.

This CAREER project will achieve these advances through the following research
objectives: (1) Investigate and develop a mathematical framework and associated
algorithms for Multiple Instance Function Learning that addresses linear and
non-linear classification and regression problems with varying levels and types
of sparsity, uncertainty, and specificity in training labels.

(2) Study and apply the proposed framework and algorithms towards the fusion of
satellite imagery, road map data and social media for global scene
understanding.

This research will be conducted in conjunction with integrated education and
outreach activities. In particular, an interactive web application will be
developed to provide an avenue for introducing concepts from machine learning
and remote sensing to the public for dissemination and outreach. This
interactive web application will also be used, along with additional hands-on
activities, to introduce high school students to machine learning and remote
sensing concepts during an annual summer engineering camp held at the University
of Missouri in Columbia, MO. Paired with the web application will be a research
website in which data, code, publications and presentations will be shared with
the research community. Furthermore, undergraduate and graduate research
assistants will be trained in the areas of machine learning and remote sensing.
Finally, relevant research topics will be introduced in the PI's undergraduate
and graduate courses.