* 1723313
* SHINE: Exploring Time-Dependent Ionization in Magnetic Reconnection During Solar Eruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* John Raymond, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,537.00

Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental process that governs multiple aspects of
space weather between the Sun and Earth. This process governs the solar eruptive
events as well has their effects at earth. The proposed research will enhance
infrastructure for research and education by making new capabilities available
for improving global models. This capability will benefit society by improving
the ability to validate space weather models and can easily be applied to the
study of other astrophysical systems. Members of the proposal team will mentor
undergraduate summer interns, and organize a session on diversity, equity, and
inclusion at a scientific meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed program
explores the question: What is the thermodynamic history and evolution of plasma
during reconnection in the solar environment? The magnetic reconnection that
drives solar flares and coronal mass ejections is much faster than predicted by
classical mechanisms, and explanations generally rely on either turbulence or on
a Petschek-like configuration with exhaust bounded by slow mode shocks. In
either case, the rapid heating leaves the plasma drastically underionized. As
plasma expands and cools, it can become severely overionized. Departures from
ionization equilibrium will lead to inaccurate interpretation of UV spectra and
EUV images if equilibrium is assumed, and they can affect the radiative cooling
rate at the order of magnitude level. However, these departures also offer a
powerful means of exploring the thermal history of the plasma. The proposed
research has the potential to advance knowledge on thermodynamic evolution in
magnetic reconnection regions during solar eruption, where the ionization state
can be far from equilibrium and methods based on the assumption of ionization
equilibrium can provide incomplete or misleading information about the
temperature structure. The in-line ionization calculation within MHD simulations
can significantly extend the capability of MHD models and improve observational
predictions from MHD simulations.