* 1723057
* A new hypothesis for the initiation of plate tectonics on Earth: Feedback between subduction and continental crust growth
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Bradford Foley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2022
* USD 341,400.00

This proposal studies how plate tectonics, the concept that Earth's surface
layer is broken into rigid plates that move with respect to one another, started
and evolved over Earth's history. Plate tectonics is one of the most important
processes on Earth, as it is responsible for most earthquakes, volcanoes, and
surface landscape features such as mountain ranges and geology. However, when
and how plate tectonics begin during Earth's history is not well known. The
project will study the role that the formation of continents, chemically
distinct regions of Earth's crust that are thicker and sit higher than the
corresponding ocean basins, play in initiating surface plate motion. By
combining theoretical models with observations of some of Earth's oldest rocks,
the proposed work will test a new theory for how plate tectonics started, and
thus advance our understanding of this fundamentally important process. The
proposal serves the national interest by promoting the progress of science. In
particular, the proposal will advance education and diversity in the
geosciences, by supporting a graduate student researcher for three years and an
undergraduate student intern for one summer. The graduate student will receive
valuable training and research experience in geophysics and interdisciplinary
Earth systems science, applicable to careers in academia or industry. The
undergraduate will be hosted through the Summer Research Opportunities Program
at Penn State University, which is geared towards students from groups or
backgrounds that are underrepresented in the sciences. As a result, hosting the
intern will not only provide an undergraduate student with experience in cutting
edge Earth science research, but will also contribute to building diversity in
the Earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis to be tested in this
proposal is that a feedback between continental crust growth and subduction
leads to the progressive initiation of modern-style plate tectonics across the
planet. The proposal will use numerical models of mantle convection and thermal
evolution models of the Earth incorporating continental crust growth to test
this hypothesis. The proposed work will answer three main science questions: 1)
Does a continent enhance lithospheric weakening, and thus induce formation of a
weak plate boundary and modern-style subduction at its margin, and is the
timescale for subduction to begin as a result of continent formation consistent
with geologic observations? 2) Is the effect of a continent on lithospheric
weakening felt locally or globally, and how does continent size change the
length-scale over which this effect is felt? 3) Does the presence of a continent
lead to higher rates of felsic magmatism due to enhanced subduction, and does
the feedback between crustal growth and subduction cause a global transition to
plate tectonics over a ~ 1 Gyr timescale, as indicated by geological
observations? For each science question a detailed, thorough set of modeling
work will be carried out that constrains the effect of all key model parameters
on the results, and allows the robustness of the results to be fully tested. The
initiation of plate tectonics was a seminal event in Earth's history,
fundamentally reshaping its thermal, chemical, and geologic evolution. Thus the
proposed work will significantly advance our understanding of perhaps the most
important geophysical event in Earth's history. The results will have direct
implications for interpreting Archean geology and geochemistry, by providing a
large-scale geodynamic framework that geological observations can be placed in.
Plate tectonics also fundamentally alters cycling of volatiles between the
surface and interior, and thus plays a role in the long-term evolution of
Earth?s atmosphere. The results of this proposal will thus have direct bearing
on how Earth's atmosphere, and therefore the surface environment so crucial for
life, has evolved over time.