* 1723086
* Collaborative Research: Balloon Campaign to Quantify Thunderstorm Effects on the Global Electric Circuit
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Jeremy Thomas, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 351,648.00

This grant would quantify the role of thunderstorm activity as a driver of
Earth's global electric circuit. The required measurements of the fair weather
vertical electric field and current density would be obtained over a period of
several days. The time series of the fair weather electric field and vertical
current density at high altitude, above weather, orographic, and other
influences, obtained by using the well-proven technique of double Langmuir
probes on a stratospheric balloon platform would be compared to properties of
the contemporaneous global thunderstorm activity. With the recent development
and characterization of ground-based global lightning detection networks, it is
now possible to retrieve global thunderstorm area, and its uncertainty, on a
timescale of minutes. The objective of the proposed work is to test the
hypothesis, at unprecedented accuracy and depth, that thunderstorm activity is
the primary driver for the global circuit. intellectual merit. Nearly 100 years
after C. T. R. Wilson suggested thunderstorms are an important driver of the
global electric circuit. Achieving this goal would require a quantitative
evaluation of the drivers for the fair weather electric field. This goal has
remained elusive due to a long-standing difficulty in measuring the various
candidates: thunderstorms, electrified clouds, or other middle atmosphere
current sources. Furthermore, there has been only very limited observational
work on the short time response of the global circuit to variations in the
thunderstorm source. This proposal will test thus connection hypothesis, at
times scales of order 100 seconds. A straightforward comparison of the two time
series of global active thunderstorm area and vertical fair weather electric
current density would enable significant progress on this classic question.
Because the high time resolution measurements are a substantial advance over
previous investigations, this work will likely lead to new insights and
questions about the global electric circuit. A graduate student's dissertation
research would be supported as a result of the proposed effort. Moreover, an
undergraduate student participating in the sub-contract effort relating to the
flight deployment of the balloons each summer would be supported as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be trained in development and
calibration of instrumentation, field campaign logistics, collating and
analyzing multiple types of data, and modeling as a means to understand
measurements. This grant would provide important measurements, and likely also
insights, for ongoing efforts to model the global electric circuit. The
anticipated improvement in our understanding of the thunderstorm driver
component is also critical to achieving progress on understanding other global
electric circuit variations such as from solar wind effects, solar protons
events, or large scale atmospheric temperature change. If a robust relation
between global thunderstorm activity and stratospheric vertical current density
is identified as expected from the grant, this would open the possibility to the
prospects of being able to monitor total global thunderstorm activity using a
small number of instrumented balloons.