* 1723997
* S&amp;AS: FND: Real-Time Self-Diagnosis and  Correction in  Linear and Nonlinear Control of Autonomous Systems Using Encoded State Space  Error Signatures
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Abhijit Chatterjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,022.00

Next generation autonomous systems that can perform societal functions without
human intervention (such as intelligent buildings, robots, drones and self-
driven cars) will need to be aware of the health of the core electro-mechanical
subsystems of which they are composed. Such self-awareness will dictate how they
respond to different workload demands so that the general public can depend on
these systems for reliable execution of designated tasks irrespective of how
much wear and tear these systems have experienced through field use. The goal of
this project is to enable the design of such self-aware autonomous systems of
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linear and nonlinear control systems can be
described using state-space representations that are encoded with redundant
"check states" that bear a known relationship with the observable states of the
system in the absence of failures. The difference between the check state value
and its value as predicted by the known relationship above, results in a time-
varying error signal that can be used for the first time to detect, diagnose and
compensate for parametric failures in the electro-mechanical system components
in real-time with the least amount of computational overhead and detection
latency for a wide class of such systems. The project will train graduate
students to develop new mathematical techniques, simulation tools and algorithms
across diverse domains of electrical engineering and computer science. The
students will work closely with industry, facilitating technology transfer
through summer internships and co-ops. The research findings will be integrated
into a class on fault-tolerant computing. Key research aspects will be
incorporated into senior year undergraduate design projects while engaging
students from the summer undergraduate research experience program for
minorities at Georgia Tech. K-12 education program engagements relevant to this
project will be pursued through the course of this research.&lt;br/&gt;