* 1723385
* Making Academic Change Happen for Emerging Engineering Educators (Workshop Proposal)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Julia Williams, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 04/30/2018
* USD 49,599.00

The lack of systemic change in STEM education points to an important problem
with the approach that the STEM education community has pursued thus far. Change
has been targeted at the course and curriculum levels, focusing on teaching and
learning methods and proving their efficacy. While beneficial, these activities
have not fostered the strategies - such as motivation, communication,
collaboration, and persuasion - that are necessary if individuals wish to enact
change on larger, more institutional levels. These change strategies are well
documented in the literature of other disciplines, such as organizational
psychology and behavior, but have not been brought into the conversation within
STEM education in a rigorous, accessible way. The workshop Making Academic
Change Happen (MACH) fills the need of academics for research-based skills
development and assistance in creating a plan for change. Through targeted
working sessions on specific topics (e.g. partnership development, generating
buy-in, institutional context, and identity discovery), participants learn
research-proven strategies for making large scale change happen on their home
campus. The focus group for the 2017 MACH Workshop is emerging engineering
educators. The primary experience of graduate training is to be introduced to
disciplinary research and then be provided with a means to gain further
competence. We have determined, however, that new engineering educators are
tasked with developing new courses, curricula, and programs. These initiatives
require additional skills or areas of expertise: advising, mentoring, curriculum
development, imaginative vision, program assessment, etc. None of these skills
are likely addressed in a typical engineering Ph.D. curriculum. For these
reasons, we believe that new engineering educators who envision themselves as
change agents should work to adopt the disposition and skills of a change agent.
Attending the MACH Workshop will help these educators start on their path as
engineering education innovators.

The purpose of this workshop is to assist emerging engineering educators in: 1)
learning and practicing skills needed to lead change, and 2) preparing working
documents around a variety of topics that are necessary to advance a change
project. By fostering the development of these skills and mindsets in the very
people who must lead change efforts, this workshop promotes meaningful change in
STEM higher education. The change projects advanced by the workshop participants
are expected to become model programs that can be mined for examples strategies
and processes for others hoping to implement similar ideas. These projects reach
beyond a single classroom, focusing more on the underlying processes,
approaches, or philosophy of STEM education enacted on their campus. By working
within the institution's context, the change agents trained during the MACH
Workshop will positively impact the student experience of STEM. As part of this
research, the emerging engineering educators will be interviewed about their
change projects and provided with mentors and support for their change
activities. Mentorship will continue to be offered after the workshop is over.
The progress on their change projects will also be tracked as they implement the
MACH change strategies they learned during the workshop.