* 1723634
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment: Sea Education Association (SSV Corwith Cramer &amp; SSV Robert C. Seamans
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Paul Joyce, Sea Education Association
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2018
* USD 19,465.00

Proposals from SEA are fundamentally different form others is this panel because
SEA does not support any NSF-funded science. Rather the program is a shipboard
educational experience that has offered high-quality academic programs to
college, high-school, and graduate students, as well as K-12 teachers, for 45
years. The National Science Board recently named SEA the recipient of its 2016
Public Service Award for making a substantial contribution to increasing public
understanding of science and engineering. NSF recognizes that many SEA alumni
are professionals working and teaching in the marine sciences and related fields
and for that reason have allowed for limited support through the SSSE Program.
The panel considered this when it evaluated the requests and found unlike the
Instrumentation Proposal, there were several items here that were poorly
explained and that the whole proposal was a bit unclear. The overall rating was
Good-Very Good. That said it is clear that SEA needs overboarding sheaves. Their
top priority was a leval winding sheave with an expensive monitoring device.
This was way over the top in terms of what this Program would support. Instead,
the Program will fund the purchase of two overboarding sheaves but has counseled
the group to consult with other operators, i.e. WHOI, who is located down the
street, and purchase sheaves with load pins which could provide the digital
output and load information they need. SEA appreciated the advice and will do
exactly that. No other items on the proposal will be
funded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program recommends an award of $19,465 for the
purchase of the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) 2 Overboarding Sheaves
$19,465