* 1723249
* Earthquake Precursors and Controls on Earthquake Magnitudes: Probing the Behavior of Megathrust Faults through Numerical Simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Julia Morgan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2021
* USD 205,780.00

Large or great earthquakes that occur along subduction zones rupture large
portions of the fault interfaces, releasing substantial accumulated energy
capable of causing catastrophic damage and disruption. As such earthquakes
define a major geohazard, particularly to coastal areas vulnerable to large
tsunami, understanding the controls on earthquake size and the predictors of
their occurrence along megathrust faults is of critical societal relevance to
the US and around the world. This project will provide new insights into how and
why earthquakes occur on these major faults, and what determines how large they
can become. We will use numerical modeling to simulate the conditions present in
such settings, to predict fault behavior. Earthquakes are of great popular
interest, and our models of virtual earthquakes will provide a stimulating way
to inform the public about natural processes and their effects. We will prepare
and distribute animations of our earthquake simulations and related phenomena by
way of a webpage, and communicate our science through collaborative arrangements
with local schools and Rice teacher training courses. We will also develop new
course materials that can be used in undergraduate geology courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, we will carry out a systematic
modeling study using particle dynamics simulations to examine the controls on
seismic and aseismic slip on numerical analogs of heterogeneous faults modeled
after subduction megathrusts. Consistent with subduction megathrusts, our
research will focus on asymmetric faults in which stress and strength vary along
the length of the fault. We will use these simulations to develop catalogs of
slip events in both 2D and 3D, and then probe conditions along the fault before,
during, and after the events to gain insights into the conditions that initiate
unstable sliding, and those that cause run-away slip to stop. The overarching
questions we plan to address are: (1) What controls the size of an earthquake?
Is earthquake size predetermined, and if so, by what? (2) Are there any
consistent precursory phenomena (e.g., deformation) or properties changes that
can inform us about the onset of seismic slip? To address these questions, we
will probe the model data, including particle displacements, forces, packing
arrangements, etc., to obtain direct constraints on stress and strains and their
variations in space and time, as well as evolving mechanical properties such as
friction, dilatancy, strength, and stiffness. In this way, we can explore
specific controls on earthquake rupture and other slip behaviors. We will also
compare our catalogs of simulated earthquakes, correlated with the properties
changes listed above, with natural systems. Our models will help to clarify the
characteristics of faults responsible for different types of earthquakes, and
the processes that initiate and limit them, advancing our knowledge in this
area. This project will support one graduate student and one undergraduate
student, and formalize interdisciplinary collaborations at Rice. We will publish
and present our results at national and international meetings.