* 1723661
* DCL: EAGER: MAKER: Determining the Efficacy of Maker Activities by Navigating Discourse (DEMAND)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Jennifer Albert, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2020
* USD 284,560.00

Makerspaces have become increasingly popular in schools throughout the United
States thanks to movements like MakerFaire and other grassroots efforts. 
However, finding space and staff for a Makerspace can be daunting for schools.
The DEMAND project will address these barriers with standards-based kits
containing Maker materials, detailed lesson plans, and assessment rubrics.  The
kits will be available to all elementary school teachers within the partner
district and a lead teacher will be identified at each school. The goal of the
DEMAND project is to build a community of teachers and students committed to
integrating "Making", using a uniform pedagogy across the school
district. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan to investigate 1)the
efficacy of the kit-based approach to Making (vs. a dedicated Makerspace), 2)
the benefits of learning with Maker activities compared to other activities, and
3) the role of Maker activities in learner agency and broadening participation
in STEM.  The objective is to produce a well-researched teacher professional
development (PD) model for Maker activities. This project will encourage school-
based cohorts to attend the PD sessions. The investigators will conduct case
studies, comparing individual teachers in schools, and contexts, across the
district. The project will explore a new model for engaging more teachers in
learning about Making activities, thereby serving as a launching point to expose
a wider range of students to Making in various contexts. Additionally, in
order to understand learner agency within the Maker process and the affordances
for students' problem-solving skills and self-efficacy, the investigators will
analyze student and teacher discourse as they engage in Making
activities. &lt;br/&gt;