* 1723425
* Collaborative Research: SHINE--Magnetic Energy Release During Solar Eruptions - From Large to Small Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Katharine Reeves, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2020
* USD 215,114.00

This 3-year SHINE project is aimed at gaining a comprehensive understanding of
the physical connection between small-scale physical processes at magnetic
reconnection sites in the solar atmosphere and the evolution of solar eruptions
at greater scales. This, the project has the potential to significantly advance
knowledge of the energy release process in solar eruptions. In particular, the
project will explore the relationship between small-scale energy release in the
form of outflows in the current sheet region and the large-scale transport of
thermal energy in the flare structure. The integrated modeling efforts will form
the basis of the development of a more sophisticated, full three-dimensional
(3-D) simulation of solar eruptions in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
3-year research program integrates two sets of well-developed, state-of-the-art
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) simulations: one simulation models the large-scale
structure and evolution of solar flares, whereas the other simulation targets
detailed dynamics in and around the reconnection current sheet region at small
scales. The large-scale flare simulation will be used to set up the context and
initial conditions for the detailed full 3-D simulation of the reconnection
region. The outputs of the detailed small scale 3-D simulation, in turn, will
provide feedback and update the large-scale simulation to evaluate the
consequences of small-scale energy release processes. The modeling results will
be compared with extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and X-ray observations to test and
improve our understanding of the energy release and conversion processes from
small to large scales. A variety of well observed, but poorly understood
phenomena that are closely tied to the energy release processes will be
investigated and compared to model outputs, including supra-arcade down-flows
and other fast plasma outflows, current-sheet like structures above flare loops,
and hot loop-top EUV/X-ray sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improved knowledge
on the origin of solar eruptions is critical to understand basic science needed
to meet the goals of the National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plan, which
aims to develop tools to forecast space weather and mitigate its impacts. The
project team will involve students in this SHINE research through the
established CfA's Solar Physics Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program. These students come from a wide variety of backgrounds, including
traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences. Thus, the research and
EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.