* 1723677
* EAGER:Maker: Making Inspired by Nature: Digital Tools and Activities for Supporting Pre-service Elementary Teachers in Applying Biomimicry in a Maker-centered Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Douglas Williams, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 257,793.00

The University of Louisiana at Lafayette seeks to improve the effectiveness of
preparing elementary pre-service teachers to engage children in maker-centered
learning and design thinking through the lens of biomimicry. To achieve this,
the project will (a) build and evaluate digital resources and engaging
experiential lessons in innovation through the application of biomimicry and
design thinking in a maker-centered context for underrepresented and underserved
elementary children, and (b) develop and evaluate models for deepening pre-
service teachers' pedagogical knowledge for supporting student learning in
maker-centered classrooms. Pre-service teachers participating in these model
programs will gain valuable experience in modeling and developing maker-centered
learning dispositions for community children participating in after-school
programs as well as for the future students they will serve in their own
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is in the development
and evaluation of the project model which consists of two primary components:
(a) a two semester scaffolded sequence of Making and biomimicry experiences for
elementary pre-service teachers and (b) an elementary grades maker-centered
learning curriculum, Making Inspired by Nature. The project will introduce pre-
service teachers to innovative pedagogies such as systems thinking, inquiry,
biomimicry, innovation, and sharing work in a showcase. These activities will
follow a progression from Making as playful and experimental to using the
engineering design process of think, make, improve to take maker projects
through multiple iterations. Supported by examples of how nature functions, each
unit will culminate with an opportunity to apply biomimicry and the maker ideals
to solve a real world issue. These experiences will be extended into practice as
pre-service teachers mentor small groups of children during weekend and summer
programs for approximately 80 community children as they engage in the Making
Inspired by Nature curriculum to solve their own identified Making challenge.
This project is a part of NSF's Maker Dear Colleague Letter (DCL) portfolio (NSF
15-086), a collaborative investment of Directorates for Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources
(EHR) and Engineering (ENG).