* 1723804
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Enhancing Security Education through Transiting Research on Security in Emerging Network Technologies
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Xiao Su, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 135,232.00

Cybersecurity education is critical for the development of future cybersecurity
professionals, and for protecting IT assets. The advent of new network
technologies such as Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function
Virtualization (NFV) has resulted in a high degree of flexibility in network
infrastructure, but at the same time brought new security challenges. Although
current research efforts have prompted positive progress in addressing security
challenges and opportunities in SDN and NFV, the latest results appear in few
educational materials targeting SDN and NFV security. With emerging SDN and NFV
technologies, there is a need for education to keep pace. This project from the
San Jose State University Foundation aims to develop effective educational
materials on SDN and NFV security for preparing students to protect the emerging
SDN/NFV-based network infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance the knowledge of cybersecurity education by creating hands-on labs and
curriculum on SDN/NFV. The course materials, along with nine hands-on labs, will
aim to increase the educational resources for cybersecurity, particularly for
security in new networking technologies. Further, this project will advance the
usability and effectiveness of using a cloud-based open laboratory to support
hands-on labs on SDN/NFV security. The knowledge generated from this project can
be applied to transitioning research in security to teaching materials, and
integrating into computing curricula, as well as building faculty capacity in
security education. In addition, the joint effort in this collaborative project
will improve the partnership among three institutions to collaboratively improve
cybersecurity education.