* 1723817
* EAGER:MAKER: University of Hawaii MakerSTEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Judith Lemus, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 286,602.00

Leveraging knowledge about how "Making" actively engages participants in
authentic science and engineering practices, the University of Hawaii MakerSTEM
project explores a new model for teacher preparation in secondary science
education. Pre-service teachers will design and iterate their own science
investigations and classroom instructional materials in a makerspace lab studio
at the Hawaii Institute for Marine Biology. While much emphasis has been placed
on providing maker opportunities for students, teachers also need these
experiences to become qualified mentors and proficient facilitators of modern
STEM learning. MakerSTEM will help pre-service teachers in Hawaii to develop
proficiency in scientific investigation and design practices, and to become
innovators of student-driven active learning. The cumulative impact over the
course of a single teacher's career could reach 4,500 students. If successful,
this maker-based approach can be transferred to other teacher training programs,
potentially transforming K-12 science education by empowering teachers with deep
pedagogical content knowledge and skills that align with 21st Century STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project includes
investigation of 1) the efficacy of applying makerspace design principles to a
science teacher credential program and 2) the impact of MakerSTEM lab
environment on pre-service teacher STEM learning and practice through a
longitudinal case-study approach. Knowledge gained from this research will
result in a new heuristic model for how making can be effectively incorporated
into STEM teacher education. This line of investigation will begin to further
inform evidence-based teaching practices to improve learning outcomes and
contribute to a generalized grounded theory of STEM learning in college maker
labs. These insights may catalyze novel possibilities for the way science and
science education is offered on college campuses. The potential for communities
of learners to emerge within university maker labs may remodel the overall STEM
college learning experience, enabling students to address student-defined
problems and build collaborative partnerships in a way that parallels
professional practices.