* 1723388
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting the Oral Tradition of Northern Paiute, a Uto-Aztecan language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Thierry Veyrie, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2019
* USD 18,900.00

The linguistic diversity of North America is well-established in terms of the
numerous language families represented on this continent. However, the vitality
of these languages is threatened, making the documentation and maintenance of
surviving Native languages all the more pressing. The Native American Languages
Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of
the unique status and importance of Native American languages. The opportunity
to document the speech used in oral traditions and the verbal arts for Native
American languages is urgent, especially when this occurs in communities where
the language retains considerable vitality and is still used extensively by
speakers. This project will document oral traditions, and cultural and
ethnohistorical knowledge where the indigenous language usage and speakers'
traditional knowledge are very strong. The documentation will form the core
material analyzed in a doctoral dissertation produced by the CoPI. Broader
impacts include a publicly available deposit of the recordings and
transcriptions at the California Language Archive at the University of
California, Berkeley, and the uses of this material by the tribe to support
language revitalization and educational activities in culture, history and
related areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fort McDermitt Paiute-Shoshone
Reservation is an isolated Native community situated across the Nevada-Oregon
border, formed when the Atsak&amp;#616;da kwa N&amp;#616;m&amp;#616; (the people
of the Red Mountain), were joined by families from neighboring areas looking for
a Paiute safe haven as Euro-American settlers expanded settlements westward.
Northern Paiute, a member of the Uto-Aztecan language family, is used
extensively in this community by about three hundred speakers. This project will
record the Northern Paiute language in both casual and formal speech. It will
also document Paiute perspectives on past events as well as more distant
collective history for the community, examining how oral traditions are used,
and performed, as well as how they contrast with the Euro-American historical
discourse. Native American languages differ in their linguistic and information
structure from Indo-European languages like English. As a result, documenting
Native American cultures requires serious attention to not only the structure of
these languages, but also to the performance of verbal arts and how grammatical
structures interact to express historical and other knowledge. The CoPI, a
doctoral student at Indiana University, will analyze the documentation to
explore how oral traditions in Northern Paiute are performed. The analysis will
include how meaning is expressed in both the physical body in performance and
via the grammar through instrumental prefixes, morphemes referring to gestures
or parts of the body. Elicitation strategies range from videorecording of an
annual storytelling festival (started in 2016), the use of focus groups in which
people come together and discuss specific topics of the history of the
community, and interviews and field trips to places of relevance to the
community's collective history. By transcribing, analyzing, and translating
Northern Paiute texts, the project will expand the linguistic, cultural, and
historic record for the community and for researchers in history, anthropology,
and folklore, as well as other allied disciplines.