* 1723147
* Planning for the Ozark Research Field Station at Missouri S&amp;T
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Robin Verble, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 24,998.00

Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology (Missouri S&amp;T) is developing
a 5-year planning effort for a new field station, the Ozark Research Field
Station (ORFS) located in the Mill Creek watershed. The field station will serve
a variety of research, teaching, and outreach missions of the university. The
ORFS has already provided an excellent venue for experiential learning. Students
have conducted research projects as part of 7 classes taught at the field
station, and for independent research credit. Missouri S&amp;T has recently
implemented an experiential learning requirement for all undergraduates, and
data from field station classes can be used in assessing learning outcomes of
the requirement. The Mill Creek watershed also provides a great setting for
novel research. Sites along the stream have varying hydroperiods that can serve
as a natural experiment for examining the effects of droughts from climate
change on such streams. Several animal taxa in the watershed are endangered or
of concern, while other taxa are of recreational interest, such as trout,
turkey, and deer. Conservation and restoration programs for these and other taxa
can be evaluated for their effectiveness as a guide for wider implementation.
The ORFS will serve to introduce students, local residents, and a diverse
constituency to the value of Ozark ecosystems and field research. Outreach
opportunities with local K-12 schools, community groups, and others are
envisioned. Several outreach events have already taken place at the field
station and the surrounding area. A large BioBlitz occurred in the watershed
recently, involving over 80 scientists and citizens in a large-scale inventory
of biota along with a trash cleanup and festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planning effort will include three goals: 1) Establish an advisory board of on-
campus faculty and staff, local stakeholders and collaborators from government
agencies, and representatives from other field stations in Missouri and around
the country. This advisory board will hold meetings at the ORFS, and the ORFS
leaders will visit other field stations. 2) Expand the capabilities and
opportunities at the field station in the next few years. This goal will focus
on the growth of the research, teaching, and outreach programs for users from
Missouri S&amp;T, other campuses, government agencies, and local communities. In
addition to university personnel, several key groups, such as Missouri Stream
Teams and Master Naturalists, will benefit from activities and access to the
station. Also, the Newburg Children?s Museum and the Kaleidoscope Discovery
Center, two local science museums, can use the field station for educational
activities. 3) Adopt a 5-year strategic plan based on feedback from the advisory
board. This plan will guide the next steps in developing the ORFS to fulfill its
missions of research, teaching, and outreach.