* 1723211
* Classification of Methods for Bayesian Inverse Problems Governed by Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Georg Stadler, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Inverse problems emerge in all areas of science, engineering, technology, and
medicine. They provide a systematic and rigorous way to extract knowledge and
insight from observational data. When this data corresponds to observations of
natural or engineered systems that can be described by mathematical models, the
properties and structure of the inverse problem depend on the properties of
these models, which commonly involve partial differential equations (PDEs). It
is crucial that efficient inverse problem solution methods exploit these
properties. This is in particular the case when the inversion parameters are
high (or infinite) dimensional, when the mathematical models are given by PDEs,
and when one is interested in quantifying the uncertainty in the parameters, as
is important in many applications.

This project will systematically study properties and develop algorithms for
three inverse problems that are representative of a wide class of Bayesian
inverse problems governed by PDEs: (1) a parabolic inverse problem with
spatially (and temporally) well-separated parameter and observation locations,
(2) an elliptic Stokes flow problem for which a rich set of measurement data are
available and the locations corresponding to parameters and observations are not
well-separated, and (3) a hyperbolic problem with sparse point measurements. The
PI will study these problems theoretically, develop and classify structure-
exploiting methods to approximate their solutions, and implement these methods
in an open-source software library. All three prototype problems have important
and societally relevant real-world, large-scale analogues. Thus, any algorithmic
or theoretical findings obtained for the three model problems will have
immediate benefit for these grand challenge inverse problems.