* 1723337
* RAPID:  Cold Air Pool Exchange Processes during the Utah Wintertime Fine Particulate Study
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Sebastian Hoch, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 45,000.00

Persistent cold-air pools are a phenomena where air is effectively trapped in a
basin or valley during high pressure events in wintertime. They are especially
prevalent in high altitude basins in the western United States. One of the
impacts of cold air pools is that particulate pollutants accumulate and affect
the air quality for places like Salt Lake City, Utah. This award provides
funding for researchers to take surface-based meteorological measurements during
an existing aircraft-based air quality field campaign to better detail the
processes that affect air movement within the cold air pools and impact the
relevant chemical processes. In Salt Lake City alone there are over 1 million
people affected by these events, and the research results may extend to other
locations with similar topography such as Los Angeles and the Front Range of
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will join the NOAA-led Utah
Wintertime Fine Particulate Study which will take place in Jan-Feb 2017 in the
Salt Lake City region. The NSF-funded researchers will augment the air quality
focused study with meteorological measurements of the persistent cold pools that
set up in the valleys and basins of Utah in the wintertime. In cold air pooling
events vertical mixing is inhibited and particulate pollutants accumulate and
affect human health. Multiple ceilometers, a lidar, sodar, temperature sensors,
a surface flux station, and radiosonde launches will be deployed as ground-based
assets to complement the NOAA aircraft campaign. The deployment will target key
processes and questions regarding atmospheric mixing and airmass exchange that
affect chemical composition and chemical pathways of particulate air pollution
formation. The specific processes include: 1) vertical mixing within the
persistent cold-air pool, 2) nighttime injections of clean, but oxidant-rich air
along the basin sidewalls and through down-canyon flows, 3) daytime ventilation
processes along the basin sidewalls, and 4) airmass exhanges with the lake
boundary layer of the Great Salt Lake.