* 1723924
* S&AS: INT: Taskable and Adaptable Autonomy for Heterogeneous Marine Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Julie Adams, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,008,000.00

Underwater exploration using unmanned robotic vehicles has opened up vast new
areas for understanding the world's oceans. However, in the current state of
practice, human operators must provide specific waypoints for the vehicles to
follow, which is both time-consuming and inflexible. This project will develop
autonomy capabilities that facilitate on-vehicle intelligence, leading to longer
duration deployments of unmanned underwater and surface (on-water) vehicles.
Specifically, the project will enable autonomous information gathering missions,
such as searching for an area of interest and tracking targets of interest
(e.g., biological hot spots in the ocean). As the autonomous capabilities
improve over the course of this project, the amount of time that humans must
dedicate to interacting with, or correcting, the vehicle's actions will be
reduced, drastically improving the efficiency and reducing the cost of ocean
data collection.

The ultimate objective is to develop intelligent autonomy capabilities that
expand the functionality of unmanned marine systems and reduce the need for
human intervention and control. This goal will be achieved by focusing on three
key areas of marine vehicle autonomy: (1) the ability for humans to provide
high-level, taskable specifications to vehicles in a way that is understandable
to the autonomy system; (2) cognitive capabilities of autonomous vehicles to
provide intelligent in-situ adaptation with changing conditions in long-duration
missions; and (3) reflective and introspective failure recovery allowing the
vehicles to self-assess faults and respond to them appropriately while still
meeting the mission specifications. The proposed techniques will be validated
through two ocean deployments, consisting of multiple underwater gliders and
autonomous surface vehicles, as well as extensive simulated testing using
satellite data and data from field deployments.