* 1723444
* First Annual PI Meeting for the NSF Big Data Regional Innovation Hubs Program
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2017,08/31/2017
* Samarth Swarup, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

This project will organize the first annual PI Meeting for the NSF Big Data Hubs
and Big Data Spokes programs. This meeting will be held in conjunction with the
PI meeting of the NSF BIGDATA program. Together, these meetings convene all
Principal Investigators in these programs. The meeting is to take place on March
15-17, 2017 in Washington DC. This will be an opportunity for academic
researchers, industry participants, and representatives from government agencies
to interact, learn about the latest research and applications in Big Data,
identify opportunities for collaboration, future research directions, and
funding opportunities, and to discuss barriers and gaps. The meeting will
consist of invited talks, presentations by researchers funded through these
programs, panels with academic, industry, and government representatives, a
poster session, and multiple topical breakout sessions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF is funding research through its programs in Big Data
to cover all aspects of the Big Data ecosystem, including infrastructure
development, methodological progress, application development, and community-
building. These research programs cover mathematical, statistical, and
algorithmic foundations, the development of new technologies and techniques,
hardware and software infrastructure-building, and applications requiring
innovative uses of Big Data. The PI meeting will serve an the main opportunity
for all these communities to come together and explore new ideas and
partnerships. This meeting is expected to play a major role in growing the Big
Data community across a broad range of sectors and technologies, and performing
outreach to others interested in learning about these programs and contributing
as future proposers, sponsors, or partners.