* 1723610
* EAGER: MAKER: Developing a Model for Expanding Informal Tech Education for Underrepresented Communities through Makerspaces
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shawn Grimes, Digital Harbor Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,525.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). Building on a
successful approach to technical education training with minority youth through
the Baltimore-based Digital Harbor Foundation (DHF), the project will identify
efficient and effective methods of scaling maker-based technology education
programs, beginning with middle and high school youth. Maker education models
provide multiple points of entry for youth to gain exposure, interest, and
skill-building in high-growth technology skills. The DH model presents a
holistic, scaffolded approach to providing a long-term support for educators and
organizations as they integrate maker-based tech learning into their youth
offerings. Project research will inform best practices of scaling youth
makerspaces and tech education programs, especially for underrepresented youth.
Maker, academic, and youth-service communities will benefit from our training
materials, tech education curriculum, and evaluations of diverse engagement
strategies. The project will share its experiences, materials, and strategies
publicly through DH website, as well as via conferences, papers, as well as
dissemination of our training materials.

This project will test three professional development models: Satellite-Site,
Home-Site, and Remote Engagements. The goal is to find cost-efficient, yet
successful mechanisms to disseminate training for informal educators to
establish a safe, youth-focused makerspace inside their existing spaces; provide
starter curriculum to build basic competencies and maker mindsets for educators
and youth; support educators as they independently integrate their own tech
projects into future courses and activities in their programs. Project research
will: 1) compare three training and deployment methods to integrating a youth-
focused makerspace and entry-level curriculum into existing after-school
programs; 2) explore an innovative, scaffolded professional development approach
that encourages program ownership and continued skill-building for youth-service
providers.Â  Methods and analysis will respond to common techniques of
afterschool program management and STEM professional development approaches. As
an immediate result of this project, three independent afterschool programs
serving diverse audiences will receive basic equipment, training, and curriculum
to run their own tech education programs.