* 1723341
* EAGER:   Resilient Control Systems with respect to Instrumentation Attacks: Theory and Testbed Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Liang Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 134,922.00

In a cyber-physical system, the operation of the physical plant is typically
maintained by closed-loop control, which is intended to keep the plant process
variables in a desired range. A major part of any control system is its
instrumentation, i.e., sensors and actuators. Due to information exchange
between the controller and the instrumentation, the control system performance
may be compromised by attacks on its sensors and actuators. Indeed, the sensors
may project erroneous information to the controller and the actuators may
receive undesirable commands, possibly leading to a catastrophe. In this
research, the control system is referred to as resilient, if it identifies
attacks on the sensors and actuators involved in the feedback loops and
mitigates undesirable effects. The goal of the proposed research is to develop a
theory for analysis and design of resilient control systems with respect to
attacks on the instrumentation and to demonstrate its efficacy using the High
Performance Building Testbed at the United Technologies Research Center. The
broader impact of the project is in its effect on cyber-security of critical
infrastructure systems, such as power, telecommunications, transportation, high
performance buildings, gas, oil, and water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In this
project, we consider control systems, in which the sensors and actuators may be
under various types of instrumentation attacks through transfer function
modification and/or external deception signal injection. This project include
developing the following techniques: A method for system vulnerability
evaluation with respect to various instrumentation attacks; a method for optimal
controller design to minimize performance degradation under attacks, while
meeting desired performance specifications under non-attacked condition; a
method for actuator/sensor health assessment in control systems using the
synchronous detection approach; a method for design of resilient feedback
controllers, driven by the actuator and sensor health to detect, identify, and
mitigate instrumentation attacks; a method for knowledge fusion for process
variable estimation based on multiple sensors and control signal calculation
based on the knowledge fusion results. The project will significantly enhance
the field of CPS from the point of view of resiliency. &lt;br/&gt;