* 1723268
* James Reserve Facilities Improvements
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jennifer Gee, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 31,326.00

Documentation of environmental changes and depletion of natural resources
requires networking across a diversity of facilities and ecosystems, many of
them remote, to create a national infrastructure for research and training.
Energy reliability is crucial to this infrastructure. The James San Jacinto
Mountains Reserve is one of 39 closely connected reserves in the University of
California Natural Reserve system (http://www.jamesreserve.edu/), and its
location precludes use of conventional power. Nevertheless the James Reserve is
committed to advancing the nation's capacity to support basic research and to
sharing its resources with a diverse group of faculty, students, staff and the
public. Power from solar energy fuels typical daily operations at the James
Reserve. Requested funds will increase the battery bank to maximize the storage
of solar energy that is harvested from existing solar panels, which will
increase accessibility of the reserve. In addition to enhancing research,
increased power will facilitate extended visits from classes of students. Many
student visitors are from a diversity of urban, underrepresented and underserved
populations in Southern California who have never had a firsthand look at winter
snowpack. Understanding the connection between snowpack and drought is
fundamental for scientists and citizens alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Installation of photovoltaic batteries and a separate
power system for the weather station will improve its reliability, particularly
in winter months when it is currently prone to power failure. This will improve
availability of meteorological data. Increasing solar power storage will permit
year-round access. Other minor improvements will stabilize power to scientific
equipment and communications to increase research potential and improve safety.
Strengthening the infrastructure at the James Reserve will enable longitudinal
projects to become established as well as advance the capacity for future
research programs. The majority of new research programs at the James are
focused on the effects of shifting environmental conditions. Access to the James
is crucial to support a new cohort of principal investigators who collect data
during winter months, the season during which California receives most of its
precipitation. The James Reserve is a particularly important field site for many
projects because it is the only field station located in the San Jacinto
Mountains of Southern California, an ecologically important area. The San
Jacinto Mountains are a relatively humid sky island surrounded by desert; they
represent a unique northern and inland region of the Peninsular Mountain Ranges.
The James Reserve and surrounding region are vital for further research because
of its baseline abiotic and biotic data that extend back to the early 1900's.