* 1723640
* EAGER: Maker: Engaging Parents as Makers to Build Capacity for Community-Based Making
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,200.00

The Maker movement has grown considerably over the past decade, both in the USA
and internationally. Several varieties of "making" have been developed, but
there are still many important questions to ask and research to conduct about
how different programmatic structures may relate to the potential impact Maker
programs can have on individuals and communities. As part of a larger, long-
range initiative in their local community, the New York Hall of Science proposes
to leverage the philosophy and activities of the Maker movement to take
important first steps toward realizing their eventual goal of developing family
and community-wide commitment to and improvement of STEM education. The project
would build both foundational and practical knowledge about how parents with
little or no prior knowledge of or experience with Making choose to engage with,
contribute to, and learn from Maker programming designed for families with
children from low-income households and backgrounds that are under-represented
in the STEM professions. The intent is to build their understanding of the value
of Making as a pathway toward deeper STEM learning. The project is characterized
as "high-risk with potentially high-payoff." It applies a community psychology
approach (rather than individual psychology) to the study of Making, and it
focuses on parents as potential learners and leaders. While some work has been
done in the field with respect to the role of parents in Maker environments,
this is a new approach to the study of Making and its potential influence on the
broader culture of STEM learning in a community. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two informal learning environments will be
developed and studied at the New York Hall of Science: Learning Together, a
table-top, minimally staff-facilitated setting in the Hall's science library,
and Family Making, a high-tech and staff-facilitated experience in the Hall's
maker facility. The study poses two research questions: (1) How, and to what
extent, do the Learning Together and Family Making programs attract and sustain
parental engagement, parental facilitation of children's activity, and parents'
own explorations of Making? (2) From a community psychology perspective, what
social structures, resources, social processes, and surrounding institutional
conditions support or impede these parental pathways into exploring and
understanding Making as a pathway toward STEM learning? The study will involve
sustained collaborations between the Hall's Maker Space staff and research team,
and will seek to generate guidance about how to design Maker programming that
attracts and retains low-income, under-served family groups and new knowledge
about how external structures and practices shape this audiences' perceptions of
and interest in Making as a mode of STEM learning.