* 1723293
* Collaborative Research: De Novo Evolution of Multicellularity in a Unicellular Volvocine Alga
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Matthew Herron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2019
* USD 552,575.00

Life on Earth includes both very simple and rather complex organisms. The
central question motivating this research is how do simple organisms evolve into
complex organisms? The origin of organisms composed of more than one cell (i.e.,
multicellular organisms) was one of a few major events in the history of life
that created new opportunities for more complex biological systems, such as
plants and animals, to evolve. However, understanding how and why this kind of
complexity has increased in some lineages remains a major challenge for
evolutionary biology. The challenges posed by the evolution of multicellularity,
for example, in the evolution of mechanisms for sharing labor and cooperating
among the cells within an organism, underlie many medical conditions and are
foundational in understanding genotype to phenotype relationships. The goal of
this project is to experimentally evolve multicellularity under controlled
conditions and study the pathways involved. This project will also develop novel
curriculum materials for teaching high school students about cellular
differentiation and the challenges of multicellularity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to experimentally evolve
multicellularity in the single-celled green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. C.
reinhardtii is an established model system with a well-developed set of genetic
tools. Its relatives among the volvocine algae range from species having single
cells to those having tens of thousands of cells of different cell types.
Generation of a novel origin of multicellularity in the lab will enable direct
comparison of multicellular descendants to their unicellular ancestors. Twelve
replicate populations will be evolved in the presence of a filter-feeding
predator, conditions known to favor multicellularity. Genetic changes that occur
over the course of these experiments will be tracked to reveal the genetic basis
of multicellularity and the evolutionary processes giving rise to those changes.
Experimental data will be compared with the evolutionary and genetic routes by
which multicellularity evolved in the volvocine algae. Finally, the role of
environmentally induced developmental changes in the evolution of
multicellularity will be evaluated.