* 1723076
* FSML:   Planning for the Future of the Las Cruces Research  Station, Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Elizabeth Braker, Organization for Tropical Studies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 22,101.00

The objective of the Las Cruces planning session is to produce a five-year
development plan for the Las Cruces Research Station, a field station of the
Organization for Tropical Studies located in southern Costa Rica. The station
contains 365-ha of primary and secondary forest and one of the most important
botanical gardens in Central America. The station's physical location places it
at the intersection of natural and human dynamics that are central to tropical
environmental science. It is embedded in an agricultural landscape yet has
exceptionally high levels of biodiversity due to the rugged topography, the
surrounding remnant forest fragments, and its role as part of a biological
corridor between two of the most critical conservation areas in Central America:
La Amistad International Park and the Osa Peninsula. However, the current lack
of adequate infrastructure is a strong limiting factor to ongoing and new lines
of research. The Las Cruces planning session will address expansion of station
infrastructure to meet current project needs and allow for the modernization and
technological improvements that will make the station a hub for research and
conservation. The importance of reliable data on a broader range of physical
conditions and their temporal behavior is becoming ever more critical to
understand the function and dynamics of natural systems. The Las Cruces planning
session will assess the opportunities for expansion of environmental monitoring
and instrumentation and evaluate associated needs for improved
cyberinfrastructure. Finally, upgrades to station facilities will open new lines
of research that can be integrated with education and research training
opportunities for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Las Cruces Research Station
currently supports a suite of ongoing projects addressing landscape-level
question in biogeography, forest fragmentation, and ecological restoration. The
Las Cruces planning session will focus on: (i) potential expansion in current
research areas as well as new research directions, especially in environmental
sciences, that best utilizes the Las Cruces-Las Alturas biogeophysical setting;
(ii) new facilities, laboratory infrastructure, cyberinfrastructure, and
equipment needed to support current and emerging areas of research; (iii) key
environmental monitoring and instrumentation needed to support existing and
emerging research questions; and (iv) integration of this research with
education and research training for students. The planning grant will enable
sixteen U.S. researchers and graduate students to travel to Las Cruces for a
three-day workshop, with overnights in San Jose, Costa Rica, six hours from the
station. The planning session will facilitate communication among established
scientists as well as graduate and undergraduate students from a range of
disciplines and enable new ideas and directions for research in tropical
environmental sciences to emerge. Collaboration among these researchers and
students at Las Cruces Research Station is expected to result in the development
of new, regional multi-disciplinary projects. As such, the Las Cruces planning
session will enhance opportunities for underrepresented groups by encouraging
collaboration and planning for new education opportunities and hands-on field
research projects.