* 1723612
* I-Corps: Internet of Things Monitoring System
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2017
* Eugene Wu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will result in a
better understanding of the need for internet connected devices and how the
collected data can influence specific customer needs. If designed for firearms,
this will be the first major, objective firearms data collection technology. For
private security and insurance firms, this could reduce liability and increase
cost savings on premiums. Among law enforcement, the data could usher in a new
age of policing and firearms handling, building trust within communities while
keeping officers safe. Researching the data could generate new methods of
visualizing large amounts of data that could be applied to other data-centric
fields and technologies. Both the data analytics and the firearms industry are
multi-billion dollar markets and if implemented effectively, this will drive
technological advancements in a rapidly growing market.

This I-Corps project will explore the possible applications of a device composed
of a series of ruggedized sensors, built into the grips of a firearm, dedicated
to providing real time firearms activity monitoring, including firearm location,
orientation, and discharge monitoring. This is an install and forget device,
independent of the firing mechanism (does not prevent discharges), that collects
objective data on firearms usage and orientation. In turn, the data collected
has a host of possible applications among security forces, ranging from
augmenting critical first response systems to minimizing response times and
improving situational awareness, to machine learning in automating radio
transmissions and predictive firearm maintenance. Inventory control and firearms
accountability are also possibilities with this potentially life-saving
technology.