* 1723067
* Array Science for the IRIS Community Wavefields Experiment
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Charles Langston, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 05/31/2020
* USD 144,770.00

Seismic waves that move through the Earth give critical information about the
earthquake sources that create them and about the physical nature of the crust
and mantle that they move through. Seismic waves are generally recorded by a
seismic instrument situated at a single spot on Earth's surface so that wave
motion is recorded can be seen as time changes. A seismic array is a collection
of seismic instruments arranged in a pattern such that waves can be imaged over
space as well as time. This additional information is important to the solution
of many practical problems in hydrocarbon exploration, earthquake source
physics, explosion detection, earthquake hazards assessments, and scientific
studies of the structure of Earth's crust and mantle. Research in this project
is centered on the study of new array geometries and data analysis methods that
have been made possible by the deployment of a scientific-community experiment
in Northern Oklahoma by the Incorporated Research Institutions in Seismology
(IRIS) consortium. Several experimental arrays were deployed over an area of
active earthquake activity to collect seismic data in order to validate the new
array methods. Expected results will be important in the design of future arrays
and to the understanding of the relatively new Oklahoma seismic activity. In
addition, the results will be incorporated into the IRIS Data Analysis and
Processing short course held during the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRIS
consortium deployed a community-planned experiment in northern Oklahoma in an
area of presumed active induced seismicity from June 22, 2016 until the end of
November 2016. Scientific goals for this experiment included: densely recording
small to moderate induced earthquakes to understand their source processes,
deploying experimental arrays to examine the utility of certain array geometries
and methods in determining wave attributes of local and regional seismicity
(e.g., horizontal phase velocity, azimuth of propagation), dense recording over
two 5- and one 12-km-long profiles to probe for crustal structure, and use of
local infrasound arrays in discriminating wave sources seen in the seismic
signals. The present project is concerned with the PI-'s contribution to the
experiment in testing two experimental array designs. These include a phased,
frequency-wavenumber array in the defined by the 'Golay 3x6' spatial geometry
3x6 geometry consisting of 18 broadband stations with a 6 km aperture (3x6
geometry) and a separate 7-level, nested gradiometer consisting of 112 three-
component industry nodal seismometers deployed over a square 800m on a side.
Deployment of these two arrays offers an unprecedented opportunity to rigorously
test the performance of a gradiometer against a phased array using the same
earthquake sources that generate the wavefield. A positive result for the much
smaller gradiometer would allow array deployments in areas with difficult field
conditions such as inaccessibility or having poor security. Objectives for
testing the performance of the "Golay 3x6' array are to examine its stability as
a function of frequency and degradation of the array response due to field
siting requirements. The great redundancy in sampling the wavefield will allow
testing of methods to compute the spatial wave gradients and dealing with
amplitude statics problems due to site, installation, and instrument response
factors. In addition to evaluating the arrays, the seismic data and wave
attributes will be used to study local and regional wave propagation and will
serve to train young scientists on array processing techniques. The project will
support a graduate student.