* 1723366
* Testing the Feasibility of Batteryless Physiological Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2017,09/30/2020
* Nima Maghari, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 298,030.00

This award studies the ways to monitor the most common physiological variables
(heart rate, blood pressure, respiration and brain activity) with miniature
devices that can harvest energy from the body instead of being powered by
batteries, and using electrodes that can be applied to the skin as a "tattoo".
This next generation of Mobile Health (mHealth) devices will improve further the
national health and wellbeing. A major bottleneck towards the goal is how to
decrease the power consumption of algorithms required to extract information
from the collected signals. The aim of this project is to design, implement and
validate a new ultra-low power signal processing solution that does not require
digital computers, but much simpler digital devices driven by input pulse
trains. The project will also train two graduate students in the theory and
technology to design the next generation of biomedical devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will develop new pulse based algorithms and a
reconfigurable hardware platform that amplifies, converts and quantifies
structure of the signals in real time. More specifically, the research plan
includes two synergestic aims: the first aim develops a mathematical framework
based on signal processing and a statistical-syntactic approach to learn
directly from data the structure of the input. A nonlinear state model called
KAARMA (kernel adaptive autoregressive moving average model) will be trained
statistically from data to recognize events with clinical significance. Once
trained, KAARMA can be converted in a combination of finite state machines and
memory tables that can easily be implemented in ultra-low power reconfigurable
digital logic platform to design ambulatory monitoring of physiological
variables for mHealth. No digital signal processors are needed in the deployed
proposed device, lowering power consumption, maintaining programmability and the
quality of the digital extraction of information. The second aim is to design an
ultra-low power reconfigurable analog front-end sensing integrated circuit using
mainly digital standard cells to implement a variable number of channels,
multipurpose analog amplification and filtering, and the finite state machines.
The expected goal is to demonstrate power consumption of less than 5 microwatts
to analyze one channel of electrocardiogram (ECG). The KAARMA will be extended
to blood pressure, respiration and brain activity. Validation with competing
technologies will be conducted in the Physionet database.