* 1723352
* CAPA: Collaborative Research: ARION: Taming Heterogeneity with DSLs, Approximation, and Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Rastislav Bodik, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 850,000.00

Specialization and the arrival of new technologies are key forces motivating
heterogeneous systems. Heterogeneity is already in use widely, with public
clouds offering instances that are heterogeneous in both compute capabilities
and storage. This project identifies the following forces that will make systems
heterogeneous beyond just compute and storage, complicating programming and
compilation beyond the challenges that we face today. This project develops
Arion, a system for compiling programs onto heterogeneous platforms based on
several unifying ideas. The Arion system will be evaluated on practically
relevant workloads ranging from computer vision and virtual reality, to graph
computations, machine learning and stream processing. The investigators will
work with partners in industry to transfer research results to products, and the
tools and software developed by this project will be released as open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project relies on four
unifying ideas. The first thrust explores schedules and type systems separate a
program's specification from its implementation strategy, enabling performance
portability because one can select, without changing the program, its
parallelism, locality, and hardware mapping. The second thrust uses domain-
specific languages to describe not only programs but also artifacts used during
compilation, such as schedules, resource-, and memory consistency models. This
allows automatic synthesis of these artifacts. The third thrust uses resource
models to bring scheduling and synthesis to large programs because the target
program need not be scheduled or synthesized all at once. Instead, the compiler
makes high-level decisions by estimating performance using a model before
committing to low-level decisions. Finally, the investigators will use formal
methods to lift programs into, and verify and synthesize programs in our DSLs,
providing a high degree of automation. The verifiers and synthesizers are
automatically generated from descriptions of DSLs.