* 1723019
* Uncertainty Quantification in Seismic Inversion by Nonlinear Sampling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Mrinal Sen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 407,916.00

In many branches of science and engineering construction of an image of targets
from remotely sensed data is an essential task for drawing meaningful
inferences. The data, however, are often far from being ideal in that they are
generally contaminated with noise and may be inadequate because of issues such
as the geometry or density of the recording stations with respect to the targets
to be imaged. In addition, resolution of the target is often chosen in an ad-hoc
manner, introducing uncertainty in the resulting answer. Quantitative measures
of uncertainty are, therefore, crucial to establishing confidence in the results
of data analysis. Existing methods of characterizing uncertainty are often based
on simplistic assumptions primarily because of limitations of computing powers.
The objective of this proposal is to develop a technique for estimation of
uncertainty using nonlinear sampling that will be applied to imaging of seismic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic tomography is the primary tool for estimating
Earth?s subsurface images from seismic travel time, amplitude and waveform data.
The data are often inadequate and noisy, and the forward modeling is generally
based on approximate physics. Ad hoc parameterization of subsurface model
parameters adds further complication in estimation of subsurface
characteristics. The non-uniqueness in the solution estimates has been well
recognized in the past and the need for uncertainty quantification has been
promoted by the geophysics community. The Bayesian approach to describing our
inverse problems has been found appropriate for this purpose. It enables us to
describe our answer in terms of a probability density function, called the
posterior probability density (PPD). A simple functional description of the PPD
is generally not available, however. Thus, estimating samples from the PPD which
is generally highly multi-modal is a challenging task. The common practice is to
derive the maximum a posterioi (MAP) model and represent the uncertainty using
the Hessian at the MAP point. This method assumes that the PPD is Gaussian ? an
assumption often violated due to the nonlinear nature of the forward problem and
the noise characteristics in the data. On the other hand, Metropolis-Hastings
based Markov chain Monte Carlo methods are computationally very expensive, often
requiring over a million forward model evaluations. Here we propose to develop
computationally efficient MCMC methods for uncertainty quantification with
application to seismic tomography. A Reversible jump Monte Carlo method (RJMCMC)
in which the data themselves are allowed to find suitable number of model
parameters required, addresses some of the shortcomings of the commonly used
methods. The method, however, is computationally expensive. The researchers
propose to develop and implement a new method called Reversible jump Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (RJHMC) method to seismic inversion. This method can be demonstrated
to be two times faster than the conventional RJMCMC since it uses gradient
information to take large jumps in MCMC steps. It will be applied to a 2D marine
multi-channel seismic dataset.