* 1723430
* Student Travel Support for 2017 Web Archiving Data Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Matthew Weber, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 01/31/2018
* USD 24,113.00

Funding will provide graduate student support for two workshops Web Archiving
Data Workshops in 2017. The workshops focus on analyzing archived Web data. Such
data sources provide unique opportunities to examine social science phenomena
that have evolved over time, such as how news media is presented on the Web or
how individuals interact in online discussions. On the other hand, such data are
often difficult to access and challenging to analyze due to the fact that the
data were often captured using sporadic or random approaches, due to data
formats that are opaque and not always standardized, and due to the large size
of the data (mid-sized collections can be on the terabyte scale). The workshops
will educate graduate students with regards to combinations of code and research
questions that can be used to design appropriate research studies and to then
access and analyze this type of data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
workshops is interdisciplinary, bringing together research interests from
disciplines as diverse as computer science, social science and the humanities
Participants will work hands-on with data, will learn new programming skills,
and will develop pilot projects for new research that they will be able to
continue at their home institutions. For example, workshop participants will
learn about the Warcbase software package (based on Spark and Scala), and will
also have the opportunity to analyze data using in-browser Python notebooks. The
first workshop will take place in February 2017 at the Internet Archive in San
Francisco, CA, and the second workshop will take place in June 2017 at the
British Library in London, UK. The first workshop will focus on the use of
application programming interfaces for interoperability between collections and
institutions. The second workshop will focus on establishing international
collaborations between North American and European researchers, and will include
a discussion of how to utilize archived Web data with other types of data such
as socioeconomic variables. Data used and projects developed during the
workshops will be published to the workshop website, and will also be made
available via a GitHub repository. A final report will be produced summarizing
the results of the workshop, and reviewing current state of the art research
pertaining to archived Web data. This will be a significant contribution to the
field as it is beginning to coalesce.