* 1723266
* Science in the Sierra Madre: developing infrastructure for multidisciplinary research at the CICHAZ field station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gil Rosenthal, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 194,194.00

This FSML improvement grant proposal addresses the infrastructure and shared
instrumentation needs of the Centro de Investigaciones Cientificas de las
Huastecas "Aguazarca" (CICHAZ) field station located in the Sierra Madre
Oriental (http://www.cichaz.org/). CICHAZ is located in the unique Sierra y
Huasteca region of central Mexico, an area high in biological and cultural
diversity but devoid of academic and research institutions. This field station
is associated with Texas A&M University and hosts an increasing number of
scientists annually who need a broad array of scientific resources. Since its
founding in 2005, CICHAZ has hosted over 150 researchers in the natural and
social sciences from over 30 institutions internationally, fostered 9 Ph.D. and
two Master's theses, and attracted 11 NSF-funded projects. CICHAZ has provided
research and cultural experiences for undergraduates, local residents, and
members of the U.S. public. In addition to long-term lodging for up to 11
researchers, the station has built up facilities including an indoor fishroom,
an array of 24 aquatic mesocosms, and a small laboratory for molecular biology.
This award will provide the infrastructure and equipment for collecting and
analyzing genomic data; controlled husbandry of plants and animals; and
ecological and evolutionary studies in the region.

With this grant, an existing laboratory will be converted into a standard
molecular wet lab, featuring a MinIon genome sequencer. This will enable
researchers to collect and analyze nucleic acid data in situ within the course
of a field stay. Two new greenhouse facilities will be erected to house animals
and plants for controlled studies, as well as sustainable improvements to
address the anticipated increase in energy needs. Finally, the station will
acquire a mobile laboratory flexibly equipped with instruments for stream
sampling, water quality analysis, and sedimentary core extraction. These
proposed improvements have fundamental impacts on outreach efforts, and will
ensure success of broader impacts initiatives including research experiences for
US and Mexican undergraduates, and for local K-12 students, focused on
integrating field and environmental approaches with state-of-the-art techniques
for measurement and analysis. The mobile laboratory will revolutionize
engagement with schools and with remote indigenous communities, by enabling
visiting researchers to work with staff in designing outreach programs in local
communities.