* 1723381
* S&amp;AS:INT: Integrated Reasoning, Planning and Acting for Household Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Tomas Lozano-Perez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Robots have the potential for enormous beneficial impact on society in fields
such as cleaning, tidying, and cooking in households and hospitals, and
supporting the elderly to age in place. To achieve many of these benefits,
however, these systems will need to be smart enough so that they can be easily
told what to do and act sensibly over long periods without needing constant
supervision. The proposed research aims to develop fundamental algorithms that
will enable robots to operate autonomously in complex domains, characterized by
substantial uncertainty, complex interacting goals, and interaction with
multiple people and many objects. Graduate and undergraduate students are
involved in all aspects of the research, and the research in this project will
become part of a new "AI in Robotics" project course at MIT (also available on-
line).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental approach in this proposal is
decision-theoretic: (a) the system's uncertainty about its physical environment
(such as location, shape, type, mass, etc. of objects) as well as mental states
of other agents (such as intentions and desires) is modeled probabilistically;
(b) design objectives for the system are articulated in terms of utility; and
(c) the robot chooses actions according to the principle of rationality, that
is, it should do things expected to gain high utility. While finding optimal
solutions in complex domains is highly computationally intractable; the project
will develop principled approximate solutions that are tractable, based on
principles of hierarchical abstraction in space and time, planning in advance
for only the most likely outcomes, and factoring complex processes into nearly-
independent subprocesses.&lt;br/&gt;