* 1723075
* Request for Supplemental Funds for the 18th International Conference on II-VI Compounds and Related Materials
* EHR,HRD
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Maria Tamargo, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
provides support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CREST Center
for Interfase Design and Engineered Assembly of Low-Dimensional Systems at City
University of New York (CUNY) City College requests National Science Foundation
support for the 18th International Conference on II-VI Compounds and Related
Materials.&lt;br/&gt;II-VI semiconductor compounds are composed of a metal from
either group 2 or 12 of the periodic table. The scope of the conference spans
synthesis techniques, investigation of new physical phenomena and innovative
device development. Specific topics that will be covered include growth,
characterization, structure, physics and devices of II-VI and related compounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference has been a significant contributor of
modern science and technology since it was established. Ground breaking research
in the growth and characterization of materials and design and implementation of
new devices of interest in medical, military or imaging domains has been carried
out since the conference began. The recent strategic importance of solar cells
based on II-VI compounds and the development of new materials with related
fabrication properties have increased activity in this field with enormous
potential, and has led to a surge in interest in the conference
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will provide a unique forum for
researchers from two CREST Centers (CUNY and University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez) to expand and promote the Centers' collaborations and allow CREST
Center students and faculty to interact in a unique global research environment.
Student participation will be encouraged through the availability of travel
support and a student presentation competition.