* 1723832
* Investigation of the mechanisms that drive intraseasonal Arctic surface air temperature variability during the winter
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Steven Feldstein, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 607,455.00

The scientific objectives of this proposal are to advance understanding of the
physical mechanisms behind day-to-month time scale variability in Arctic surface
air temperature during the cold season. Over the past several decades, the
Arctic has been warming twice as fast as the rest of the planet, and most of
this warming has occurred during winter when the Arctic receives very little
sunlight. Until recently, the primary research focus in Arctic science has been
on warm season processes; however, recent studies show that during winter when
there is virtually no sunlight over the Arctic, warm moist air associated with
weather systems is transported from the midlatitudes into the Arctic. These warm
moist air intrusions, which can even warm high Arctic regions, have been
occurring more frequently during recent years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will improve extended and seasonal prediction of Arctic sea ice. It
will also support a graduate student. The team will collaborate with The Center
for Science and The Schools (CSATS) at Penn State University to lead two single-
day workshops on Arctic processes for middle school teachers from urban and
rural Pennsylvania school districts serving populations highly underrepresented
in science, technology, engineering, and math fields. The workshop activity will
enhance the teachers' awareness of the importance of studying the Arctic for the
winter season. CSATS will evaluate the effectiveness of the workshop through
pre/post tests, making necessary adjustments to the pedagogy sessions and
activities for the second workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms that drive
day-to-month variability of Arctic surface air temperature will be investigated.
The evolution of dominant patterns of Arctic temperature field will be examined
and quantified by performing surface energy budget analysis and moist static
energy analysis for the atmosphere. The analysis will also include calculations
of wave energy propagation. These data analyses will be complemented by
computations with a numerical model of the atmosphere. The research will also
include an examination of ocean currents and ocean temperatures, as well as sea
ice data.