* 1723768
* SaTC: EDU: Digital Forensics Education for Judicial Officials
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Yuliang Zheng, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 02/28/2021
* USD 299,949.00

As society becomes more dependent on digital technology, cyber-crime continues
to be an increasing threat. There is a growing need to counter cyber-crime
through digital forensics investigations. With rapid developments in technology
such as cloud computing, the Internet of Things, and mobile computing, it is
vital to ensure the proper training of law enforcement personnel and judges in
the theory and practice of digital forensics. This project from the University
of Alabama at Birmingham aims to develop curricula, educational materials, and
courses for training law enforcement and judicial personnel in digital
forensics. The courses will serve the following purposes: (1) educate legal
professionals on the basics of computer security and forensics terminology, (2)
generate knowledge and understanding of technology that can lead to more
effective judicial decisions and (3) reduce mistakes associated digital
forensics investigations. Educating law enforcement and judicial personnel will
improve the understanding and handling of digital forensic evidence in legal
cases and investigations. This will lead to significant improvements in
investigating and prosecuting cyber-crime, helping build a safer society.

The project will create and evaluate a unique set of educational modules and
courses in digital forensics that are optimized for training legal
professionals, including judges, prosecutors, and attorneys. The project will
design a series of modules/courses on digital forensics and evaluate their
effectiveness in educating the actual target demographics. This will be done in
partnership with legal entities as well as practitioners and educational experts
and instructional designers. Training materials will be designed to be scalable
to nationwide law enforcement and judicial professionals, as well as easily
adaptable so that it may keep pace with rapidly changing attacks and forensic
techniques. The project will also involve undergraduate researchers and
students, as well as women and minorities. Additionally, it will also involve
students from a newly established BS degree program in Digital Forensics and the
NSF SFS program in Computer Forensics at UAB. Course materials developed for
this project will be made available to law enforcement and judicial
professionals from all over the nation, helping address the nationwide shortage
of legal professionals who are skilled in digital forensics.