* 1723877
* Documenting America's Cultural Heritage
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Kevin Nolan, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 136,430.00

Private archaeological collections are abundant in the United States, holding
upwards of 90% of informative artifacts like "arrow points." The full story of
how prehistoric cultures coped with adversity and environmental change demands
incorporating into archaeological research the knowledge that resides in private
collections. The Central Ohio Archaeological Digitization Survey (COADS) is the
first systematic effort to map and digitize collections from a specific region
of the United States, the remarkable prehistoric landscape of Ohio's central
Scioto Valley. One of its chief innovations is to treat local knowledge as
integral to the archaeological record and research. In the process, COADS
documents prehistoric cultural transitions as responses to population growth,
economic change, and landscape development. It uses archaeology's unique
perspective to study tempo and mode of long-term technological change. COADS
serves as a model for engaging the public in contributing to understanding of
the human condition, and improves understanding of how prehistoric native
cultures thrived over long periods. COADS also provides students and involved
citizens training in proper mapping and documentation methods, and expands data-
collection for preservation planning. COADS facilitates efficient and
responsible stewardship of heritage resources, and planning more efficiently for
development that capitalizes on heritage while maximizing preservation. Finally,
COADS creates an enormous database of virtual collections that can be used for
research and education purposes long after the physical material is
dispersed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COADS integrates the materials from private
collections with previous site- and region-based analyses into a composite model
of distribution of human activity on the landscape over time. Previous work
constructed a mutually reinforcing model of transition from mobility to
residential stability (i.e., more sedentary populations) concomitant with a
shift to increasing focus on, and eventual domestication of, seed crops. COADS
employs geometric morphometrics to explore: 1) the implications of sedentism
through the predicted effects on tool shape and degree of toolstone curation;
and 2) the nature of transition of technology from one "type" to another. COADS
creates the biggest archive of private collections for a region. Through high
resolution 3D and 2D scanning, COADS serves as a portable research and education
resource for the public and scholars. Increasingly it is realized that
prehistory is not accurately characterized by the major excavated sites. One
must examine all parts of the landscape and multiple aspects of past cultural
systems. Documenting private collections fills many of the gaps in the official
record.