* 1723759
* The behavioral and neural basis of codeswitching: bilingual speech, executive control, and language processing
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Melinda Fricke, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 18,422.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship supports the career development of a
recent Ph.D. graduate from the University of California, Berkeley in the field
of Linguistics. The research is supervised by two professors from the Center for
Language Science at the Pennsylvania State University. This interdisciplinary
research project is an important step toward understanding the commonalities and
differences between monolingual and multilingual language processing.
Bilingualism has historically been treated as its own separate field, but the
current study contributes a unique set of data that can be exploited to better
understand the cognitive resources that underlie all language processing. A
better understanding of bilingual/multilingual linguistic norms is critical for
the development of effective teaching curricula and assessments. In addition,
the results of this work have the potential to be useful for diagnostic and
treatment materials in a clinical setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
incorporates methods from phonetics, corpus linguistics, cognitive psychology,
and cognitive neuroscience to better understand the time course of processes
underlying speech production and speech perception. The project uses bilingual
language processing as a context that can reveal cognitive mechanisms that are
otherwise hidden in monolingual speakers. The specific research questions target
the interplay between the neural signature of inhibitory processes, as revealed
using Event Related Potentials (ERPs), and the behavioral outcome of that
inhibition, as revealed in acoustic measures of speech articulation. The studies
take advantage of bilinguals' ability to switch languages mid-sentence. The
training component of this project is both theoretical and methodological. The
project capitalizes on the Fellow's previous training while simultaneously
familiarizing her with the theoretical background necessary to conduct research
related to the cognitive psychology of bilingualism, and the methodological
training necessary to incorporate neurocognitive and eyetracking methods into
her future work. The intellectual merit of the proposed research is its ability
to tie together findings from traditionally separate approaches to studying
language.