* 1723765
* CyberCorps: Capacity Building In Social Engineering Penetration Testing
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Akbar Siami Namin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Social engineering is the act of using methods of deception to manipulate
victims into revealing personal information. Social engineering attacks can be
launched through different methods, such as targeted phishing/scam emails,
fraudulent text messages, or by observation of a person's computer activity over
their shoulder, i.e., "shoulder surfing." The project from Texas Tech University
will identify the social skillsets that professional and ethical hackers need
for launching deceptive social engineering attacks. This project proposes to:
carry-out experiments to understand factors at play during social engineering
attacks; develop of educational materials that incorporate lessons learned from
these experiments; and offer opportunities for students and educators to
practice social engineering attack-tactics with one another. Through these
approaches, the project will increase the number of cybersecurity-capable
professionals and enable them to conduct better and more effective tests of
security of systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the project, human-factor
experiments will be conducted to understand the factors at play on three major
social engineering attack methods: i) the characteristics of emails that enable
launching successful phishing attacks, ii) the behavior and manner of attackers
when deceiving victims through phone calls with the purpose of divulging the
victims' personal information, and iii) the behavior and manner of attackers
when physically approaching victims with the goal of obtaining sensitive
information. In addition, project personnel will develop a set of instructional
modules for a course on Social Engineering. Those modules will a) reflect the
results of the human-factor experiments, b) include penetration testing attack
toolkits that allow students to gain hands-on experience with such attacks, and
c) include lesson plans to help cybersecurity professionals learn social
engineering content and become better penetration testers. To build a capacity
in social engineering, the project will offer professional development workshops
for students and educators from across the nation where the results of this
research will be showcased. These workshops will provide an opportunity for
students and educators to gain hands-on experience with social engineering
skills so that they may better understand the nature and efficacy of these
approaches, and be better equipped to address them.