* 1723380
* EAGER: MAKER: Mobile Makerspaces for Children's Hospital Patients: Exploring Impact on Patients' Agency, Creative STEM Problem Solving and Physical Well-being
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Steven Schneider, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 09/30/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The Maker movement has grown considerably over the past decade, both in the USA
and internationally. Several varieties of Making have been developed, but there
are still many important questions to ask and research to conduct about how
different programmatic structures may relate to the potential impact Maker
programs can have on individuals and communities. WestEd, in collaboration with
the Lucile Packard Children's Hospital, the University of Michigan C. S. Mott
Hospital Children's Hospital, and the Children's Hospital of Orange County, is
conducting a year-long exploratory research study that will focus on the out-of-
school learning by adolescents and young adults in children's hospitals. This
research study will focus on mobile and dedicated Makerspaces in hospitals to
support patients' learning. The application of Makerspaces to hospital
environments is a unique opportunity to research a critical need of chronically
ill individuals, i.e. to explore how Making can enhance patients' agency,
creative STEM learning, and physical well-being. The proposed study is building
on the prior work of the principal investigator and will: (1) examine the nature
and processes of learning in children's hospitals; (2) revise the current design
of the mobile Makerspace and the associated implementation model in response to
variations in programmatic contexts across multiple hospital settings and
disparate patients' conditions; and (3) investigate and test the effectiveness
of the Makerspace approach as it relates to both patients' learning and health
outcomes. The study would contribute to longer-term efforts to develop a
comprehensive, scalable, and sustainable strategy to determine the programmatic
viability of the mobile Makerspace approach across a more varied array of
hospital settings. This project has the potential to have a much broader impact
by reaching out to other isolated students beyond the hospital environment,
including those in residential treatment facilities for behavioral and emotional
problems, as well as those attending programs designed to help youth who have
been in trouble with the law get back on track. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's goals are to contribute to the
understanding of how to: (1) describe and measure the education and health
impact of mobile Makerspaces on chronically ill patients, and (2) design and
sustain implementation models in various hospital settings. Since a children's
hospital is a challenging context to support a patient's learning, it is not
typically conducive to learning. Patients are constantly interrupted by the
demands of the illness, by the strict protocols that need to be adhered to, and
by the medical staff who manage their exhaustive treatment regimens. The mobile
Makerspace is intended to adjust the environment in deliberate ways, allowing
researchers to study and observe what kinds of learning intervention models
enable youth and young adults to recapture a sense of their own agency and
enable them to see themselves as creators, and makers of things that improve
their own and others' lives. The project will have two strands: one on learning
and one on adaptation of the model. In the learning strand, the study will
investigate how engaging with the Makerspace can enhance patients' learning by
provoking their sense of curiosity, encouraging them to set up and pursue
personal goals via invention, and inspiring them to feel more agentive in taking
charge of their learning process i.e., development of affinity for and fluency
in the ways of knowing, doing and being (the epistemologies and ontologies) of
engineers or scientists. In the adaptation strand, they will identify challenges
and opportunities for implementing Makerspaces and develop an implementation
plan that provides a process for introducing Makerspaces into hospital settings.