* 1723606
* SaTC: EDU: Software Defined Radio Wars for Cybersecurity and Information Assurance Education
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,888.00

The pervasive use of wireless networks has created a demand for students who are
trained to include security in the design constraints of new systems, not as an
afterthought. This project from Drexel University proposes to leverage the
hands-on learning opportunities offered by software defined radios (SDRs) to
emphasize the interdisciplinary nature of cybersecurity and information
assurance. The researchers aim to accomplish their goal by developing and
offering an academic curriculum that consists of a series of 3-courses with
competitions (Radio Wars) centered around various interdisciplinary degrees of
freedom of a SDR. Students will be tasked to securely transmit information,
while preventing others from doing so. Throughout their exposure to materials,
students will start with wireless communication basics and dive into adding
encryption, authentication, and power management modules to their radios. The
researchers will use assessment techniques focused on understanding whether the
curriculum provides students with a learning experience that is authentic to the
work of the discipline and promotes development of content knowledge and skills
relating to excelling in the cybersecurity field. The project aims to have
broader impacts in preparing cybersecurity individuals for the workforce by
leveraging connections with the NSA as well as offering learning opportunities
to high school students, which will expose them early on to cybersecurity,
engineering and STEM fields. Finally, the team plans to maximize their impacts
by disseminating the course materials designed for other researchers to be able
to adopt them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ettus USRP N210 SDR platform provides
the flexibility and ease of use needed to implement Radio Wars and will thus
serve as the platform for the proposed project. The project will leverage the
ceiling mounted SDR grid network at Drexel University as the "battleground". A
visual scoreboard system will be implemented for real-time feedback for student
progress. This system will require specific API calls to be used by students.
The first year of the project will focus on developing the curriculum and the
hardware/software backbone using GNU Radio, UHD, and Python programming. The
second year of the project will be when the Radio Wars courses will be offered.
Students will be asked to implement various encryption (AES, TLS, IPSec, WEP and
WPA2) and authentication techniques to maximize their score. Each action taken
by student teams during the competition will be logged for scoring. The project
hopes to develop an educational suite that will begin to do for cybersecurity
and information assurance education what "Battlebots" does for robotics and
mechanical engineering education.