* 1723007
* NSFGEO-NERC: Global ultralow-velocity zone properties from seismic waveform modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* June Wicks, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 36,361.00

This project aims to image the Earth's deep interior using recordings of seismic
waveforms generated by earthquakes occurring globally. Constraining the
structure, composition and dynamic motions of the deep Earth, from which we have
no definitive rock samples, is crucial to understanding both the forces that are
actively shaping our Earth from formation to present, and hazards such as
surface volcanism that arise from deep within the Earth. This study focuses on
technical development of a new modeling approach combining data analysis and
prediction of seismic waveforms, which will be applied to imaging features at
the core-mantle boundary called ultralow-velocity zones (ULVZs). The existence
of these ULVZs is well documented, and several past studies have linked them to
important global Earth processes, such as melting, influx of core iron into the
mantle, or the leftover remnants from a molten Earth early in its history. Yet
what ULVZs physically represent remains in question. This research is aimed at
determining what ULVZs are in terms of their composition, location, and relation
to past and present processes inside the Earth. This work will provide crucial
constraints on understanding how the Earth formed, what the ongoing dynamic
motions within the Earth currently are, and how these motions are related to
surface hot spot volcanism such as Hawaii and Yellowstone. This project aims to
develop a new seismic waveform modeling approach that will allow for a new
understanding of the origin of the complex seismic waveforms we routinely record
from earthquakes worldwide and how these seismic waves are sensitive to small-
scale features within the Earth. The methods and software developed in this
project will be shared openly and will be applicable to a broad range of
researchers who may wish to apply these techniques to different target areas. In
addition, this research benefits a large area of researchers who work on
determining Earth structure and processes and how they relate to surface
processes. This project establishes a new international collaborative research
effort between the United Kingdom and the USA and will support the training of
two post-doctoral researcher fellows, one in the UK and one in the
USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific project goal is to develop a
transformative joint waveform modeling and data analysis approach to
characterize global ULVZ structure. The primary tasks are to (1) collect a new
global database of seismic waveforms sensitive to ULVZ structure, (2) use recent
developments in seismic wavefield modeling that includes full-wave sensitivity
kernels and differential wavefield mapping to determine the sensitivity of
seismic arrivals to ULVZ structure and to identify additional seismic arrivals
that may be utilized to study ULVZ properties, (3) further the development of
wavefield modeling approaches using a fast 3-D Born waveform modeling approach
in order to predict seismic waveforms for any desired input model, which allows
for (4) the determination of global ULVZ structure through a Bayesian
probabilistic inversion, and (5) assess the physical origin of ULVZs by testing
current mineral physics models of ULVZs. The approach represents an entirely new
line of interrogating localized structures in the deep Earth. The ultimate aim
of this work is to fundamentally reassess ULVZs from all angles, and reduce
uncertainties in their properties, location, and composition. Ultimately this
project will produce a global assessment of ULVZ existence as well as to
determine their compositional and geographic scope, and how they are related to
other dynamic features inside the Earth.