* 1723416
* SHINE: Physics of the Interplanetary Electric Potential and Modifications to Exosphere Models of the Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Joseph Borovsky, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

This SHINE Investigation focuses on the production of stellar winds and will
provide information about the physics of double layers in natural plasmas.
Stellar winds production is important for other astrophysical systems as well as
understanding the solar wind that the Earth and other planetary systems are
subject to. The Principal Investigator in acts as a SHINE-GEM Liaison where
solar/solar-wind issues and geospace issues are communicated between two
research communities and is active in the Los Alamos Space Weather Summer School
where his research investigations have been used to create student research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year SHINE Investigation will
make improvements to the physics of exosphere models of the solar wind and will
determine how those improvements affect the properties of the solar wind and the
exobase that drives it. The major advance will be to replace a static (in the
Sun's reference frame) interplanetary potential with a potential made up of
multiple weak double layers propagating in the solar wind plasma. The changed
reaction of ions to moving potential structures (instead of a Sun-stationary
potential structure) will result in: (1) changed terminal velocities for the
protons and heavy ions as a function of the electron velocity distribution
function at the exobase, (2) a related change in the total electrostatic
potential needed to accelerate the solar wind, (3) heating, rather than cooling,
of the ions as they are accelerated, (4) differences in the outward acceleration
of protons and heavy ions. Using multiple double layers as the form of the
potential in exosphere models for the interplanetary electric field will result
in a more-physically correct model and should overcome several of the
shortcomings that existing exosphere models have. As a fundamental part of this
SHINE project, PIC plasma simulations will be run to discern critical properties
of solar-wind double layers as inputs to the exosphere model.