* 1723712
* I-Corps: Optimized Compiler Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2017
* Terrance Boult, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is expected to
enhance the performance, productivity, and correctness assurance of computer
software development, particularly for computation or data intensive software in
areas such as scientific computing, gaming, graph/map processing, data mining,
signal processing, and machine learning. The project has potential to speed and
scale these types of applications on a variety of hardware platforms. The
correctness assurance of these applications is enhances by having a variety of
implementation variants for different platforms automatically generated, while
allowing a single easy-to-maintain version of the software being used as the
source for the different implementation variants. These "automatically improved"
applications can, in turn, enable better knowledge discovery through larger-
scale scientific simulations and machine learning, and potentially improve the
quality of people's daily lives through better GPS routing and natural language
processing implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
explore the commercial viability of a system that automatically produces
efficient implementation variants of computer software on a variety of different
hardware platforms. A graphical user interface is used to permit users to
interactively specify the desired application features, provide knowledge about
the application source code, and select the appropriate hardware platforms. The
project is unique in its interface for supporting interactive communications
among software developers, compiler optimizations, and performance tuning of
optimizations for varying platforms. While the existing state-of-the-art largely
treats compilers as black boxes that optimize a given software application for a
single desired hardware platform, this project packages compiler technologies as
a collection of optimization tool sets to be used interactively by developers so
that optimizations can be applied at a much finer-grained level, specially
customized to suit the needs of each application, and better tuned to exploit
the varying capabilities of hardware platforms.