* 1723308
* An Arctic Ocean sea surface pCO2, pH and O2 observing network
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Michael DeGrandpre, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/28/2021
* USD 421,091.00

Arctic Ocean sea-ice is decreasing and the water at the sea surface is getting
warmer and fresher. These changes may be affecting the accumulation of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere and in the ocean. The carbon cycle is complex because
there are many processes that control the amount of carbon dioxide in the Arctic
Ocean. Plant growth, oxygen use by organisms, ice cover, temperature, and ocean
circulation all contribute to differences in the amount of carbon dioxide in the
water and the exchange of carbon dioxide with the atmosphere. As ice cover in
the Arctic Ocean decreases, scientists think the water will absorb more
anthropogenic (human originated) carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. As carbon
dioxide levels increase, this will lead to the ocean becoming more acid (lower
pH) because carbon dioxide forms carbonic acid when it dissolves in water. The
lower pH water can affect the food web by slowing the growth of shell-forming
organisms. Despite these important issues, not much is known about the carbon
cycle in the central Arctic Ocean basins. Nearly all measurements have been made
close to the Arctic coasts during the low ice summer period, when water for
samples are more accessible to scientists. With this National Science Foundation
support we will combine forces with another National Science Foundation project
and use the Canadian icebreaker Louis S. St-Laurent to reach the under-studied
central Arctic Ocean. These data will be made available to the public and other
researchers. The project also supports operation of an ocean acidification
exhibit for University of Montana?s science museum so we can better share our
results with the public. A post-doctoral researcher, research technician, and
two undergraduate students will be supported on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The specific activities on this project are
focused on a field effort in fall 2018 that includes shipboard measurements and
deployments on moorings and ice-tethered profilers. A shipboard underway partial
pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) measurement system will be installed on the
icebreaker. The goal of these measurements is to map sea surface pCO2 over a
broad region to quantify air-sea CO2 fluxes. Sensors for pCO2, pH, and dissolved
oxygen will be deployed on the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution time-series
moorings and ice-tethered profilers. Three moorings will be deployed with a
subsurface profiler that measures conductivity, temperature, depth, and
dissolved O2. Our sensors are deployed at 35 m depth, just below the subsurface
float. These data are used to examine short- and long- term carbon cycle
variability in the Canada Basin. Sensors for pCO2 and O2 will also be deployed
just under the ice surface on two ice-tethered profilers. These sensors record
variability near the ice interface that is not possible with the deeper
subsurface moorings. A post-doctoral researcher will lead the data quality
control and interpretation and will work with other Arctic scientists to
facilitate use of the data in their studies.