* 1723432
* SHF:Small: Build Code Maintenance and Detecting, Testing, Locating Configuration and Build Errors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tien Nguyen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 166,644.00

Software has become a critical infrastructure in our society with
its&lt;br/&gt;pervasive use in all kinds of products from home appliances
to&lt;br/&gt;automobiles, from individual pacemakers and smart phones to
air&lt;br/&gt;traffic control systems and high-end computers in large-scale
power&lt;br/&gt;grids. During software development, the build process is vital
to make&lt;br/&gt;sure that a software product is correctly and reliably
constructed and&lt;br/&gt;configured in accordance with different users'
operation environments,&lt;br/&gt;operating systems, platforms, and devices. To
reliably build a&lt;br/&gt;software product, a build tool is used to execute
build code to&lt;br/&gt;generate the executable and deliverable files according
to the rules&lt;br/&gt;specified in the build files. As a software project
evolves over time,&lt;br/&gt;build code continually evolves and is defect-prone
due to the high&lt;br/&gt;rate of changes and complexity of the build files. The
complexity of&lt;br/&gt;build code leads to two important issues. First, the
maintenance of&lt;br/&gt;complex build code has imposed much extra effort on
software&lt;br/&gt;developers. Second, its complexity is a source for
configuration and&lt;br/&gt;build errors in software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve software
reliability with a comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;approach to develop a scientific
foundation for build code analysis to&lt;br/&gt;provide automatic supports for
1) build code maintenance and 2)&lt;br/&gt;detecting, testing, and locating
configuration and build errors. We&lt;br/&gt;will first examine configuration
and build code errors and related maintenance &lt;br/&gt;tasks in real-world
projects. Second, we will develop a scientific foundation&lt;br/&gt;with novel
concepts, techniques, and algorithms for build code static&lt;br/&gt;analysis,
build code smell and configuration error detection,&lt;br/&gt;refactoring, and
change analysis. Third, we will investigate a&lt;br/&gt;foundation for build
code dynamic analysis and leverage it to support&lt;br/&gt;fault localization in
build code given a reported build&lt;br/&gt;failure. Finally, a theoretical
foundation and tool supports&lt;br/&gt;(e.g. semi-automatic test generation) for
build code testing will be&lt;br/&gt;developed. Our research will fundamentally
advance the body of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge in theoretical foundation for software
building, build code&lt;br/&gt;analysis and maintenance. Our results will lead
to more reliable&lt;br/&gt;software and improvement in code quality as well as
in the developers'&lt;br/&gt;productivity. Our validation efforts involve
students and&lt;br/&gt;professionals, promoting teaching and training in
information&lt;br/&gt;assurance and software reliability.