* 1723045
* Measuring aseismic fault slip during a normal faulting earthquake sequence in central Italy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Richard Bennett, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 595,013.00

The tectonic fault system in central Italy is responsible for notably
destructive earthquakes -such as the M6.3 2009 L'Aquila and M6.2 2016 Amatrice
events- and complex earthquake sequences that may last for several months or
even years. The processes that control the spatial and temporal clustering of
earthquakes, as in the case of the central Italy sequences, are currently only
poorly understood and current models for aftershocks and earthquake triggering
are incomplete. The shortcomings of current models are particularly true for
central Italy, where the models inadequately explain the spatial and temporal
characteristics of earthquake sequences. One proposed mechanism for fault
interaction and earthquake clustering is that some faults or portions of faults
slip without producing ground shaking seismic waves. Such behavior has been
suggested on portions of the San Andreas fault, the North Anatolia fault, and
the Cascadia subduction zone among other locations around the world. Studies of
micro-earthquakes and fault rocks in central Italy indirectly support this slow
aseismic slip hypothesis, but direct measurement of slow aseismic fault slip has
been difficult obtain there, because specialized instrumentation is required to
detect the small amplitude and slow speeds of ground motions associated with
such events. Our project will deploy a network of multi-sensor instruments in
shallow boreholes capable of detecting the small signals associated with slow
aseismic fault slip in central Italy. The new data that we collect will provide
valuable new insights into the mechanisms that control earthquakes and faulting,
with important implications for earthquake hazards assessment and the physics of
earthquakes and faulting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The borehole instruments that we
deploy will build on significant foreign investments in geophysical
infrastructure to study aseismic Italy fault systems, taking advantage of
surplus instrumentation from the NSF EarthScope Plate Boundary Observatory. The
resulting data sets will address several first order questions: (1) Do aseismic
faults load stress on earthquake prone faults steadily or episodically through
time? (2) Does the pattern of aseismic slip correlate with the pattern of micro-
seismicity on or near aseismic faults? (3) What are the spatial and temporal
characteristics of aseismic fault slip, including slip magnitudes, rates,
propagation directions and rates, and event durations? These questions bear
directly on our understanding of fault friction and mechanics, and earthquake
hazards. The data we collect will feed a burgeoning international collaboration
involving US researchers and students focused on aseismic fault slip and
earthquakes using central Italy as a natural laboratory. We will train a US
graduate student in borehole strainmeter analysis methods. Refined understanding
of aseismic slip in central Italy will bear on a long-standing debate regarding
the possibility of slip on low angle normal faults in nature. Data from the
borehole network and other geophysical networks will be incorporated into the
Accessible Earth Study Abroad (AE) curriculum. AE is based in Orvieto, Italy,
near our field central Italian field site. AE is a capstone course for students
at US universities that provides a disability-accessible alternative to geology
field camp and aims to increase diversity among geoscientists by making
geoscience as accessible as possible to all students. Students of AE will
contribute to a major international research program. The AE Program is funded
independently and will run every summer indefinitely, serving approximately 8-12
US students each year, including students with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;This
award is cofunded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.