* 1723316
* I-Corps: Low Noble Metal Content Catalysts for Emission Control Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,09/30/2017
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
commercialization of more sustainable catalysts for emission control systems.
The use of high levels of pure noble metals such as platinum, palladium and
rhodium in existing commercial catalysts are increasingly unsustainable in many
aspects, including high price, noble metal scarcity, low recycling recovery, and
limited global supply, posing significant challenges to catalyst manufacturing.
Manufacturing low-cost and efficient catalysts for commercial applications in
emission control systems will enable more cost effective adherence to clean air
and other environmental regulations. The low-noble metal content catalysts are
anticipated to reduce the content of noble metals in the catalysts in comparison
with existing catalysts in many emission control systems, reducing the cost of
emission control systems. There is a clear market potential for the catalyst
technology in view of the expectation of the global market of emission control
system catalysts.

This I-Corps project focuses on customer discovery in the translation of a new
catalyst technology to commercial production of low-noble-metal-content
catalysts for emission control systems. Noble metals such as palladium and
platinum are widely used in the catalysts for emission control systems,
including factory exhaust gas treatment reactors and catalytic converters, to
meet the ever-tightening of emission standards, calling for further reduction of
emission levels of the criteria gaseous pollutants. However, the high costs and
market volatility risks associated with the platinum group metals constitute a
major area of pain in the market of emission control systems. To address this
challenge, the proposed low-noble-metal-content catalysts feature noble metals
alloyed with non-noble transition metals in nano-alloy and composite
formulations, which exhibit enhanced catalytic activity and stability for the
elimination reactions of the pollutants at significantly reduced use of noble
metals in comparison with existing catalysts in the commercial emission control
systems. Insights into the competitiveness of the catalyst technology in the
emission control catalyst market will be developed through the intensified
activities of customer discovery in this project.