* 1724941
* Resolving Abnormal Target Erosion in High Frequency Magnetron Discharge
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Qi Fan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2022
* USD 335,328.00

Radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering is an essential technology for
manufacturing a broad variety of high-quality thin films. The ceramic targets,
the source of the thin film coating material, consumed during the RF sputtering
process are expensive, thus efficient target consumption is highly desirable in
lowering manufacturing costs. Incomplete understanding of the ceramic target
etching mechanisms occurring during RF magnetron sputtering results in poor
target use rates (~30%). This award supports fundamental research aimed at
understanding RF magnetron discharges and how they induce target consumption.
New knowledge obtained on the complicated RF discharge processes will contribute
to plasma science and technology, and will ultimately provide guidance on
efficient RF magnetron design. Results from the research are expected to double
the use rates of target materials. This will have a positive impact on many
industrial fields including large-area optical coatings, energy storage,
displays, solar energy, and semiconductor devices. The annual market of these
fields has reached over $500 billion and is growing continuously. This project
will strengthen university-industry collaborations and economic competitiveness
of the U.S. by greatly reducing manufacturing costs of thin films. It will also
contribute to workforce development by attracting and training graduate and
undergraduate students in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RF
magnetron sputtering is essentially determined by the non-uniform
electromagnetic fields that vary with time and in space. Charged particles that
lead to the sputtering of the target undergo complicated interactions with the
non-uniform fields. Understanding high-frequency plasma discharges under the
confinement of magnetic fields is a challenge and holds strong scientific
appeal. Despite the scientific community's strong interest in high-frequency
plasma discharges, knowledge in RF magnetron sputtering is very limited, which
results in unsatisfactory RF magnetrons. In fact, current magnetrons are
designed for achieving optimum performance in direct current (DC) sputtering,
which is used for target materials that are electrically conducting like metals.
When this same magnetron is used for RF sputtering of insulator targets, it is
extremely ineffective and produces an abnormal erosion profile completely
different from that in DC sputtering. Specifically, the intensively etched
region under DC sputtering is the least eroded under RF sputtering. To
understand the mechanisms of the abnormal RF target erosion and fill the
knowledge gap, the research team hypothesizes a 'localized charge effect', which
assumes that electrons in RF magnetron discharges preferentially accumulate and
stay immobile on the insulator target surface near the magnet poles to attract
ions to sputter these regions. This hypothesis is unexpected from the existing
knowledge on magnetron sputtering and is thus potentially transformative. The
research includes two major tasks: 1) modeling of RF magnetron discharges, and
2) verifying the 'localized charge effect' by designing a highly efficient RF
magnetron through modeling and experimentally testing.