* 1724243
* CRCNS Research Proposal:  US-German Collaboration: Roles of place and grid cells and phase precession in human spatial and episodic memory
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Michael Kahana, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 616,800.00

A fundamental issue that affects everyone's life is how the brain represents
memories and how this process sometimes experiences dysfunction. To examine this
topic, our research project uses direct human brain recordings to characterize
the brain signals that represent aspects of individual memories. A key question
is understanding how the brain supports tasks such as answering "Where did I
leave my keys this morning"? In this project, we will test how memory-related
spatial information is represented by the activity of individual cells in the
human brain. We perform this work by examining direct human brain recordings,
working with patients who are undergoing neurosurgery to map their epilepsy.
While the brain signals are recorded, patients play a video game that involves
spatial navigation and memory. We measure patterns of electrical activity that
show how the brain stores memories for individual spatial locations and well as
for events in time. In particular, we focus on measuring the role in memory of a
particular cell type, the "grid cell", that is known to play a role in spatial
navigation, to test whether the brain's navigation network also supports memory
storage. By revealing the neural basis of memory, this work has implications for
developing treatments for memory and navigation disorders such as Alzheimer's
Disease. In addition to these scientific objectives, there is a direct
educational component to our work. Through performing our research, we will
train students at various levels, including graduate, undergraduate, and post-
doctoral fellows, on the methods used for studying the human brain and its
involvement in memory. We also will develop curriculum material for K-12 and
undergraduate students to learn about how the brain supports memory and spatial
cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientifically, the goal of this work is
characterize the neural basis of episodic memory by identifying how the rate and
timing of the activations of human grid and place cells support the storage of
spatial memories. By examining these cells' activations as patients perform our
hybrid spatial-episodic memory task, we test the broad hypothesis that there is
a fundamental link between how the brain represents the location and timing of
when events occur. Our main hypothesis is that the activity of grid cells during
memory retrieval represents the spatial location where an event occurred. We
also test the role of grid cells in memory retrieval based on cues (Aim 1) as
well as self-initiated recalls from memory search (Aim 2). Finally, will also
evaluate whether temporal ordering of memories is stored via a rhythmic process
in the brain, called theta-band phase precession. Our findings are likely to
expand our understanding of how the human entorhinal cortex and hippocampus
support a range of cognitive and behavioral processes. A companion project is
being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF).