* 1724391
* QEM Outreach Forum on Building Research and Education Capacity in Advanced Computing, Communications, and Information Systems at HBCUs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2019
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 03/31/2019
* USD 176,435.00

Forum on Building Research and Education Capacity in Advance Computing,
Communications, and Information Systems at HBCUs is designed to increase the
research capacity in computer science at HBCUs. The work is in response to the
Dear Colleague Letter issued by NSF (17-027) that suggests that HBCUs are an
important component of the higher education infrastructure in the United States
and the institutions and students would benefit from greater research capacity
in critical STEM areas. In the case of computer science, the Forum addresses the
need to close the knowledge gap between CS departments at HBCUs and program
officers in CISE directing the core research programs. In addition to closing
the knowledge gap, QEM offers technical assistance specifically tailored to
enable successful long term research capacity development.

QEM offers a timely approach to addressing improvement of research capacity in
computer science at HBCUs. Intentional technical assistance covers the range of
necessary steps to increasing research success that include activities from
tailored proposal development to innovative institutional collaboration. As the
national focus on post-secondary CS education and institutional research
capacity increases, the development of innovative means of strengthening the
capacity of HBCUs is critical. The Forum is the beginning of an ongoing effort
specifically between CISE and 25 CS departments at HBCUs to catalyze this work.