* 1724198
* Mechanisms for Hurricane Motion and Intensity Change
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Hugh Willoughby, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 335,055.00

The factors that impact hurricane motion and intensity have been deeply studied
over the past few decades, with resulting improvement in knowledge and
forecasting ability. However, there are still basic questions about processes in
the inner core of a hurricane and the role they may play in determining the
strength and track of tropical systems. This project will focus on atmospheric
waves that move around the center of a hurricane and potentially impact
intensification and rain bands. The main societal impact of this work will be to
improve understanding of a basic process in tropical cyclones with a goal of
improving intensity and track forecasts. A student will be directly involved
with the project, thus ensuring the transfer of knowledge to the next generation
of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct a theoretical
and modeling study into the small-scale motions within a hurricane which may
affect their direction and intensity change. The project is focused on Vortex
Rossby Waves (VRWs) which can be excited by convection or tropical cyclone
motion. These VRWs transport angular momentum inward and wave energy outward,
and may underlie spiral rain band formation. The project will make use of two
existing simple models of tropical cyclone dynamics, a linear model and a time-
domain model. Four aspects of VRWs in tropical cyclones will be investigated: 1)
Convectively forced wavenumber-1 VRWs and their interaction with vortex motion
in a Barotropic Non-Divergent (BND) model, 2) Logical inconsistency of unbounded
vortices on a spherical Earth, 3) Rectification of vorticity sources when
wavenumber-n asymmetric convergence interacts with wavenumber-n vorticity to
generate symmetric and wavenumber-2n vorticity, 4) Three-dimensional modeling of
convectively forced waves in the inner waveguide