* 1724213
* International Conference: The Integration of Science Centres with Natural History Museums for Imparting Informal Education
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Lynn Dierking, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2019
* USD 99,866.00

Supporting and sustaining public science literacy and engagement are important
goals of informal science education institutions worldwide. Although there is
evidence that both science centers and natural history museums positively
influence public science literacy and engagement, significant differences exist
between these two types of institutions. This international workshop on
Integration of Science Centers with Natural History Museums for Imparting
Informal Education addresses this issue by convening key science center and
natural history museum professionals from 9 countries in South and Southeast
Asia, as well as the United States, to explore the strengths and limitations of
the assets, philosophies and strategies of these institutions. Beyond the
benefits science center and natural history museum professionals attending will
receive, the effort will significantly contribute to the broader US and
international conversation about the future of science centers and natural
history museums, as well as other museum-like, science-rich informal education
institutions, in these regions and beyond. In particular, supporting personal
and cultural relevance has been a major focus of informal science education
organizations globally, and the recommendations that emerge from the meeting
will significantly contribute to this dialogue and help to make advances in the
disciplinary field of informal science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international workshop, hosted in Malaysia and facilitated by researchers from
the Institute for Learning Innovation, convenes 40 science center and natural
history museum professionals to explore the affordances and constraints of
science centers and natural history museum exhibitions, programs, outreach
efforts, websites, etc. The conference is designed to examine the opportunities,
challenges and barriers to integrating key design principles that blend the best
of science centers and natural history museums, while guiding the creation of
new forms of 21st century informal science education institutions. Additional
goals explore how to make informal science education institutions in general
more relevant to 21st century publics, both culturally and personally, as well
as foster intra- and international collaborations between science center and
natural history museum professionals. Toward these ends, all conference
participants will commit to the completion of pre-conference assignments; active
preparation and involvement at the meeting; and, assistance with the
dissemination of project findings. The major deliverable will be a Whitepaper
describing the outcomes of the meeting and the key design principles that
leverage the effectiveness and relevance of each of these institutions. The
Whitepaper will be produced in both hard copy and electronic form and more
broadly disseminated throughout the natural history museum and science center
fields in all participating countries. The electronic form will be hosted and
available for download through the website of the Institute for Learning
Innovation and the Center for Advancing Informal Science Education (CAISE) with
links to all participating institutions. This project is supported jointly by
the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Advances
in Informal STEM Education (AISL) program.