* 1724898
* CIF21 DIBBs: PD: OneDataShare: A Universal Data Sharing Building Block for Data-Intensive Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Tevfik Kosar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2022
* USD 616,469.00

Applications in scientific, industrial, and personal spaces now generate more
data than ever before. As data become more abundant and data resources become
more heterogeneous, the accessing, sharing and disseminating of data sets
becomes a bigger challenge. Existing technologies for transferring and sharing
data suffer from serious shortcomings, including low transfer performance,
inflexibility, restricted protocol support, and poor scalability. This project
develops a universal data sharing building block for data-intensive
applications, dubbed OneDataShare, with three major goals: (1) optimization of
end-to-end data transfers and reduction of the time to delivery of the data; (2)
interoperation across heterogeneous and incompatible data resources; and (3)
predicting the data delivery time and decreasing the uncertainty in real-time
decision-making processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OneDataShare deliverables
include: (1) design and implementation of novel algorithms for application-layer
optimization of the data transfer protocol parameters to achieve optimal end-to-
end data transfer throughput; (2) development of a universal interface
specification for heterogeneous data storage endpoints and a framework for on-
the-fly data transfer protocol translation; (3) instrumentation of end-to-end
data transfer time prediction capability, and feeding it into real-time
scheduling and decision-making processes for advanced provisioning, high-level
planning, and co-scheduling of resources; (4) deployment of these capabilities
as stand-alone OneDataShare cloud-hosted services to end users; and (5)
integration of these capabilities with widely used data scheduling and workflow
management tools, and validation in specific applications. OneDataShare services
and tools are developed at the application level, and they do not require any
changes to the existing infrastructure, nor to the low-level networking stack,
although they increase the end-to-end performance of the data movement tasks
substantially. These efficient and high-performance data transfer techniques
will help the scientific community, industry, and end-users to save significant
time and effort in transferring and sharing data.