* 1724638
* Bound State Theory and High Precision QED: Muonium, Positronium, Hydrogen, and Pentaquarks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Michael Eides, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

An area of active fundamental research in physics is the study of the hydrogen-
like atoms and exotic atoms, atoms where one particle such as an electron is
replaced by another such as a muon. Theoretical research of the properties of
these systems represents the main goal of this project. In recent years,
experiments in this area have reached an unprecedented level of accuracy,
challenging the theory at a stronger and stronger level. Responding to this
challenge, this project will provide theoretical input to the determination with
higher precision of many fundamental physical constants, such as the electron-
muon and electron-proton mass ratios, the proton charge radius, and the Rydberg
constant. The new theoretical understanding developed here will be used in the
next CODATA analysis of the fundamental physical constants. CODATA compilations
of the fundamental constants are used in every science classroom, as well as in
numerous fields of science and engineering, from fundamental research to
consumer electronics. This project will also provide theoretical insight in the
properties of pentaquarks, the bound states of five quarks recently discovered
by the LHCb Collaboration at the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN). Graduate and undergraduate students participating in this research will
acquire research, computer, problem solving, and presentation skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High precision quantum electrodynamics of hydrogen-like
bound states is an active field of theoretical research motivated both by the
spectacular experimental progress achieved in recent years and the intrinsic
intellectual challenge. Despite significant progress in the theory of light
hydrogen-like bound states, a number of challenging problems remain and will be
addressed in this research: 1) Complete calculation of all three-loop radiative-
recoil corrections to hyperfine splitting in muonium, 2) Complete calculation of
hard three-loop corrections to hyperfine splitting in positronium due to two-
loop radiative insertions in the fermion lines in two-photon exchange
nonannihilation diagrams, 3) Complete calculation of all relevant three-loop
nonrecoil corrections to the Lamb shift in hydrogen and muonium. The above
represent the largest unknown contributions to the Lamb shift in atomic physics.
Respective three-loop nonrecoil corrections to hyperfine splitting in hydrogen
and muonium will be calculated also. The PI will further develop the
hadrocharmomium interpretation of pentaquarks. The project will provide
quantitative description of their properties.