* 1724440
* Collaborative Research: Combining complex systems tools, process-based modelling and experiments to bridge scales in low temperature geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Li Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2020
* USD 173,352.00

Investigators will combine new modelling approaches and experiments to
understand the mechanisms by which organic carbon in stream waters increases.
Carbon is an important constituent in the aquatic food web and plays an
important role in water quality. This research is novel because, instead of
beginning with locally-observed phenomena and build process-based models that
scale those mechanisms up to a larger scale, the investigator team will mine
large observatory datasets for more global patterns followed by the
investigation of smaller scale processes. The project provides interdisciplinary
training in modeling, lab and field approaches for multiple graduate and
undergraduate students. Furthermore, the team will collaborate with a minority-
serving, K-5 elementary school to develop and administer a professional
development workshop for Vermont's K-5 teachers.

Because forested headwater catchments cover large geographical areas, they have
disproportionate effects on the dissolved fraction of organic carbon (DOC) and
are closely monitored across the globe. Significant increases in DOC fluxes from
forested streams across the northern hemisphere have been documented by numerous
studies and potential causes such as changes in climate, land use or
precipitation composition (i.e. recovery from acidification) are debated. The
lack of focus on the specific mechanisms potentially driving the DOC release
makes the prediction of future DOC fluxes nearly impossible. The investigators
propose to address this gap with a combination of modelling and experiments to
test the hypotheses that 1) an increase in stream water DOC flux is driven by
the regionally observed recovery from acidification (i.e. the increase in pH and
decrease in ionic strength of wet and dry deposition), 2) DOC is released from
soil aggregates that become unstable under these changing conditions, and 3)
aggregate stability and DOC release is a function of soil composition and
mineralogy, leading to the varied responses (presence or absence of DOC
increase) despite potentially similar regional forcings. Big Data analysis using
novel data-driven modelling techniques will use USGS and Critical Zone
Observatory datasets to probe regional-scale data (>100 km) and identify general
patterns (test hypotheses 1). Results from this step will inform selection of
sites for more detailed process-based investigation at the catchment (km) to
soil aggregate scale (micrometer) using Reactive Transport Modelling and
experiments (test hypotheses 2-3). This research addresses a highly debated
topic in C dynamics (i.e. increase DOC fluxes) and furthermore works toward a
framework for the integration of scales, disciplines and approaches in low
temperature geochemistry. The combination of statistical and process-based
modelling with experiments to bridge scales varying >10 orders of magnitude is
novel and potentially transformative for the field of low temperature
geochemistry. The impact of this research is broadened by the interdisciplinary
training provided for three graduate students and multiple undergraduate
students. Furthermore, the investigators will collaborate with the College of
Education and a minority-serving, K-5 school to develop and administer a
professional development workshop for Vermont's K-5 teachers. Goals for this
workshop are to i) provide professional development for K-5 educators on the
Critical Zone as a framework for sustainability learning and ii) to begin to
develop teaching modules with participating educators for the appropriate K-5
level.