* 1724297
* CRCNS US-French Research Proposal: Architectural Principles and Predictive Modeling of the Mammalian Connectome
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Zoltan Toroczkai, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 534,193.00

This US-France collaborative project is aimed at discovering the fundamental
properties of the structural/anatomical organization of cortical connections
capable of supporting massive amounts of computations in the brain, despite the
100,000-fold variation in mass from the smallest mammals to the largest. Several
independent empirical observations (such as sensory substitution experiments)
suggest the existence of common network architectural principles in the
mammalian cortex, critical for efficient and hierarchically modular information
processing. Through capturing these fundamental structural and dynamical
features in large-scale neuronal networks across several species, this project
will help with our understanding of information processing in the human brain.
It will also inform the emerging field of neuromorphic engineering, which
focuses on bio-inspired computational devices. The outcomes of this project may
also be relevant to neuro-degenerative diseases, given the growing evidence
suggesting that disease progression often occurs via the breakdown of high-
centrality, long-range connections between cortical areas, which will be
characterized within this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By extending empirical,
consistent tract-tracing databases for the physical network of interareal
cortical connections in the macaque and mouse (supplemented by dMRI tractography
data) and exploiting recent discoveries related to the Exponential Distance Rule
(EDR) (which has been empirically demonstrated in several mammals), this project
aims to capture the network architectural invariants of the cortex. These
invariants are graph theoretical properties of the connectome that are preserved
across mammalian brains and across scales. Based on recent empirical evidence,
the project puts forward the hypothesis that the EDR also plays a critical role
in generating sparse encoding of highly correlated information streams in a
scale-invariant manner, a hypothesis that will be tested within a predictive
modeling approach. The work will also generate novel imputation algorithms
suitable for dense networks and novel, efficient algorithms for comparing
species connectomes, exploiting the spatial embeddedness of these
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the French
National Research Agency (ANR).