* 1724433
* National Ecological Observatory Network: Operations Activities
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2023
* Paula Mabee, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Charlotte Roehm
* 10/31/2023
* USD 383,062,101.00

The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) provides a standardized
instrumentation and observational platform with the capability to measure the
structure, composition, processes, and dynamics of the biosphere from local to
continental scales. NEON is the first continental-scale facility designed to
enable ecological research on the causes of and responses to environmental
change. It provides this capability through in situ sensing capabilities,
biological measurements, airborne remote sensing, and data products delivered
through a cyberinfrastructure backbone that ensures community access to these
resources. NEON supports a large and diverse group of stakeholders - ecologists,
educators, policy makers, and engineers - who use the NEON infrastructure and
data in their research, management and training programs. Data provided by NEON
contributes to collaborative, innovative, multi-disciplinary approaches to
educate undergraduate and graduate students. Education and training initiatives
include workshops, seminars, tutorials, and data carpentry courses. NEON
recruits individuals from underserved and minority communities, through a
program that capitalizes on the distributed nature of NEON and the expertise at
localized ecological domains to promote broader community
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to the Battelle Memorial Institute
(BMI/Battelle) is to operate the NEON for three years (FY 2018 - 20). The first
year of operations is being performed as construction is finalized, while the
second and third years occur after construction is complete. The award supports
the scientific, technical and human resource requirements of NEON operations.
During this operations phase, BMI is exploring efficiencies across the
observatory network that will inform full operations, while maintaining the
scientific integrity of the data products being provided to the scientific
community. BMI is also ramping up engagement with the scientific community to
increase awareness and use through the utilization of advisory groups, outreach
through workshops, and other approaches. Activities during initial operations
provide data essential for addressing the effect of stressors, such as land use
change and invasive species, among other environmental factors, on regional and
continental scale ecological processes. NEON provides, for the first time, a
highly coordinated national infrastructure for monitoring critical ecological
properties at multiple spatial and temporal scales. The NEON infrastructure is
deployed across 20 ecological domains that span the continental United States,
Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Included are 81 observation sites (47
terrestrial, 34 aquatic), along with complementary remote sensing airborne
activities. The operations plan is expected to ingest data, monitor data
quality, and process data into useable products that are broadly accessible to
stakeholders. Additionally, NEON provides research infrastructure in the form of
assignable assets to support community-driven research and educational
activities.