* 1724555
* The Dynamics and Predictability of Midlatitude Sub-monthly Retrograde Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Huei-Ping Huang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2021
* USD 310,313.00

Maps of the wintertime atmospheric circulation commonly show wavelike features
in the middle latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, with jet streams meandering
northward around ridges and southward around troughs in the upper-level pressure
pattern. Most of these waves either remain stationary or propagate from west to
east, like the upper-level ridges and troughs associated with the fronts seen on
surface weather charts. This project considers the unusual case of retrograde
waves, which propagate from east to west and thus contrary to the strong
westerly winds that prevail in the mid-latitude upper troposphere. The
retrograde waves occur largely between 40N and 70N, moving along a path poleward
of the jet stream. They are slow and long, with periods from eight to thirty
days and only one or two undulations over a full latitude circle. Although they
tend to have their largest amplitude over the North Pacific, they can influence
weather and climate over the continental US, including precipitation over
California. They were documented in the 1980s but have not received much
attention from the research community and are still relatively
unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses several key questions
regarding retrograde waves, including the mechanisms that generate them, their
predictability, and their effect on the predictability of day-to-day surface
weather. One possibility to be explored is that the waves are generated by
tropical precipitation, as the Coriolis force acting on upper-level divergence
above precipitating regions can generate waves at some distance from the source.
Another possible origin is the shedding of potential vorticity on the poleward
flank of the jet stream. These mechanisms are explored through diagnostic
analysis of retrograde waves identified in meteorological (reanalysis) datasets.
The predictability of the waves and their influence on the skill of weather
forecasts is examined using retrospective forecasts prepared at the NOAA Earth
System Research Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal broader
impacts due to its potential value for long-range weather prediction. The slow
movement of the waves suggests that they may be somewhat predictable, and it is
possible that their effects on day-to-day weather may provide some basis for
practical long-range forecasting. In addition, the project provides support and
training to a graduate student, thereby providing for the future workforce in
this research area.