* 1724923
* Topological and Disordered Phases of Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Nicholas Read, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The award supports theoretical research and
education on profound questions that arise in the study of modern materials. In
a solid material, there are many electrons, say one for each atom in the
material, and they may remain active at low temperatures. In the quantum
mechanical world of the electron, new phenomena can arise as a consequence of
interactions between electrons that lead to correlations in their motion. They
can also lead to the formation of a state of electronic matter with no analog in
the familiar world governed by classical mechanics. A feature of this state is
quantum entanglement, meaning very long-range correlations between electrons.
The quantum phases of matter under investigation, known as topological phases of
matter, involve non-trivial long-range
entanglement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various ways of theoretically studying such
states of matter are known. Some involve techniques called tensor networks. The
PI will explore the intrinsic limitations of these methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other approaches involve methods from quantum field theory
and from the branch of mathematics known as algebraic topology. The PI will
bring his experience with these to bear on the problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on these topics may contribute to quantum
information science, where there are proposals that utilize topological phases
of matter to perform quantum computation. There is also the possibility that
these unusual states of matter could be applied as novel materials in other
technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also study another
distinct area of research, disordered systems. This means that the degrees of
freedom, for example atoms in glass, that interact with one another do so with
strengths that differ from one place to another, and are modeled as random
numbers. This aspect, which models the lack of perfection intrinsic to real
materials, leads to some very difficult questions; a particular class of
examples are called "spin glasses". Finding the lowest energy state may be a
computationally hard problem. Even at a statistical level, it may be very hard
to characterize the properties of a spin glass. The PI will continue the use of
rigorous mathematical approaches to advance understanding of this problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The award supports
theoretical research and education to study low-temperature phenomena in both
classical and quantum condensed matter systems, usually in lattice
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the quantum side, the goal of these studies is
to understand the topological phases of matter in these systems in greater
depth. An approach of particular interest is tensor network states. The PI will
investigate whether these methods can be successfully applied to topological
phases of matter in more than one dimension, or whether they possess intrinsic
(topological) limitations that make these applications impossible. The
theoretical techniques that will be used include concepts from algebraic
topology, such as K-theory, and quantum information theory, as well as many-body
and quantum-field theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also study
disordered systems such as classical spin glasses. Outstanding controversial
issues include the basic question of whether or not there are many pure states
in the low temperature phase in the limit of an infinite system; this is the
question of replica symmetry breaking. The use of rigorous mathematical analysis
may be the only approach that can sidestep disputes about interpretation that
have dogged non-rigorous and computational approaches. The PI uses Newman and
Stein's metastate approach to provide a rigorous framework for attacking the
problem, but may also uses replica methods to gain insight and to make
connections with non-rigorous methods or experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
both areas, while the emphasis is on fundamental theoretical issues,
experimental relevance is always in view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.