* 1724221
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Computational and experimental investigation of neural state changes in the olfactory system
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Christiane Linster, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Social interactions between all animals are a highly important function of
mammalian brains. Limited or mal-functioning social interactions can have a high
impact on an animal or person's life quality, life span, and reproductive
success - examples include Autism, Personality disorders, Williams syndrome,
Prenatal alcohol syndrome and others. During social interactions, specific
neuro-hormones change sensory perception and cognitive processes in our brains
to be adaptive and optimized to these specific tasks. The investigators propose
a detailed investigation of the effects of one such substance, oxytocin, on
social recognition and memory using an interdisciplinary approach in mice that
combines state of the art experimental and computational approaches. The
investigators study to what extend oxytocin changes computations in the brain
during social interactions, the neural mechanisms through which oxytocin causes
these changes. For example, a lack of oxytocin can limit an animal's social
recognition capacity and memory and interfere with social structures in
individuals and groups. Understanding systems that play a role in social
interactions and recognition has a potential high impact on understanding and
treating disorders of social interactions. The project also offers
interdisciplinary (computational and neuro-biology) and international (USA and
Germany) research opportunities for trainees at the undergraduate and
postdoctoral level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral context and demands can
modulate brain state and neural computations via influx of neuromodulators and
-hormones. This proposal studies the relationships between brain state, neural
computation, and plasticity by taking advantage of a well-established model
system. The neurohormone oxytocin is triggered during specific behavioral
situations and supports neural plasticity and learning in those situations.
Other neuromodulators, such as acetylcholine, noradrenaline, and serotonin
released in response to behavioral contexts such as attention, stress, or hunger
change how brain networks compute to best respond to these behavioral
situations. Although there is extensive knowledge of cellular and network
effects of these substances, knowledge about contexts in which these are
released remains vague, and correlating the effects of neuromodulators with
specific behavioral situations is difficult. Olfactory system modulation by
oxytocin provides with a unique opportunity to directly ask how neural
processing is modulated to enable more stable memories, what about neural
representations is important for stable memories, and how feedback interactions
between sensory, modulatory, and cortical areas interact during the formation
and expression of these memories. This project specifically addresses how and
through which (a) network and (b) cellular and synaptic mechanisms oxytocin
changes the signal-to-noise ratio of odor representations in the olfactory bulb.
The project also examines how the feedback loop between olfactory bulb and
cortex enhances stable odor trajectories. To achieve these objectives, the
investigators apply an interdisciplinary approach using state of the art
experimental and computational techniques. A companion project is being funded
by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF).