* 1724954
* Collaborative Research - COSEE Florida:  Water as Habitat
* GEO,OCE
* 12/09/2016,09/30/2020
* Richard Tankersley, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2020
* USD 117,636.00

Because the state of Florida has over 1,350 miles of salt-water coastline, the
state represents a significant, untapped opportunity for the Centers for Ocean
Science Education Excellence (COSEE) network to expand its geographic and
programmatic reach. Our proposed center, COSEE Florida: Water as Habitat, will
build statewide connections with Florida's ocean research community. This
project will provide professional development opportunities for scientists to
improve their ability to communicate the value and importance of their science
to nonscientific audiences and achieve a better understanding of their role in
supporting STEM education. Founding partners for COSEE Florida are the Indian
River State College, the Smithsonian Marine Station at Fort Pierce, the Ocean
Research & Conservation Association, and the Florida Institute of Technology.
Our content theme "Water as Habitat" is engaging and appealing to students and
the public and will allow us to place naturally charismatic marine organisms and
ecosystems within a systems framework linking physical, chemical and geological
ocean processes to biodiversity, marine ecology, climate change, threats to
human health, and stewardship actions. COSEE Florida will advance ocean science
literacy through the implementation of three strategic initiatives:

1. Professional Development Workshop Series for Scientists: Ocean scientists
will participate in workshops to improve their effectiveness in communicating
their research to non-scientific audiences. COSEE staff will also provide
assistance to scientists who wish to develop quality outreach programs to
broaden the impact of their research. Six workshops will be conducted around the
state each year.

2. A new Ocean Science Concentration for Pre-Service Educators: Ocean science
focused educational content will be added to the Bachelor of Science STEM
Education degree for middle school science at Indian River State College in Ft.
Pierce, Florida. Students will participate in a suite of courses, research
opportunities and high quality practicum situations. The program will be
disseminated to additional State College campuses in year 5.

3. COSEE Florida Ocean Science Learning Network: This initiative is the linchpin
that brings scientists, educators and the public together to communicate and
collaborate. Water As Habitat events will feature ocean-based interactive
presentations, educator workshops, and opportunities for continued participant
engagement at regional nodes throughout the state. On-line communication tools
will be developed to facilitate post-event collaborations and resource sharing.
At least five regional Learning Community nodes will be established around the
state.

Our work will engage a spectrum of people and organizations from across
Florida. Ocean researchers, higher education faculty, informal education
institutions, educators and the general public will participate in a wide range
of activities. Through our initiatives we will (1) involve up to 90 Florida
ocean scientists in effective outreach and education each year, (2) expand the
skills and strengthen the ocean science content of at least 200 pre-service
undergraduates, 100 in-service teachers and 100 informal educators over a 5 year
period, (3) improve the ocean literacy of over 3000 Florida residents and
tourists and (4) learn from and contribute to the work of other Centers in the
National COSEE Network.

The ocean science content of our programs will draw on current research findings
from Florida's leading ocean scientists (Intellectual Merit) and significantly
expand public awareness of the significance of their work (Broader Impacts).
Scientists will also develop a deeper understanding of the challenges facing
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) education today
(Intellectual Merit) and contribute to improving the quality of teaching and
learning in Florida through the integration of cutting edge research into K-16
education (Broader Impacts).