* 1724679
* Student Support: 17th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGrid 2017)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

Engaging students in premiere scientific conferences is extremely important as
we seek to increase participation in STEM and to identify and develop the next
generation of scientists by engaging students in premier scientific conferences.
The International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGrid) is a
successful series of conferences that serves as the major international forum
for presenting and sharing recent research results and technological
developments in the fields of Cluster, Cloud and Grid computing. The CCGrid
conference series has been emphasizing a comprehensive experience for students,
to better prepare students attending the conference for their professional
career. The CCGrid program provides a comprehensive set of events and activities
that can expose students to the state of the art in research and technologies,
as well as to the leading researchers and thinkers in the field. The student
program is a critical aspect of CCGrid and is anchored in this technical program
and exposes students to the state of the art in research and technologies, as
well as to the leading researchers and thinkers in the field. Traditionally,
students have participated in all aspects of this program, including being
authors and presenters on papers and posters, presented demos, and been
competitors in the SCALE challenge. Additionally, the CCGrid program includes
the annual CCGrid Doctoral Symposium, which provides students researchers with
visibility, mentoring, and valuable feedback for their research. Participating
in the conference will provide students with valuable opportunities to improve
their overall research skills and planning, and thus aligned with NSF's overall
mission of promoting science and advancing national
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the participation of
US-based students in CCGrid 2017. Supported students will present papers or
posters describing their ongoing research to the conference audience,
participate in the student program and related activities, discuss their
research with experts from academia and industry during the conference, and make
useful contacts. Travel grants will encourage the research interests and the
involvement of students in the field who are not well funded and those who are
just beginning their participation in the field or are interested in entering
it. Particular effort will be made to solicit applications for the travel
support from female students and students from under-represented communities.