* 1724791
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Quantum Materials from Geometric and Dimensionality Design
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2021
* Alex Zunger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to advance the capability to design specific
functionality into materials. Engineering properties of materials to make them
technology critical, such as special optical, structural or magnetic
functionalities, is generally achieved by controlling the chemical composition
of compounds. The PI will investigate a much less explored strategy - attaining
target functionalities by assembling simple, known building block materials into
various geometric shapes without changing their compositions. For example,
quantum mechanics-based theory calculations suggest that the design of
concentric alternate shells of Silicon and Germanium around a core of silicon
can deliver novel optical properties that are altogether absent from the
constituent building blocks. Similarly, a designed assembly of needles made from
the element Molybdenum and any one of a class of elements known as chalcogenides
can deliver a new state of electronic matter that is unknown in more common
three-dimensional geometric shapes. By combining computer simulations of solid
materials based on quantum mechanics with materials design principles, the PI
aims to develop novel ways to predict emerging properties of materials, such as
unique optical and magnetic properties. This project will benefit from
collaboration with experimentalists at Tel Aviv University. Graduate students
and postdocs will be encouraged to develop college-level teaching experience
through a program at the University of Colorado. The project includes an
outreach seminar activity to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to advance the capability to design materials with specific
functionality. The quest for attaining outstanding physical properties of
materials historically involved synthesis of new individual compounds of ever
increasing complexity. But not all such compounds have delivered the optimal
properties technologists wished to have for applications in particular devices.
A recent alternative has been to seek desired functionalities from
superstructuring, as well as exploration of reduced dimensionality, using common
compound building blocks that by themselves may lack interesting properties. The
PI builds upon his recent work on geometric and dimensionality design to obtain
emergent properties that greatly supersede or are even qualitatively absent from
those attainable from the individual compound building blocks. The approach
involves the search for specific superstructure patterns or polymorphs with
specific reduced symmetries that deliver unusual, emergent quantum properties.
Specific explorations within this generally unexplored research field include:
(i) engineering a direct band gap in core-multi-shell 1D-superstructures from
indirect gap Si and Ge components and the Giant Rashba effect, (ii)
investigating the coexistence of metallic and insulating properties, and the
emergence of novel electronic states in 1D-polymorph of transition-metal mono-
chalcogenides, (iii) finding topological systems by superstructuring of
topologically trivial ordinary components through energy stabilization of
metastable states or internal electric fields. The number of possible
configurations afforded by superstructuring is so large that high-throughput
approaches, experimental or computational, are impractical. The PI will approach
such nanostructures as a design problem, using functionality-driven search and
discovery that combines (a) electronic structure methods with (b) screening for
stability and (c) evolutionary search where needed, to identify the "magic
configurations" that have both stability and interesting target properties.
Superstructuring will lead to better understanding of the critical enabling
factors of the intriguing quantum properties, as well as have the practical
advantage of creating new functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.