* 1724537
* WORKSHOP: The Pioneers Workshop at the 2017 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Brian Scassellati, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 40,950.00

This is funding to support a Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 24 graduate students (12 of whom are from the United States and
therefore eligible for funding), along with distinguished research faculty. The
event will take place as part of the first day of activities at the 12th
International Conference on Human Robot Interaction (HRI 2017), to be held March
6-9 in Vienna, Austria, and which is jointly sponsored by ACM and IEEE. HRI is
the premier conference for showcasing the very best interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary research on human-robot interaction, with roots in diverse
fields including robotics, artificial intelligence, social psychology, cognitive
science, human-computer interaction, human factors, engineering, and many more.
It is a single-track, highly selective annual international conference that
invites broad participation. Building on the "Smart City Wien" initiative, the
theme of HRI 2017 is "Smart Interaction." The conference seeks contributions
from a broad set of perspectives, including technical, design, methodological,
behavioral, and theoretical, that advance fundamental and applied knowledge and
methods in human-robot interaction, with the goal of enabling human-robot
interaction through new technical advances, novel robot designs, new guidelines
for design, and advanced methods for understanding and evaluating interaction.
More information about the conference is available online at
http://humanrobotinteraction.org/2017. The Pioneers Workshop will afford a
unique opportunity for the best of the next generation of researchers in human-
robot interaction to be exposed to and discuss current and relevant topics as
they are being studied in several different research communities. This is
important for the field, because it has been recognized that transformative
advances in research in this fledgling area can only come through the melding of
cross-disciplinary knowledge and multinational perspectives. Participants will
be encouraged to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development, to form
collaborative relationships, and to generate new research questions to be
addressed during the coming years. Participants will also gain leadership and
service experience, as the workshop is largely student organized and student
led. The PI has expressed his strong commitment to recruiting women and members
from under-represented groups. To further ensure diversity the event organizers
will consider an applicant's potential to offer a fresh perspective and point of
view with respect to HRI, will recruit students who are just beginning their
graduate degree programs in addition to students who are further along in their
degrees, and will strive to limit the number of participants accepted from a
particular institution to at most two. As a new feature this year, the
organizers will also invite 3 undergraduate students (all eligible for funding)
to help increase diversity in the pipeline of students entering this
field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Pioneers Workshop is designed to complement the
conference, by providing a forum for students and recent graduates in the field
of HRI to share their current research with their peers and a panel of senior
researchers in a setting that is less formal and more interactive than the main
conference. During the workshop, participants will talk about the important
upcoming research themes in the field, encouraging the formation of
collaborative relationships across disciplines and geographic boundaries. To
these ends, the workshop format will encompass a variety of activities including
three keynotes, a distinguished panel session, and breakout sessions. To start
the day, all workshop attendees will briefly introduce themselves and their
interests. Following the opening keynote, approximately half of the participants
will present 3-minute overviews of their work, leading into an interactive
poster session. This will enable all participants to share their research and
receive feedback from students and senior researchers in an informal setting.
The workshop organizers will facilitate the post-presentation discussion and
will encourage participants to ask questions of their peers during the
interactive break and poster session. After lunch, the remaining workshop
participants will give their 3-minute overviews, followed by presentation of
their posters during a second interactive poster session. Senior researchers (in
addition to those on the panel) will be invited to attend the student
presentations and poster sessions in order to provide feedback to participants,
and workshop participants will be invited to present their posters during the
main poster session of the HRI conference as well. The conversations between the
panel and participants will continue over lunch and during dinner.