* 1724512
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Relationship between Diet Variability and Population Spread
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Christopher Davis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2019
* USD 17,603.00

Modern humans originated in Africa during the Middle Stone Age (MSA) and during
this time period developed complex foraging behaviors that facilitated their
later migration out of Africa and across the world. Studying the full range of
these early behaviors is critical to both understanding how modern humans
adapted to diverse environments and refining models of human evolution and
migration. The proposed research is based on materials excavated from a MSA
archaeological site located in a previously unstudied region of the lowlands of
northwestern Ethiopia along the Shinfa River, a major tributary to the Blue Nile
River. The site is dated to greater than 50,000 years in age, close to the time
when modern humans dispersed out of Africa. The research will study the fauna
excavated at the site that includes a diverse array of terrestrial and aquatic
animals that the humans hunted, trapped, collected, and brought back to the site
to eat. Investigation of these animal remains will detail which species were
collected, when they were collected, and how they were processed. The site is
unusual for the MSA because in addition to terrestrial animals a large quantity
of aquatic animals (e.g., fish, crocodile, and mollusk) are also present, and
this combination of species permits an evaluation of the evidence for early
riverine adaptations and structured seasonal resource use. Both of these
activities have important implications for the evolution of modern human
behavioral and social systems, and both have been argued to be largely absent
during the MSA. Data from this study will also contribute to the broader debate
about the significance of aquatic resource use during hominin evolution.
Additionally, this project is the first to examine how regional seasonal
extremes selected for flexible adaptive strategies in the MSA specifically
within the context of temporary river ecosystems and how this particular
ecological setting might have influenced early human behavior. The broader
project involves a collaboration between US and Ethiopian scholars, students,
officials, and local communities, and its NSF-supported research experience for
undergraduates trains US and Ethiopian students and includes a focus on
participants from groups underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr. John Kappelman,
Ph.D. candidate Christopher Davis will reconstruct foraging behavior at the
archaeological site with a focus on answering two research questions: 1) Does
the site document an early riverine adaptation? and 2) Does the site document
structured seasonal occupation and resource exploitation? The methods are drawn
from a large body of ethnoarchaeological and experimental research that uses
faunal remains to reconstruct past human behavior. Faunal analyses will document
the taxonomic groups and skeletal elements present at the site. Taphonomic
analyses will identify the agent(s) of site formation, how the faunal elements
were processed, and which natural processes potentially altered the assemblage.
Behavioral analyses will reconstruct foraging strategies, and examine evidence
for systematic riverine foraging and seasonal occupation. Comparative analyses
will evaluate how foraging behaviors at this site compares with those from other
similarly aged sites in Ethiopia.