* 1724705
* Collaborative Research: Science Policy Research Report: New Directions for Impact
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* James Holbrook, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 17,805.00

When public money is used to fund research, federal science agencies expect
excellence in advancing science, along with a clear description of the
accompanying societal benefits. This project examines trends for increasing the
accountability of scientific research, and identifies new directions for
improving the usefulness of science for meeting societal needs. The research
presented here has the potential to advance the effectiveness of the STEM
community for making its results more relevant to non-academics. The knowledge
generated here can help funding agencies demonstrate the societal value of
investments in scientific research.

This research report reviews the latest elements of the debate surrounding
broader impacts in terms of: scientific autonomy versus public accountability,
societal concerns versus acceptance of scientific results, the relative
advantages of peer review and metrics, and various new mechanisms for
encouraging broader impacts. The report offers evidence-based recommendations
for policy makers concerned to account for the return on investments in
scientific research. The report considers the effects of media, the politics of
transparency, the development of a relativistic culture, and compares these
developments to policy innovations such as the Impact Agenda and Open Science
movement.