* 1724248
* S&amp;AS: FND: Safe Task-Aware Autonomous Resilient Systems (STAARS)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Brian Huff, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 549,836.00

Realizing the full potential of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) for commercial and
societal benefits will call for autonomous UAS that must operate around people,
especially urban/suburban areas, and respect safety, privacy, and regulatory
concerns. This project will quantify the operations of UAS executing a task in
urban/suburban environment as "risk" to these considerations, then develop
dynamic risk assessment and guidance algorithms to compute least risky
trajectories for the UAS to follow while executing a task. The project will
produce knowledge on the proper autonomy level of UAS in urban operations, and
will benefit FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) in UAS regulatory issues. The
technological advances in this project will also contribute to multiple fields
including autonomy, mobile networking, and intelligent control. The task &amp;
risk-aware decision-making framework developed in this project can be applied
not only to UAS, but also to other unmanned systems on the ground and in/under
water, with broad applications in smart health, transportation, and
manufacturing domains. The PIs also expect that successful demonstrations of
"safe" UAS operation in various risk conditions will increase the public's
acceptance of UAS technology, and benefit broad commercial UAS use and job
market. The project will also produce exciting learning and training
opportunities for students and the community at large to learn UAS
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use two raster maps to
quantify risk: (1) PREM (Probability Risk Exposure Map) defines the risk of
exposure of people and property on the ground to the presence of a UAS in the
air as a function of position and time. (2) PURM (Probabilistic UAS Reachability
Map) is the probability that the UAS can reach a position on the ground from its
current position, computed based on the vehicle's capability (both nominal and
diminished by possible failures) and environmental conditions such as wind.
Defining the PURM by joint probability of reachability domains for nominal and
all failure cases results in a resilient system, since decisions are made
considering all possible operational modes. Trajectory planning in the PURM will
use a modified, bidirectional, probabilistic RRT (Rapidly Expanding Random Tree)
to efficiently, incrementally plan a set of trajectories that minimizes the
overall risk. An autonomous decision algorithm then can keep the risk below an
acceptable level as it guides the UAS in the successful completion of a given
task. Because the safe operation of UAS also highly relies on effective
communication among UAS and between UAS and a Command and Control Center, the
project will also develop a decentralized dynamic communication schemes under
different risk levels and mobility constraints.