* 1724818
* MRI:  Acquisition of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Instrumentation to Advance Understanding of the Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Lee Baugh, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 103,871.00

To date there is good understanding of the structural makeup of the brain.
However, a full understanding about how the brain produces cognition and
behavior still remains elusive. This is important because elucidating the
functional connectivity of the brain serves to assist efforts in improving or
maintaining brain function across the lifespan, which is critical for directing
educational and rehabilitation approaches. This award to the University of South
Dakota (USD) will allow the acquisition of transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) equipment to clarify brain-behavior relationships. This is a safe, non-
invasive method for applying a magnetic pulse to a specific brain region to
either activate or decrease activity during experimental tasks or conditions.
TMS can test causal structural-functional relationships that cannot be
ascertained with any other technology within humans. This instrumentation will
be utilized by researchers across four different Schools/Colleges at the USD, to
solve outstanding problems in sensorimotor and cognitive/behavioral
neuroscience. In addition to advancing understanding of brain function, the
instrumentation will contribute to the training of the next generation of
neuroscientists, particularly from diverse or underrepresented backgrounds such
as Native Americans, rural and first generation students. Furthermore, the
concepts of the technology and the findings gained from this instrumentation
will form the basis of neuroscience education to the general public and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research enabled by TMS at the USD will
significantly advance the fields of neurophysiology, behavioral neuroscience and
cognitive neuroscience in three major ways. Neurophysiological findings will
have important implications for understanding of learning within the motor
systems. This is because projects will determine the capacity for plasticity in
the motor system, will identify the neural networks that enable this plasticity,
and demonstrate the outcomes of this plasticity on sensorimotor and skilled
motor function. Behavioral and cognitive neuroscience projects will provide new
and potentially transformative information regarding the neurobiology underlying
decision making that could be applied to consumer marketing, leadership studies
and improving impulse control. Furthermore, research enabled by TMS
instrumentation will challenge the traditional thought of separate language
comprehension and production networks to better our understanding of language
development and dysfunction, with direct educational applications. Thus, the
proposed instrumentation will enable research that significantly furthers the
understanding of brain function and how that can be employed in a variety of
applications in health, marketing, psychology and educational sectors.