* 1724819
* HRRBAA: The metabolic cost of living among herders
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Cara Ocobock, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 35,000.00

The constrained total energy expenditure hypothesis suggests that in the face of
high levels of physical activity the human body works to reduce the overall
number of calories burned each day. However, the idea that humans live within a
narrow metabolic range has not been broadly tested across climates and seasons.
To further address this hypothesis, this high-risk research project will assess
feasibility of measuring energy expenditure and brown adipose tissue activation
in a highly active cold-climate population. The fundamental human biology
research that would result from this effort will inform our understanding of how
metabolism and brown adipose tissue relate to the obesity epidemic in the modern
world. The research will support research training and mentoring for
undergraduate and graduate students, international collaborations, and science
outreach to local communities. Results will be disseminated in peer review
journals as well as incorporated into undergraduate and graduate curricula at
the University at Albany.

Using the flex-heart rate and doubly labeled water methods, total energy
expenditure (calories burned each day) will be measured during the herd round-
up, which lasts roughly one week during the late fall. Physical activity levels
(used to estimate and compare energy expenditures) and dietary intake will also
be documented during this time. Resting metabolic rate, age, sex, body mass,
body fat percentage, muscle mass, glucose levels, and cholesterol levels will be
recorded for each subject. These data will be used to develop a metabolic
profile, determining how many calories are used for different activities and
during rest. Energy expenditure measurements will be compared to estimates to
determine if herders expend fewer calories than expected, as hypothesized by the
new constrained theory for human energy expenditure, or if the measurements
reflect a higher energetic demand required by inhabiting a harsh environment.
Finally, a new procedure employing a thermal imaging camera will be used to
measure brown adipose tissue activation in the field. Typically, brown adipose
tissue studies take place in clinical settings and require PET-CT scans; the
procedure used in this study is more flexible for both researchers and study
participants in the field. This project will act as a spring board for
developing a longitudinal study examining seasonal impacts on total energy
expenditure, physical activity levels, brown adipose tissue activation, and
applications for addressing the obesity epidemic.