* 1724445
* An Examination of Factors Which Contribute to Long Term Social Stability
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Matthew Pailes, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 126,893.00

The reasons for what is colloquially known as societal collapse are a popular
subject of debate. In anthropology, this question is more broadly phrased as why
do some societies persist for long periods of time while others experience major
reorganization events? Reorganizations can entail both political upheavals and,
in severe cases, major demographic changes, such as migrations or other regional
depopulations. All societies encounter occasional hardships known as
perturbations. Often societies will weather several destabilizing shocks before
a seemingly similar event triggers a major reorganization. There are also
examples of perturbations in different societies having profoundly different
effects. These observations suggest that explanations focusing on singular
causal factors are inadequate. To explain the differential trajectories of
societies, an understanding of the interaction of several variables operating at
different geographic and temporal scales is required. Archaeology is well
positioned to identify and describe these relationships due to its focus on long
time-scales and tradition of cross-cultural comparison. Although the fates of
societies in the distant past may seem to have little in common with present
conditions, this research is relevant to modern scenarios. Specifically, this
project will explore three variables common to all political organization. These
variables are the size of communities, i.e. the largest regularly cooperating
groups of people; the amount of organizational diversity present between
communities; and the character of the social networks that connect communities.
This research project, in addition to the gain in scientific knowledge, will
foster bi-national collaboration, facilitate the completion of graduate student
degree projects, and provide opportunities for international undergraduate
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selected study area is located in the
Sierra Madre of northern Mexico. This area maintained high population levels,
separated into many local communities, for at least 1000 years from
approximately AD 500 to AD 1500. All surrounding regions cycled through one or
more major reorganization events in this same time span. By focusing on a record
of continuity, the project will invert traditional methodologies that mostly
focus on explaining the causes of known reorganization events. The specific
hypotheses to be tested propose that the study region was stable for an extended
period of time because communities were relatively small, organizationally
dissimilar, and maintained sparse but diverse connections between each other.
This research proposes these qualities would have had the effect of localizing
destabilizing events, preventing the spread of calamitous political collapses,
and providing a means for local population redistribution once destabilizing
events ended. The research team will evaluate these relationships by compiling
data from previous research and collecting new archaeological data from
communities throughout the Sierra Madre of Sonora, Mexico. Researchers will
excavate at the largest sites in four prehistoric settlement communities,
complete settlement pattern surveys in two valleys, and perform geochemical
assays to reconstruct movement of materials between communities throughout
eastern Sonora.