* 1724847
* Tribal College Faculty Professional Development Workshop
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Ke Wu, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2019
* USD 234,187.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
STEM instructional and research capacities of specific institutions of higher
education that serve the Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM
curricular offerings at these institutions expands the opportunities of their
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a
community and generational appreciation for science and mathematics education.
The Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program funds
research and the development, implementation, and investigation of models to
transform the dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training
and/or faculty advancement of historically underrepresented minorities (URMs) in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) and/or STEM education
research. The focus of the proposal from the University of Montana (UM) is on
developing faculty at tribal institutions, so they too will be able to support
the needs of their students. In addition, UM continues to build and strengthen
collaborative efforts with the Montana tribal colleges, which could provide more
opportunities for tribal students to do research at UM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Montana will expand upon a successful
model to provide tribal college faculty collaboration with UM researchers and
new research opportunities. Tribal college (TC) faculty will be provided field
research experience to gain exposure to various research opportunities at the
Flathead Lake Biological Station while investigating lab research practices that
are appropriate for the TC's campus lab infrastructures, the needs of their
students, and the knowledge, skills, and abilities of the TC faculty members.
The research group model will continue to strengthen a faculty network as TC
faculty learn from each other and begin establishing collaborations with UM
faculty for future possible research discussion. The workshop will have TC
faculty come to the UM campus and the FLBS for one week during the summer of
2018, have two follow up meetings during the subsequent fall and spring
semesters, and participate in a specialized program for experienced TC faculty
in the summer of 2019. A parallel track will be developed and provided for new
TC faculty in the summer of 2019.