* 1724868
* Collaborative Research: Hydrologic and Permafrost Changes Due to Tree Expansion into Tundra
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Aleksey Sheshukov, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 105,886.00

The Arctic has been warming at an accelerating rate over the last several
decades, and at the same time, trees and shrubs have been invading into tundra
across the polar regions of Alaska, Canada, and Russia. These shifts in
vegetation may, in turn, have the potential to influence regional hydrology and
climate. The goal of this collaborative project is to combine approaches to
study water, energy, and carbon cycling to understand inteactions between forest
and tundra, including permafrost. The investigators will examine the effects of
tree expansion, or encroachment, on movement of water between earth and air in
an understudied forest-tundra boundary in the Siberian Arctic. The methods will
include collection and analysis of field data, use of remote sensing, and
modeling. The investigators will collaborate with scientists and students in
Russia, and U.S. graduate students will be exposed to interdisciplinary
research, perform field work in Russia, and have the opportunity to develop
international collaborations. Various outreach activities will inform the public
about results of this research and more generally, about the role of the Arctic
in global environmental change. These activities include development of museum
exhibits at the Museum of Natural History (MI), Orton Geological Museum (OH),
Museum of Prairiefire (KS); public research seminars engaging indigenous people
of Yamal (Russia); and documentaries showcasing this study in social and news
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to study changes in
hydrology and permafrost associated with tree expansion into tundra areas at the
scales of both the field observational program and the regional Western Siberian
Plain. The underlying hypotheses are that the tree encroachment process 1)
alters the seasonality of heat exchange between the land and the atmosphere, 2)
increases surface evapotranspiration, and 3) leads to warming of the subsurface
with a progressive increase of thickness of soil seasonal thaw depth. The
research builds on fifty years of observations in the areas with documented
larch and spruce encroachment in the Polar Urals and southern Yamal Peninsula of
Russia. The investigators will use a novel theory combined with comprehensive
field observational data and remote sensing analyses to reveal the differences
in heat exchange between the tundra and forest land covers. Pairs of field
monitoring plots will be identified, with expansion of larch and spruce in one
plot and no encroachment in the second of the pair. Field observations will
include measurements of: micrometeorology, snow conditions, and radiative
fluxes; tree-scale sap flows; snow water equivalent; soil temperature, moisture,
and heat fluxes; active layer thickness; and soil composition. Field data will
inform a model to derive surface energy budgets and heat fluxes. Remote sensing
data from 1980s to present will connect local trends inferred from these field
observations with regional characertistics of the Western Siberian Plain.
Observed and modeled heat fluxes will be used in a comprehensive physical model
to study the impact of vegetation encroachment on permafrost dynamics at both
local and regional scales, and analysis of uncertainty will assess the
reliability of the project findings.