* 1724972
* I-Corps: Materials and methods for enhanced water purification
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jordan Poler, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of new materials and processes for removing natural and
anthropogenic contaminants from drinking water. There are areas that do not have
continuous access to clean drinking water from a public utility. Often water
treatment facilities are not able to easily remove organic contaminants from the
water source before the disinfection step and distribution. This technology
potentially removes the molecular contaminants that lead to these harmful and
regulated disinfection byproducts. The largest commercial impact related to the
technology is likely from removing contaminants from water during acute natural
or anthropogenic events. Drought or floods can increase contaminants into the
natural water supply. Extreme weather can also disrupt water supplies due to
flooding, especially when waste water is discharged into the water supply.
Industrial accidents like petroleum spills, pipeline leaks, and coal ash pond
breaches can disrupt the water supply of an entire city for weeks or longer. The
materials and processes developed here can be designed for these acute or
emergency management events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
demonstrates the development of a technology platform to remove molecular and
ionic contaminant from natural waters and from treated water. The technology
outperforms current methods at removing the smallest molecules that seem to be
the most recalcitrant and can be potentially harmful to human health. The
intellectual merit of this project centers upon this flexible platform of
functionalized materials with controllable morphology. Short oligomers are
synthesized with specific functionality to adsorb various water contaminants.
These oligomers are functionalized to scaffolding materials and form a contact
resin that adsorbs a high capacity of molecular species in a very rapid rate.
The ability to control the morphology of the scaffolding allows maintenance of
the high surface area exposed to the contaminated water. Moreover, the porosity
is kept high enough to allow a fast-filtration method of water treatment.