* 1724426
* Technique Development for Caffeinated Beverage Identification
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Terry Powis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 93,274.00

The great power archaeology has is the ability to teach about our collective
past and provide a perspective on people today. A key part of that collective
past, as well as the present, is beliefs and associated belief practices.
Because the material remains of beliefs are often transitory and open to
interpretation, this realm of human behavior is often under-studied by those who
explore the deep past. This project intends to refine the methods used to
identify the use of, and ultimately explore the ancient ritual practices
surrounding, caffeinated beverages in the Americas. Before the coming of
Europeans to the New World, caffeinated beverages were made either using a
species of holly (yaupon or dahoon holly) in North America, or chocolate in
Central America. Historical and archaeological information show that beverages
made from these plants were consumed in ritual and specialized contexts, so
understanding how and when they were used will make it possible to explore the
ritual practices surrounding those uses. This will be done while helping to
train the next generation of archaeologists and supporting indigenous businesses
in Belize and the US.

The search for the remains of foods and other concoctions in ancient containers
is most often done by attempting to detect the presence of diagnostic compounds
that had been absorbed into the matrix of the container. Most absorbed residue
studies employ some version of mass spectrometry to detect and measure the
concentration of various compounds present in residue samples collected from
ancient containers. The problem with absorbed residue studies of caffeinated
beverages in the Americas is that the compounds and concentrations thought to
distinguish chocolate from yaupon holly do not, in fact, differentiate residues
produced by the two plants. This project will search for chemical compounds that
definitively distinguish the two plants sources and the beverages made from
them. This will be done by analyzing samples derived from the plant sources, the
beverages made using traditional methods, and fragments of low-fired ceramic
vessels spiked with those beverages.