* 1724891
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Computing Infrastructure to Support Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Thomas Furlani, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 09/30/2018
* USD 999,900.00

This project will acquire high-performance data analytic and computing
infrastructure to support the University at Buffalo's (UB) new cross-
disciplinary PhD program in Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering (CDSE), as well as student/faculty research at the interface of data
and computing. Specifically, the proposed resource will enable a broad range of
cross-disciplinary research throughout UB, involving 25 affiliated faculty
members from across 15 departments. The integration of the resource in the CDSE
program is particularly timely given the growing importance that big data, data
analytics and simulation based engineering and science (SBES) have on society,
science and the economy, as well as the critical need to ensure the development
of an adequate workforce with the skills necessary to keep the United States at
the forefront of the information age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the
acquired infrastructure will support research and education in a wide range of
areas, such as: the development and application of quantum theoretical methods
for the simulation of spectroscopic, optical, and magnetic properties of
molecular systems; financial market microstructure and asset pricing; machine
learning and data mining methodologies for big data; geographic information
systems; modeling volcanic eruptions and volcanic ash plumes and ash clouds that
rise into the atmosphere; the integration of novel methodologies for large scale
computational and data sciences to solve problem ranging from mass flows to
biomechanics; regulatory genomics, gene regulation, genome annotation;
quantitative network neuroscience; fast and accurate exploration of large
biological and engineering data collections; and
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamics modeling and vertical integration of big-data
for target identification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the acquired
infrastructure will provide CDSE graduates with computational, mathematical and
statistical skills that provide both depth and breadth across the areas of data
sciences, applied and numerical mathematics and high performance and data
intensive computing. By facilitating the training of these "next generation"
data analysts and computational scientists, who will graduate and take jobs
throughout the Nation, the project will have an impact far beyond the boundaries
of UB in terms of advancing knowledge and understanding across a broad spectrum
of fields, including finance, engineering, materials science, geology, medicine,
and economics.