* 1724345
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Data-driven approaches for restoring naturalistic motor functions using functional neural stimulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Warren, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 394,943.00

Individuals with lower limb paralysis retain the ability to plan and initiate
gait within the central nervous system but, due to conditions such as spinal
cord injury or stroke, are unable to transmit those directives to the muscles of
the lower limb. This research project uses a biologically-inspired, data-driven
approach to address this deficiency. Specifically, the research team is
developing and evaluating machine learning methods and electrical stimulation of
nerves to control movements of the lower limbs. The goal is to develop and
evaluate methods to restore natural, coordinated, and graceful gait in an animal
model of paralysis. This activity is a first step toward providing benefit to
the paralyzed community by creating pathways toward the development and
commercialization of functional gait restoration systems that evoke more
natural, controlled movement of paralyzed limbs. In addition, the project offers
unique opportunities to train engineering students in the performance of pre-
clinical studies, placing these future researchers at the forefront of
engineering technology and medical research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project aims to develop and evaluate methods to restore natural, coordinated,
and graceful gait in an animal model of paralysis using a synergistic
collaboration of a multi-disciplinary and multi-university team of investigators
and a combination of innovative modeling and algorithm development supported by
a series of experiments. Specifically, the project aims to achieve the following
sub-goals involving application of data-driven algorithms in a series of
experiments that are designed to evoke increasingly complex movements over the
course of the proposed work: (a) Develop, characterize, and evaluate advanced
controllers of joint angle and joint torque production of a single joint in only
a single direction, to allow comparison of the data-driven model to earlier,
classical controls methods; (b) Develop, characterize, and evaluate advanced
controllers of joint angle and joint torque production of a single joint in both
directions, to elucidate methods used by the advanced controller's solution to
the under-constrained problem of agonist-antagonist muscle pair control; (c)
Develop, characterize, and evaluate advanced controllers of joint angle and
joint torque production of multiple joints in both directions, to elucidate
methods used by the advanced controller's solution to the competing-goals
problem of biarticular muscle control; and, (d) Recreate natural, coordinated,
and graceful gait by use of the advanced controllers arising from the first
three goals, and demonstrate this result on a treadmill platform.