* 1724405
* CRCNS Research Proposal: US-German Collaboration: Influencing Brain Rhythms for Boosting Memory Consolidation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Maksim Bazhenov, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 838,163.00

This study aims to understand the neural mechanisms of sleep, with the goal to
optimally apply external stimulation techniques for enhancing the efficacy of
deep sleep. In the industrial societies the level of sleep is on a record low
level and more and more people suffer from poor sleep. Deep sleep constitutes a
major part of the night, and a number of studies have shown that efficient and
healthy deep sleep is important not only for cognitive performance and learning,
but also for strengthening the immune system, healthy functioning of the
metabolic system, and is even crucial for children with Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Syndrome (ADHS). The promise of stimulation techniques is that
they can be applied non-invasively with a potentially broad range of
applications and minimal side effects, not only in clinical settings but even at
home, and at a low cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During sleep, the brain is not at
rest but rather in an "off-line" state, where it strengthens and stabilizes
newly encoded information to maintain it for the long-term in a process of
systems consolidation. There is increasing evidence that the interplay of the
major electrical brain rhythms during deep sleep is necessary for the transfer
of information into long-term memory. The ultimate goals of this research
project are (a) to understand the neuronal processes that allow to boost these
endogenous brain rhythms by external stimulation during sleep, acoustically and
electrically, and (b) to study these interventions to optimize the strengthening
and coordination of sleep rhythms to improve memory and learning. The approach
includes combinations of auditory stimulation and optogenetic experiments in
rodents, auditory stimulation combined with transcranial direct current
stimulation in humans and large-scale computer brain models of sleep and wake
states, simulating new task learning and memory consolidation and the effects of
various stimulation techniques. The project will suggest new approaches for
improving memory, perception, and sleep both in healthy subjects and in patients
with mental and sleep disorders such as schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease, or
substance use disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering. A companion project is being
funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF).