* 1724934
* NeTS: Small: A Language-Based Approach to Deep Packet Inspection: from Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Michela Becchi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 01/31/2018
* USD 94,326.00

Deep packet inspection is at the core of several established and emerging
networking applications, such as network intrusion detection and content-aware
routing. Due to their expressive power, in recent years regular expressions have
been adopted in pattern-sets used for these applications in both industry and
academia. Existing high-performance regular expression matching engines are
based on finite automata, and are implemented using either logic- or memory-
based designs. The former allow peak performance on single packet flows with
relatively simple logic, but are not scalable to large numbers of flows; the
latter offer scalability in the number of flows at the cost of algorithmic and
design complexity. Despite the rich body of work in the area, providing worst-
case guarantees is still challenging in the presence of complex regular
expressions that include repetitions of wildcards and large character sets.
Moreover, existing solutions assume that packets are inspected in-order and
after data decompression.

This project will develop a language abstraction, data structures, and
algorithms for line rate deep packet inspection. In particular, the project will
consider open problems in regular expression-based deep packet inspection,
namely: (i) handling of complex patterns containing repetitions of wildcards and
large character sets, and (ii) inspection of out-of-order packets and compressed
traffic. A language-based approach to deep packet inspection will be introduced
in order to handle the regular expressions? complexity. This project will
integrate concepts from automata theory, practices in data structure and
algorithm design, analysis of the requirements of networking applications, and
system architecture considerations.

The previous work performed by the PI on high speed regular expression matching
has attracted the attention of several companies. The PI will leverage these
contacts to facilitate the transfer of the proposed research. The PI has added
two computer architecture courses to the undergraduate and graduate Electrical
and Computer Engineering curriculum at University of Missouri (MU); she will
introduce a new networking systems course, which will cover the knowledge
generated by this research. The PI will leverage the MU Undergraduate Research
Program to involve undergraduate students in the proposed work, which will allow
students to work at the intersection of three domains: algorithm and data
structure design, system architecture and networking applications. The results
of this research will be disseminated through publications and presentations,
and by releasing open-source software modules on the PI?s Lab website.