* 1724889
* CIF21 DIBBs: PD: Enhancing and Personalizing Educational Resources through Tools for Experimentation
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 544,644.00

This project would automate the creation and data analysis of randomized
controlled experiments (RCEs). RCEs are question sets designed and delivered to
teachers and students in a classroom setting, and can be used to compare
alternative educational strategies. This effort builds on an existing
educational platform (ASSISTments) developed by the Principal Investigator, and
uses a template-based approach to increase the efficiency and reliability of
conducting educational research. The goal is to lower the barriers to creating
and learning from randomized controlled experiments. The project has the
potential to facilitate large-scale learning in education research, reaching
hundreds of schools and thousands of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
builds upon two prior developments by this team. &lt;br/&gt; - ASSISTments is an
online learning platform originally designed to provide students with assistance
and teachers with assessments (establishing the moniker).  The system is used
primarily as an online tutoring system for middle or secondary education,
supporting the delivery, collection, and grading of classwork and homework,
providing immediate feedback for students and explicit reporting for teachers.
To date, 24 randomized controlled experiments comparing educational strategies
have been published using this platform. &lt;br/&gt; - In addition,
AssistmentsTestBed.org is a testbed developed by the PI and his group under a
separate NSF grant (#1440753), to identify best practices in education and allow
other researchers to propose and run their own studies leveraging ASSISTments as
a shared scientific instrument through this testbed. Beneficiaries include
education researchers, teachers, and students, with the existing tool being used
in over 500 schools and in the education of over 50,000 students. &lt;br/&gt;The
current project improves two components of the infrastructure that have been
resource-intensive bottlenecks in prior research. One task automates the process
of study creation and data analysis, through development of a Template Tool that
enables studies within ASSISTments. A second task automates statistical analyses
and improves usability of the existing data reporting tool (Assessment of
Learning Infrastructure, or ALI). The improvements will be achieved, in part, by
applying educational data mining algorithms (i.e., deep knowledge tracing) on
student data collected before, during, and after experimentation. These
analytics will provide researchers with covariates that will significantly
improve the agenda of personalizing education. The resulting capability will
assist researchers as they design and deliver question sets to teachers and
students in a classroom setting, increase the efficiency and reliability of
conducting educational research at scale, and streamline the research
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the NSF Directorate for Education
and Human Resources, Division of Research on Learning in Formal and Informal
Settings.