* 1724435
* Human Adaptation to High Altitude Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mike Morley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 192,927.00

Humans are the only species to colonize the entire globe and inhabit such a vast
array of habitats, including challenging environments like high mountain
systems. Researchers strive to understand the process by which Homo sapiens
developed the unique, culturally-mediated aptitude for living and thriving in
arduous settings. Archaeology is ideally suited to exploring this issue because
it allows one to trace over deep time the innovations and successes - but also,
of course, the mistakes and failures - that constituted the adaptive process of
human behavioral evolution. Previous scholarship into mountain adaptations has
focused on the permanent colonization of the world's few expanses of contiguous
high elevation terrain - the so-called high plateaus - which occurred late in
human evolutionary history. In contrast, the longer-term processes by which
people engaged with high altitudes before permanently mastering them remain
unexplored. Where and when did humans first seek dizzying new heights and what
encouraged them to do so? Africa contains some of the world's very earliest
evidence for a human presence in such environments, yet the continent's high
mountain systems are sorely under-investigated. This project will remedy this by
investigating when, why and how early humans first inhabited and ultimately
settled southern Africa's highest mountain system, the Maloti-Drakensberg
Mountains of highland Lesotho. By charting the deep-time development of human-
highland dynamics in this region, the project will yield insights into our
species' profound capacity for behavioral flexibility that forms the core of who
we are today. The project will produce a range of pedagogical and developmental
outcomes, including training and research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, the further professionalization of Lesotho's first generation
of archaeologists, and heritage awareness and empowerment through public open-
days, school site-visits, consultations with local chiefs and other
stakeholders, and extensive dissemination of findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led
by Dr. Brian Stewart of the University of Michigan, the project will reconstruct
patterns of human dispersal, landscape learning and survival strategies
necessary for living in highland Lesotho during the climatically volatile past
two glacial cycles. Dr. Stewart and a multidisciplinary research team will
conduct an integrated program of cave excavation, landscape survey and
environmental sampling targeting the highlands' unusually dense prehistoric
archaeological record and ancient sedimentary exposures. These datasets will
allow them to construct a detailed picture of highland adaptations and
settlement dynamics anchored to high-resolution records of local environmental
and hydrological change. Specifically, they will examine whether and to what
extent survival strategies documented for recent montane hunter-gatherers can be
extended into earlier stages of our species' evolution. Longer-term fluctuations
in regional demography will also be explored to test hypotheses regarding
Lesotho's possible role as a dry-phase human refugium, with related implications
for population packing, high rates of cultural innovation, and viewing Africa's
montane zones as epicenters of human behavioral and genetic change.