* 1724360
* S&amp;AS: INT: COLLAB: Composable and Verifiable Design for Autonomous Humanoid Robots in Space Missions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Luis Sentis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 479,999.00

Future space missions will increasingly rely on autonomous robots like the NASA
Valkyrie human-centered robot for deploying equipment, assisting astronauts, and
maintaining facilities in real world partially-observable and cluttered
environments. Despite significant progress in robotic mobility, manipulation,
and perception, there has been relatively little progress on providing formal
performance guarantees for these integrated systems. Formal guarantees are
critical for achieving long term autonomy, particularly for robots performing
complex tasks requiring successful execution of multiple component subtasks.
Thus, the goal of this project is to develop performance guarantees for space
robots operating in unstructured real world environments. Although robots are
used as design examples, the project is of a basic research nature and the
results can have impacts on other fields, such as sensor/actuator networks,
manufacturing and transportation systems. The multidisciplinary approach taken
for this project will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups and
positively impact engineering and computer science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop new
methods to synthesize coordinated manipulation and locomotion plans and control
policies that verifiably adhere to formal mission specifications. There are two
major thrusts. First, the PIs plan to develop manipulation, locomotion, and
motion primitives that can provide performance guarantees in unstructured,
partially observable, and dynamic environments. The focus will be on using
methods from perception and planning under uncertainty to provide guarantees in
cluttered and partially observable environments. The PIs will also leverage new
tools from hybrid systems and sampling based methods to achieve controllers with
verifiable guarantees through contact mode switches. Second, the PIs plan to
devise methods to automatically synthesize mission plans in a way that can
guarantee the accomplishment of high-level mission goals or bound the
probability of failure. The focus will be on automatic and learning-based
design, enabling the system to adapt to changing environments, uncertain faults
and potential adversaries. Most of the work performed under this project will be
demonstrated in the context of complex space tasks inspired by NASA scenarios.