* 1724778
* WORKSHOP: Community Change in Global Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Jeff Maskovsky, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 42,225.00

This award supports a two-part international workshop on changing notions of
community in global perspective. Previous research has demonstrated that strong
community ties are linked to civic efficacy, participation, cooperation, and
volunteering, and are, therefore, an important measure of social well-being. But
recently, researchers have observed dramatic increases in social heterogeneity,
weakening ties and potentially underming trust within and between communities.
The workshop asks if these developments are inevitable and what the outcomes
will be. It addresses these questions using a comparative, community studies
approach. Social scientists from the United States, Mexico, Norway, Spain, and
the United Kingdom will use anthropological ethnographic and archival data to
examine current shifts in how communities are formed, how they change, and the
kinds of ties that are formed within and between them. The work will have impact
by 1) increasing understanding of the causes and consequences of community
change in the contemporary world; 2) supporting international research
collaboration; and 3) promoting education through the inclusion of graduate
student participants and by communicating results to the public.

The two-part workshop will be convened by Dr. Jeff Maskovsky (City University of
New York) and Dr. Sophie Bjork-James (Vanderbilt University). Community studies
experts will share data on how communities across the world are changing and
whether those changes strengthen or weaken social ties. The first workshop will
seek to answer multiple, interrelated questions: From global perspectives, what
are the primary influencers of community change? What social factors have the
most impact in strengthening or weakening community ties? How does increased
diversity affect community ties? And what can ethnography and history contribute
to current debates? The workshop will emphasize a comparative perspective and
will develop knowledge of community change across regional, national,
international, and global contexts. The second workshop will distill findings
and prepare for the publication of an edited volume designed to reach four high
impact audiences: students in graduate and undergraduate anthropology courses,
anthropologists studying community change, scholars in other disciplines working
on similar topics, and the English language reading public.