* 1724749
* Emergency Services During Heightened Border Security
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Ieva Jusionyte, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 41,178.00

How do first responders confront the challenges of provisioning fire, rescue,
and emergency medical services in contexts of heightened security? The case of
emergency medical responders is intriguing and oftentimes problematic. As public
service providers, they are street-level bureaucrats who work on the frontlines
of the post-9/11 security state, facing political, legal and ethical collisions
between the security of the communities where they live and work and their
social-humanitarian responsibilities to saving lives. Professional ethics and
healthcare laws require that first responders provide help without regard to the
legal status of their patients, but as state actors they are also invested with
political and symbolic functions of governmental authority and tightly
integrated into the federal emergency preparedness and homeland security
infrastructures. The study examines the relation between local governments and
taxpayers that fund fire, rescue and emergency medical services, and federal and
state governments, which set and implement national security, border control and
immigration policies. The project will be instructive to EMS-related policy and
regulatory efforts as they relate to both broader concerns about national
security and public health. The project would also promote the advancement and
training of students in methods of rigorous data collection and analysis, while
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ieva Jusionyte of the University of Florida explores
the everyday practices and experiences of first responders - firefighters,
emergency medical technicians and paramedics - who work or volunteer for fire
and rescue departments on both sides of the Arizona-Sonora border to expand our
understanding of the human and social consequences of security policies and
border enforcement. This project asks: (1) what effects do security policies,
planned and executed at different government levels, have in the communities
where they are applied? And (2) how do potential contradictions that result when
these policies are put into practice impact border security efforts? Dr.
Jusionyte will seek answers to these questions by engaging in a twelve-month-
long ethnographic research in rural and urban communities of Southern Arizona,
where she will actively collaborate with research assistants and community
partners from the fire and rescue departments. The research team will conduct a
series of in-depth interviews, focus group discussions and archival research in
order to explain how conflicting policies at different levels of governance can
result in potentially deleterious consequences for people who experience them,
and assess the implications that these effects have on first responders as
frontline state actors. This research is an original and important contribution
to our understanding of the effects of security-making and the laws, politics
and ethics of rescue from an anthropological
perspective.&amp;#8194;&amp;#8194;&amp;#8194;&amp;#8194;&amp;#8194;