* 1724845
* CIF21 DIBBs: PD: Building High-Availability Data Capabilities in Data-Centric Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 531,994.00

This project supports data-related analysis in a wide range of science and
engineering applications. It will contribute to the development of scalable
data-centric cyberinfrastructure capabilities, to accelerate interdisciplinary
and collaborative research. The exascale file system will serve as catalyst for
research in data storage architectures, and will enable new data-focused
services and capabilities that advance scientific discoveries, collaborations,
and innovations. The project addresses a major data challenge common to a range
of communities such as social science, economics, and bioengineering, and will
provide thorough training and collaborative research opportunities for project
participants. Both high performance computing (HPC) clusters and Hadoop clusters
use file systems. A Hadoop cluster uses the Hadoop Distributed File System
(HDFS) that resides on compute nodes, while an HPC cluster usually uses a remote
storage system. Despite years of efforts on research and application development
on HPC and Hadoop clusters, the file systems in both types of clusters still
face a formidable challenge, that of achieving exascale computing capabilities.
The centralized data indexing in HDFS and HPC storage architectures cannot
provide high scalability and reliability, and both HDFS and HPC storage
architectures have shortcomings such as single point of failure and
insufficiently efficient data access. This project builds scalable high-
availability data capabilities in data-centric cyberinfrastructure to overcome
the shortcomings and create a highly scalable file system with new techniques
for distributed load balancing, data replication and consistency maintenance.