* 1724728
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: Creating a Digital Environment for Enabling Data-Driven Science (DEEDS)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Connie Weaver, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 3,456,281.00

This project creates a platform that simplifies knowledge extraction from
diverse scientific datasets, by integrating multimodal data, computing software,
and interactive tools for search and exploration.  The effort provides a
collaborative environment for sharing research data and computational and
statistical algorithms.  During research investigations, the environment uploads
and organizes data, executes and tracks computational jobs, and connects input
and output to analysis results. When investigations are complete, the
environment helps publish data, algorithms and investigative workflows for
public access. The environment also simplifies the discovery, search, and
exploration of published datasets - providing interactive tools for viewing and
analyzing data. Four distinct use cases (chemistry, electrical engineering,
nutrition science, and environmental science) provide a testbed for platform
usability and functionality. The use cases produce important datasets that are
intended for use by HHS, USDA, EPA, DOE, and other government agencies to
support decision-making about policy and regulations.

The project builds upon a 2014 DIBBs pilot demonstration award (#1443017 -
DataHub) which created a data management platform for the publishing and
discovery of scientific research datasets. The team extends this platform to
support the full research investigation process by 1) connecting data to
computational and statistical modeling software, 2) tracking research workflows
to link data, algorithms, and results, 3) automatically capturing metadata and
classifying data by type, and 4) providing interfaces to define complex
hierarchical, structured data and operate on the data using analytical toolkits.
Published datasets are explored with interactive tools that interpret data types
for advanced navigation, viewing, search, analysis, and visualization.
Collaborations with research projects in chemistry, electrical engineering,
nutrition science, and environmental science produce system requirements and
guarantee that the general, discipline-neutral platform provides end-to-end
support for their use cases. The project helps researchers curate their own
findings, and also facilitates the sharing of data and findings for the purposes
of preservation, replication, and extension.