* 1724948
* MRI: Acquisition of a Low-Voltage Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) to Enable Chemistry Research and Training at Central Pennsylvania Undergraduate Institutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Claude Yoder, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 287,200.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. With it, Professor Katherine
Plass from Franklin &amp; Marshall College and colleagues Claude Yoder and
Jennifer Morford acquire a transmission electron microscope (TEM). A TEM sends a
beam of electrons through a thin layer of material. The electron beam interacts
with the substance to produce a visual image, similar to a microscope. These
images are important for research on the chemical properties of materials. They
reveal details of the structure, such as size and shape of a nanoparticle or a
protein. This information helps researchers understand the material's properties
and improve them. The acquisition enhances the training of undergraduates in
research. The instrument is used at four primarily undergraduate institutions,
Franklin and Marshall College, Albright College, Ursinus College and
Millersville University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this electron
microscope is aimed at enhancing research, especially in areas such as: (a) the
synthesis of nanomaterials for the study of the properties of nanoparticles
interfacing with molecules or cells, (b) plasmonic semiconducting nanoparticles
used to modulate cation exchange, (c) studies of molybdenum accumulation in
marine sediments by synthesizing iron-molybdenum-sulfide nanoparticles, (d) ion
substitution in apatite materials, (e) metal nanoparticles as catalysts for
carbon nanofiber growth, (f) carbon nanotubes and graphene oxide as vectors for
transporting tetracycline antibiotics, (g) plasmonic metal nanoparticles and (h)
modular proteins and how they move within cells.