* 1724469
* Collaborative Research:  Residual Stress Preserved in Crystals from Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 171,413.00

Volcanic eruptions transport magma from reservoirs deep underground to the
surface through conduits. Because volcanic processes occur underground, or are
very dangerous to approach, many key aspects of volcanic eruptions are difficult
to study with direct observations. Here, a new technology called synchrotron
X-ray micro diffraction (microXRD) will be used to document deformation
preserved in crystals that were transported within volcanic eruptions. The
microXRD technique measures the amount of strain and preserved stress in the
crystal lattice of those crystals. Volcanic stresses are important because they
control eruption processes, including magma movement and explosivity. The first
step to interpreting residual stress is to identify the specific processes that
strain volcanic crystals. To this end, volcanic simulation experiments will be
performed to deform crystals. MicroXRD will be used to analyze the experimental
products and then compare results with natural crystals. This set of experiments
and measurements will address the "How" and "Why" of volcanic eruptions. The
standards and techniques developed in this project will enable application of
microXRD to other disciplines, including Tectonics, Meteoritics, and Materials
Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forces that act on magmas control
volcanic processes. Consequently, crystals from volcanic eruptions are strained
in the magma chamber, conduit, and during emplacement. Synchrotron X-ray micro
diffraction (microXRD) will be used to quantify the magnitude of those strains
by analyzing crystal lattice deformation with submicron spatial resolution on a
suite of quartz, magnetite, and zircon crystals from the Long Valley and
Yellowstone calderas. Measuring the magnitude of strains and using
microstructure maps across crystals will reveal how strain is produced and
preserved in crystals. Next, the preserved strains will be translated to causal
stresses using the elastic constants of the mineral and Hooke's law. The goal is
to quantify volcanic stresses in different volcanic environments and assess the
forces and the time scales over which those forces act. MicroXRD has exceptional
potential as an emerging technology in the geological sciences, but there is
limited physical and theoretical infrastructure to interpret datasets. For this
reason, high-temperature experiments will be performed to simulate stresses in
volcanic environments using unstrained synthetic crystals, and assess the
preservation of stress in strained natural crystals. Experimental products will
be analyzed by microXRD and used to identify and/or eliminate sources of
deformation.