* 1724781
* Upgrading plant-functional-types with plant trait variability in ecohydrological models: A stochastic parameterization approach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gene-Hua Ng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 351,353.00

Ecohydrological models that incorporate carbon and water cycles can predict
related changes in vegetation growth and soil water reservoirs in response to
climate and land-use perturbations. They are thus critical for helping us
prepare for ecosystem and water resource vulnerabilities. Such models also play
an important role in determining feedbacks from vegetation and soils that can
accelerate or slow climate change. However, much of the uncertainty in these
models arises because of how they currently represent plants. These models
simplify the enormous diversity of plants into a tractable number of ?plant-
functional-types? (PFTs), each of which have uniform, fixed sets of parameters
applied to them. Although PFTs group together related species with similar
characteristics, recently compiled global plant data reveal that certain plant
traits can vary just as much within these pre-specified PFT groups as between
distinct groups. Because these plant properties can affect plant uptake of water
and CO2, this study will incorporate plant trait variability into
ecohydrological models in order to improve future predictions about our changing
ecosystems, water resources, and climate. &lt;br/&gt; The current paradigm of
fixed-parameter PFTs in ecohydrological models needs upgrading to align with new
findings in ecology on plant trait variability. The proposed work offers a new
stochastic approach that simulates plant trait plasticity; these are adaptations
that occur over time and space in response to complex environmental drivers and
give rise to variability within PFTs. A spatiotemporally stochastic PFT
parameterization will be developed based on global plant trait data that capture
distributions of intra-PFT variability. Importantly, the parameterization will
be further conditioned on spatiotemporal biotic and abiotic data to fill gaps in
the plant trait datasets and rigorously account for uncertainties in applying
sparse global data to these models. This approach marks a novel departure from
recent modeling efforts that incorporate trait variability as random parameters
fixed in space and time or as deterministic inputs that fail to address
uncertainties. The stochastic PFT parameterization will be first developed for a
desert shrubland setting, which critically needs a new model representation that
can capture temperature and moisture acclimation by its plants. Simulations with
the new model will reveal relationships in desert shrublands between plant
traits and environmental variables such as climate and soil type. Plant trait
variability is ubiquitous among all PFTs; the stochastic parameterization
approach generated in this study will thus benefit ecohydrological modeling
globally.&lt;br/&gt;