* 1724341
* S&amp;AS: INT: Autonomous Multi-Robot Visual Monitoring for Urban, Agricultural, and Natural Resource Management
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Amit Roy-Chowdhury, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project develops technologies to improve natural resource monitoring
systems. Specifically, this project investigates how teams of smart and
autonomous aerial robots equipped with visual sensors can monitor vegetation
health over extended spatial and temporal scales. It addresses the fundamental
issues of i) multi-robot collaboration, ii) adaptation of robot trajectories
according to the quality of collected visual data, iii) networked decision
making under several conflicting constraints, and iv) learning planning and
control at real-world dynamic environments. The project further investigates how
these four tasks can work seamlessly with each other, under autonomous and real-
time operation. In addition to improving vegetation monitoring, the outcomes of
this project may benefit several other application domains, including habitat
monitoring, border control, forest fire tracking and search-and-rescue
operations. Additionally, the project involves several hands-on procedures that
are expected to attract undergraduate student participation and enable outreach
to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the theoretical
and technical challenges in order to enable autonomous multi-robot visual
monitoring of critical natural resources. A critical step in this effort is to
introduce novel algorithmic frameworks that can enable networks of smart and
autonomous aerial robots to detect and adapt to observed phenomena, while
satisfying multiple - often conflicting - time-varying constraints and mission
specifications. To achieve this, the project contributes to three main areas. i)
Adaptive visual sensing with focus on the analysis of visual data that can
automatically adapt to the environment and the computational constraints. ii)
Autonomous aerial robot navigation, developing reliable and energy-efficient
autonomous aerial robot navigation strategies under resource constraints. iii)
System-level decision-making and adaptation, which will focus on general
reasoning, decision-making and control schemes for adaptive resource allocation
under the real-time constraints. The project seamlessly merges individual
contributions into the proposed Adaptive Resource Monitoring (ARM) system. ARM
is cognizant of its environmental, technical and ethical constraints, and issues
goal-oriented tasks for each agent. ARM possesses the ability to reflect upon
past decisions and reinforce advantageous ones, and is driven by knowledge-rich
models and methods. The individual components and the overall system are tested
through a rigorous evaluation plan, starting with individual modules and leading
up to a system-level evaluation in the application domain.