* 1724392
* S&amp;AS: FND: Long-Term Planning and Robust Plan Execution for Multi-Robot Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Sven Koenig, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 599,999.00

How can multi-robot teams maneuver in tight and cluttered environments when "no
plan survives contact" with reality? Traditional approaches plan for idealized
situations and must patch up maneuvers when sensors or actuators are imprecise,
making them neither robust nor safe. This project, a collaboration of PIs from
artificial intelligence and robotics, will investigate fundamental research to
capture and use timing and uncertainty constraints in large robot navigation and
coordination problems. The target applications are just-in-time manufacturing
and automated warehousing, but the results will extend beyond to many
applications of smart and autonomous systems that need reliable and safe
planning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study Multi-Agent Path Finding
(MAPF), which is an NP-hard planning problem that belongs to a class of
important planning problems, namely multi-agent navigation problems with
temporal and spatial constraints. The research will relax simplifying
assumptions typically made by MAPF solvers, namely that plan execution is
perfect and stops once all robots have reached their goal locations. Many AI
planning methods that have been developed are not used on robots, since
planning/scheduling uses idealized models of the environment and plan execution
is never perfect, and there is often insufficient time for re-planning if
execution deviates from the plan. This project will develop well-founded
planning and plan-execution methods, based on probabilistic and temporal
reasoning, that fuse ideas from robotics and artificial intelligence. In
particular, the PIs will combine advances in planning algorithms from the AI
community, namely Simple Temporal Networks (STN), and adapt them to the robotics
domain by adding timely execution constraints, as well as sensor, actuator, and
model uncertainties. They will make project results (such as papers, videos and
code) available on their web pages, present tutorials on their research results
to the artificial intelligence and robotics research communities, develop
teaching material for multi-robot planning, and integrate undergraduate students
into their research activities.