* 1724455
* Crystallo-Chemical Approach to Gas Selectivity of Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/26/2016,04/30/2018
* Pelagia Gouma, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 60,720.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Metal oxide-based gas sensing today goes beyond
pollution control and environmental monitoring and reaches out to health
monitoring applications and non-invasive diagnostics. Therefore, a broader scope
of understanding is needed to synthesize and use metal oxides for detecting a
specific chemical at trace concentrations with no interference from other
compounds in a complex mixture. Within this project, the structure (rather than
the composition) of an oxide is being correlated to its ability to detect a
specific vapor of interest, whether it is a disease marker in breath or a
harmful pollutant in the environment. The experiments being undertaken include
novel synthesis of ceramic phases at the nanoscale, and atomic level
characterization of gas-oxide interactions. Fundamental knowledge about how to
produce tailored ceramic nanostructures with high specificity to the chemical
vapors of interest is sought. This project is training scientists to use
advanced materials processing and characterization techniques, and is educating
the public at large about the benefits of ceramics research to human health and
welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: While semiconducting metal
oxides have been used as resistive gas sensors commercially since 1968, the
nature of gas-oxide interactions still remains unknown. These inherently
polymorphic ceramics exist in various distinct crystallographic configurations,
each behaving as a different material with respect to it?s physical and chemical
properties, even though they all have the exact same composition. Nanoscale
processing of ceramics has made available a "toolbox" of "metastable phases" at
room temperature in high quantities. Sensing elements based on nanostructured
binary metal oxides of controlled stoichiometry and phase distribution need to
be studied in order to elucidate how gas selectivity is achieved. The underlying
hypothesis is that phase distribution, rather than oxide composition, determines
the gas sensing properties. Therefore, this study is synthesizing such
controlled nanostructures, single crystal nanowires and nanopowders of both
stable and metastable phases for common oxides used in sensing (MoO3, WO3, TiO2)
by means of blend electrospinning, soft chemistry routes, and a rapid
solidification process; and then carrying out detailed characterization studies
on gas-oxide interactions, including in situ gas sensing experiments in an
electron microscope. The physico-chemical changes occurring on the oxide
surfaces in contact with a given gas (e.g., oxidation, reduction, ferroelectric
poling) will be assessed for a selected group of oxide crystals (rutile,
perovskite, etc.) and a respective set of classes of chemicals (such as amines
and alkanes). The expected outcome from this project is a gas-oxide polymorph
selection library for building the next generation of gas-sensing systems with
inherent selectivity, to be used in health monitoring as non-invasive
diagnostics.