* 1724685
* Double-difference attenuation tomography method and pilot applications
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 05/31/2020
* USD 86,334.00

Seismologists use seismic waves to construct images of the Earth's internal
structure, termed seismic tomography, analogous to the way doctors use X-rays to
construct images of the human brain with CAT scans (Computerized Axial
Tomography). In seismology, tomography is most often done using measured travel
times of seismic waves to infer the seismic wave velocity structure within the
Earth. Another possibility is to use the amplitudes of seismic waves at
different frequencies to infer the Earth's attenuation structure, that is, to
identify regions where seismic waves lose energy more or less than normal. In
this project, the researchers will develop and test a new method to image
attenuation structure, with fine spatial resolution, using measured attenuation
differences between waves from pairs of nearby earthquakes. The effectiveness of
the method will be evaluated on earthquake data from northern Honshu, Japan, and
The Geysers geothermal field, California. In the former case, the researchers
will endeavor to image three-dimensional attenuation variations deep within the
Earth, which will provide insight into the zone where magmas originate that
erupt at "Ring of Fire" volcanoes and also into the nature of deep earthquakes.
In the latter case, the goal is to detect changes in attenuation structure
within the geothermal system over time, which can be used to monitor fracturing
changes due to geothermal exploitation or stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new method termed ?double-difference attenuation
tomography?, that will be tested on synthetic data, and applied to two regions
of interest. The concept is to do for seismic attenuation imaging what double-
difference location has done for hypocenter locations and double-difference
tomography has done jointly for hypocenter locations and seismic velocity
imaging. The key development is event-pair differential t* analysis, which
contrasts with previous differential t* analysis methods, which have generally
utilized either a phase-pair or a station-pair approach. A spectral ratio
approach for nearby event pairs will be used to obtain the event-pair
differential t* values, analogous to how waveform cross-correlation is used to
obtain differential times for double-difference location and double-difference
tomography. This method will be thoroughly tested on both synthetic and real
data. Two areas have been selected for applying the new double-difference
attenuation tomography method: The Geyser geothermal field, California, and
Northern Honshu, Japan. These areas were chosen both for their intrinsic
interest and for the availability of results from previous studies to which our
results can be compared. This method has the potential for obtaining very high
resolution images of seismic attenuation structure in the regions where
earthquakes occur. Seismic attenuation is a strong complement to seismic
velocity in efforts to distinguish lithology, saturation, fracturing, and
temperature in the subsurface, and these factors can affect velocities and
attenuation differently. In some of the applications that we envision, high-
resolution detection of temporal changes in attenuation is a realizable goal.
Many of the possible applications are to problems of high societal importance,
such as geothermal energy, mining, wastewater disposal, fracking, CO2
sequestration, and volcanoes. The project will support a female early career
scientist and a graduate student.