* 1724718
* RAPID: Language Emergence from Inception
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Rachel Mayberry, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2019
* USD 39,727.00

Sign languages are known to emerge spontaneously when groups of deaf children,
who have acquired no spoken or signed language, are brought together for the
first time in educational settings. The emergence of new sign languages can
provide insights into how human language evolves. To date, however, studies of
the phenomenon are retrospective in nature beginning ten or more years after the
deaf children were brought together. This means that we know little about how
deaf children share their idiosyncratic gestures, known as 'homesign', to create
a common sign language. In March 2016, 35 deaf children who currently
communicate via homesign gestures were brought together for the first time in
two all deaf classrooms in Iquitos, Peru. This project gathers data on the
individual deaf children's gesture and their initial inter-personal
communication using these gestures. The goal is to understand the very first
stage of language emergence. The unique insight of this investigation is the
gathering of data about the deaf children's gestures before they meet other deaf
children and how their gestures change throughout their first year of
interaction with one another. In reality, deaf children across the world
frequently grow up without access to a shared language. The data gathered in the
present study will provide the first documentation of how children's
communicative interactions via gesture become codified into the initial symbols
and symbolic utterances that form the basis of language. The study will also
provide insights into how a low-tech and inexpensive means to facilitate sign
language acquisition for isolated deaf children can be used to educate deaf
children throughout Latin America and the developing world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers have long hypothesized that bringing together
deaf children who have not had access to a conventional language in either
speech or sign will result in the emergence of a new sign language from the deaf
children's idiosyncratic gesture systems. One such well-known situation is the
emergence of Nicaraguan Sign Language, NSL, which has been used to model
language evolution (Senghas 2003; Senghas &amp; Coppola 2001; Senghas et al
2004). Because research on NSL only began 10 years after deaf children of
Managua were first brought together in a school, the available data and research
on sign language emergence is purely retrospective in nature. The crucial,
initial stages of sign language emergence have never before been observed or
studied. Data essential to investigate the emergence of a new sign language in
Iquitos, Peru will be gathered from individual children and groups of deaf
children with respect to emerging lexical forms and utterance structure, or
syntax. Spontaneous and elicited data have already been gathered from each child
while communicating via gesture with his or her family prior to school
enrollment. The individual child data will continue to be gathered on a yearly
basis. At the group level, the deaf children's spontaneous communication with
each other will be videotaped in the classrooms at regular intervals throughout
their first year together. This data, at both the child and group level, will be
gathered (1) prior to, (2) during, and (3) after one year's time of the
children's initial contact. The data with will yield unique observations about
when and how a sign language emerges from children's idiosyncratic gesture
systems. Although research suggests that sign languages emerge quickly in school
settings when deaf children are brought together for the first time, the
contribution of each child's gesture system to the initial organization of the
group's emerging sign language is currently unknown. With the opportunity to
document language emergence from inception, the proposed study will fill this
theoretical gap by mapping the relation of each child's pre-existing gestural
system and ability onto his or her subsequent learning of others' gestures and
signs.