* 1724459
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   The Role of Urbanization in Shaping Social Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Michael Frachetti, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 21,794.00

Urbanism is a transformative process, altering not only the physical
surroundings that people inhabit, but also their social environment. Urban
centers bring together diverse groups and individuals, creating opportunities
for both innovation and conflict. Investigating how people negotiate and manage
these interactions is important to understanding ideological and demographic
trends, which in turn have cascading effects in political, economic, and even
artistic realms. An archaeological perspective on these dynamics can be
particularly insightful as it expands the types of urban contexts that can be
examined beyond industrialized, modern cities, to diverse chronological,
geographic, and historical scales. Researchers will examine how communities use
social identity to negotiate urban ideological, political, and economic
landscapes. Approximately 83% of the United States population lives in urban
areas; and this number is projected to continue to rise. This is a global trend
as well. By examining the past, one can broaden understanding of the potential
ways people can and do adapt to urbanism in a growing range of contexts. Such
research also helps illuminate how different political, economic, and social
movements and policies may impact people's reactions. This project will examine
the impact of two social forces that have been shown to be important global
drivers of identity: religion and kinship.

The researchers will examine urbanism's impact on social identity and
organization through a study of variability in religious expression and kinship.
The research will be conducted on a series of medieval (8th-13th cent. CE) sites
across western-central Central Asia, especially focusing on sites in Uzbekistan.
Medieval Central Asia was a crossroads for diverse ideas and groups that came
together in a range of urban contexts. Medieval Central Asian cities were also
shaped by state sponsored spread of Islam and strong local identities rooted in
kinship. The meeting of these complex layers of ideology in Central Asian cities
makes them a productive context for exploring diverse urban experiences in the
face of both top-down and bottom-up identities. In this research, the impact of
religion will be examined through burial practice, while local kinship
identities will be evaluated through levels of biological relatedness between
individuals. Burial practice will be studied through descriptions of grave
locations, structures, and treatment of bodies. Biological relatedness between
individuals will be measured by quantifying morphological differences in human
crania from each site. Data will be collected from excavations of a highland
medieval cemetery, as well as from museum collections of skeletal remains and
excavation reports. Beyond direct academic contributions, this project will
promote international collaboration. The researchers will work with American and
Uzbek archaeologists and graduate students to conduct excavations and data
collection. This work will include training students, publication and presenting
opportunities, and the establishment of labs in collaborating Uzbek institutes,
allowing for sustained research opportunities. International collaboration is
crucial not only to bring together diverse knowledge sets, but also to build
bridges between countries in social and economic realms.