* 1724853
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: Integrated Platform for Applied Network Data Analysis (PANDA)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,080,000.00

As the Internet, and society's dependence on it, have grown, the structure and
dynamics of the network, and how it relates to the political economy in which it
is embedded, are gathering increasing attention by researchers, operators and
policy makers. This project offers a new platform and supporting tools for
collecting, analyzing, querying, and interpreting measurements of the Internet
ecosystem. It directly supports the NSF goal of providing robust, secure
cyberinfrastructure to accelerate research, education, and new capabilities in
data-intensive science and engineering. Broader impacts of this project include
increased public awareness of Internet structure, dynamics, performance, and
evolution, which informs discussions of critical issues in current and future
large-scale networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Platform for Applied Network
Data Analysis (PANDA) integrates existing research infrastructure measurement
and analysis components previously developed by the Center for Applied Internet
Data Analysis, and enables new scientific directions, experiments, and data
products for a wide range of research activities.   The design of PANDA
emphasizes efficient indexing and processing of terabyte archives, advanced
visualization tools to show geographic and economic aspects of Internet
structure, and detailed interpretation of displayed results.  The project
actively engages collaborators from four targeted disciplines: networking,
security, economics, and public policy.  Activities include workshops to
establish and stimulate multi-disciplinary collaborations, development of online
video tutorials targeting non-networking experts and classroom-focused
materials, an annotated bibliography and discussion forum, and a strategic
advisory board.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by both
the Data and Networking programs within the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.