* 1724738
* Workshop: Building Interdisciplinary Approaches to the Study of Immigrants, Immigration, and Border Enforcement
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,10/31/2017
* Bradford Jones, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2017
* USD 9,450.00

This workshop will address issues related to immigration and immigration policy
enforcement from a multidisciplinary approach. It seeks to investigate questions
related to the effects associated with border enforcement policies, along with
broader questions related to the effect on 'quality of life' issues in society
more broadly. The workshop will also feature a roundtable to assess possible
changes in enforcement policy at both the federal and national level. The
participants include political scientists, sociologists, economists,
psychologists, law, and representatives from the policy community. The workshop
brings together researchers who otherwise might not collaborate. The output of
the conference is likely to foster important interdisciplinary research that
would be of interest to policy makers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
number of disciplines investigate questions related to immigration and border
enforcement. Too often, however, these researchers communicate to others in
their field, reducing the impact of the work they do. This conference seeks to
bring scholars together from a variety of fields -- political science,
sociology, economics, law, psychology -- to generate collaborative research on
matters related to immigration and border enforcement. It seeks to address how
these policies have affected particular groups, but also how they influence
important quality-of-life indicators in society more generally. In addition to
including scholars from a diverse set of disciplines, the program includes
participants representing important policy practitioners and journalists. The
project promises to generate a more well-integrated research agenda, as well as
have the capacity to distribute those findings to scholarly and policy
communities alike.