* 1724331
* S&amp;AS: FND: Cognitive and Reflective Monitoring Systems for Urban Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Marco Levorato, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

As the urban population grows, a pressing need arises for technological
solutions capable of making city systems more effective and efficient. Many of
the envisioned Smart City systems, such as intelligent transportation, and
vehicular and security networks, require having access to a wide spectrum of
online/offline data that characterizes the state of operation and the events
taking place throughout the city. However, the practical deployment of city-wide
sensor and processing systems faces several challenges, including financial
cost, availability of network resources to transport large amounts of data with
stringent quality of service requirements, and coexistence with other existing
services using the same resources. This project's objective is to develop a
cognitive and reflective network of mobile sensors capable of minimizing their
impact on critical city communication resources using a notion of intelligence
permeating the layered communication, processing, and sensing infrastructure
that characterizes urban environments. The successful realization of this
project will contribute significantly to fulfilling the promise of real-time
Urban Internet of Things (IoT) systems in the context of limitations imposed by
technology and cost. The project also includes a multi-tiered education,
mentoring, and outreach plan to train the next generation of IoT systems
designer and professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system
enhances the ability of individual sensors to make navigation decisions with an
intelligent layered architecture capable of providing real-time feedback on the
usefulness of their produced data from the perspective of a global computational
objective. The real-time adaptation process, then, is expressed over the layers
of the architecture, where the agents dynamically learn utility models and
control at different geographical and temporal scales. These utility models are
used to orchestrate the mobile sensor's navigation within the city to enable
detection and monitoring of events and dynamic processes. The outcome of this
project is the first architecture of this kind where cognition and intelligence
spread across scales of an urban sensing, communications, and processing
infrastructure. Furthermore, the system envisioned in this project represents
one of the few and most innovative examples of edge computing architecture,
where the availability of low-delay processing is used to optimize the system's
operations. The construction of a framework for such a complex layered scenario,
which involves devices with different sensing and computation capabilities,
presents inherent technical challenges which will be addressed by producing
several innovations in the area of distributed and hierarchical learning and
robot navigation