* 1724651
* Collaborative Research: Marine Aerosols in the Arctic: Linking surface water chemistry and biology with primary particle production
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Patricia Matrai, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 379,614.00

This collaborative project between the University of Michigan, Bigelow
Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, and Villanova University, will investigate the
interactions between the surface of the Arctic Ocean and the atmosphere above.
The Arctic has experienced dramatic sea ice loss and increasing surface
temperatures. These changes affect air-sea exchange processes, not solely due to
larger areas of open water, but also in areas of increasingly broken sea-ice.
These changes impact ocean microbiology, which in turn influences atmospheric
composition. The team will examine the potential for changes in the atmospheric
composition to impact cloud formation, properties, and precipitation, which
subsequently affect climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the joint U.S.-Sweden
cruise of the Icebreaker Oden, experiments will be conducted to better
understand the physical properties and chemical makeup of marine aerosols
produced from Arctic seawater. Using seawater collected under several
combinations of sea ice and open water conditions, controlled atmospheric
aerosol generation experiments will also be conducted aboard the Oden. The
biology and chemistry of seawater will be sampled during the cruise and compared
to the composition of measured aerosols in the ambient air, as well as those
generated from seawater on the ship. Measurements will focus on individual
aerosol particle properties, organic compound molecular composition, and
microbiology. Specific links between seawater microbiology and aerosol
composition, morphology, and water uptake will be described. The nature of
marine aerosol sources will be defined and quantified for use in climate models
to improve understanding of Arctic ocean-atmosphere connections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in an unprecedented level of
understanding of Arctic marine aerosol production and links to seawater
microbiology. This will lead to improved predictions of Arctic aerosol
composition and clouds for the rapidly changing Arctic system. Integrated
educational and outreach project activities will increase awareness of Arctic
change and build upon the investigators' longstanding commitment to education
and public outreach. The project, led by three female investigators, will
involve 3 early-career scientists, 2 Ph.D. students, 1 M.S. student, 5+
undergraduate students (including participation of a Research in an
Undergraduate Institution), and 1 student from an inner city high school in
Detroit. A short documentary film on the changing Arctic Ocean and this research
project will be made by Villanova communications majors. PI Pratt will serve as
the mentor for the high school student participating in the Detroit Research
Internship Summer Experience, and the research groups of PI Pratt and co-PI Ault
will conduct outreach with the Females Excelling More in Math, Engineering, and
the Sciences program. Co-PIs Grannas and Matrai will continue longstanding
outreach collaborations with Philadelphia and rural schools in the islands of
the Gulf of Maine, respectively.