* 1724881
* Involvement of Developing Country Scientists in Activities of the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Edward Urban, Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

This award provides funds to the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR)
for a long-standing program of travel assistance to qualified and active
oceanographic researchers and early-career scientists from developing countries
and nations with economies in transition. SCOR travel grants are awarded to
enable such individuals to attend international meetings relevant to their
scientific interests and to those of SCOR and the Division of Ocean Sciences of
NSF. This ongoing project has become the cornerstone of SCOR's efforts to
provide assistance to marine scientists in the developing countries and with
economies in transition for example eastern European nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States. The impacts of this activity extend beyond
the ocean sciences into other scientific topics by stimulating scientific
progress in developing countries. In many cases, personal connections and
collaborations that can result from contacts made through these travel grants
can have long-lasting effects both in international activities as well as in the
developing country's science communities as the individuals involved rise
through the ranks of science and science policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides funds to the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) for a
long-standing program of travel assistance to qualified and active oceanographic
researchers and early-career scientists from developing countries and nations
with economies in transition. NSF support has provided an effective mechanism to
establish contacts between oceanographers from the developing and the
industrialized countries, including the United States, and to facilitate
collaborative efforts.