* 1724693
* High-Precision Equations of State Through Standardized Sample Synthesis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Wendy Panero, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 420,000.00

The composition, structure, and evolution of the Earth, planets in the Solar
System and exoplanets, can only be examined in detail with precise models for
the relationship between pressure, temperature, and density of planetary
materials. This proposal will engineer microfabricated samples to create
standardized samples that eliminate many of the complications that affect the
precision and accuracy of such measurements. A key outcome of the work will be a
"round robin" series of experiments at multiple laboratory facilities to assess
the relative effects of sample quality, variations in experimental facility, and
analysis method. As the proposed experimental approach will produce thousands of
identical samples in each synthesis, the samples will be available to the
broader experimental community for equation of state replication, phase diagram
and diffusion studies, and measurement of electrical and thermal conductivity.
This proposal will support the training for a PhD student and up to 3
undergraduate students. All data and conclusions will be published in the
scientific literature and presented at academic conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inference that the composition of the Earth's core is
a mixture of iron, nickel and a small amount of lighter elements arises from the
recognition that the Earth's core has a density lower than that expected for
pure iron or iron-nickel alloys. However, inferring the abundance and identity
of light elements is limited by the precision and accuracy of the thermoelastic
properties of iron and iron-nickel alloys, as the impact of light elements is
constrained through the discrepancy between the physical properties of iron-
nickel alloys and that of the core. To assess the differences between
thermoelastic properties under Earth's core conditions requires (1) accurate
equations of state of the end member substances, and (2) a precise and accurate
extrapolation of equations of state to core conditions. This proposal (1) will
develop a strategy to assess the accuracy of equations of state at high
pressures and temperatures by comparing the impact of different experimental
approaches when measured to high precision, and (2) will quantify the
uncertainty of extrapolated equations of state. These goals will be accomplished
through the manufacture of custom and reproducible samples for use in the laser-
heated diamond anvil cell focusing on the equations of state of hcp and fcc iron
and iron-nickel alloys to high pressure and temperature. In the second stage of
this proposal, measurements will be repeated at multiple synchrotron end station
facilities that employ differing temperature measurement strategies.