* 1724523
* The Eastern Eurasian Basin: Rerouting fresh water between the Eastern and Western Arctic in response to atmospheric and oceanic forcings
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2027
* Elena Sparrow, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 04/30/2027
* USD 6,621,953.00

Large amounts of freshwater from rivers enter the Arctic Ocean through the
eastern Eurasian Basin (EEB) during the spring, summer, and fall. The EEB acts
like a railroad switch, controlling where that freshwater moves within the
Arctic Ocean and sub-polar seas. The freshwater input from rivers is increasing
as the Arctic warms. This makes understanding processes in the Eastern Eurasian
Basin especially important. This study aims to understand how the EEB
redistributes ice and fresh water between the eastern and western Arctic in
response to changes in the atmosphere. Three biennial cruises, planned for
August-September, will take measurements between Franz Josef Land and the
central East Siberian Sea, following a path that moves from shallow water to the
deep sea. The sampling program connects observations using moorings, ship
sampling, and drifters. These efforts will inform the scientific community and
the broader public about major changes in the EEB that could impact the state of
Arctic ice cover, marine ecosystems, and areas further south. The proposed
observations are also important for developing estimates for future summer sea-
ice conditions, which are valuable information for national security, the
transportation industry, and weather forecasting. A graduate student and a K-12
teacher will join the cruises to engage in research. Together with a researcher,
they will share and reach out to classrooms and the general public. The project
will support one graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eastern Eurasian
Basin (EEB), including its shelves distributes ice and Arctic riverine water
between the Eastern and Western Arctic. This provides the shortest pathway for
Arctic freshwater to the sub-polar seas where weak stratification leads to deep
convection, a key mechanisms of global thermohaline circulation. Recent
observations have captured unprecedented changes in the EEB, likely representing
a fundamental shift to a new, less stable, more dynamic mode. The goal of our
study is to develop a comprehensive and quantitative understanding of how the
EEB functions, accumulating and releasing major Arctic riverine transports and
redistributing ice and fresh water between the Eastern and Western Arctic in
response to atmospheric and oceanic forcings. Quantifying EEB freshwater
inventories and transports, following alternating atmospheric regimes, will be
critical to future understanding of the Arctic Ocean's oceanography. This
program will provide sustained measurements in critical areas; data and
products, critically-needed benchmarks for Arctic satellite sea-ice and
altimeter measurements, will be publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.