* 1724488
* The Role of Highland-Lowland Interactions in the Development of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Claudia Glatz, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 291,032.00

Prof. Jesse Casana (Dartmouth College), Dr. Claudia Glatz (University of
Glasgow), and an international team of researchers will investigate the crucial
role that inter-regional interaction among highland and lowland communities had
in driving the emergence and development of early imperial states. Focusing on
an archaeologically unexplored borderland region between the Mesopotamian plains
of southern Iraq and the Zagros Mountains of western Iran, this project will
document a wealth of information regarding the communities who inhabited the
area during a historical period that saw the rise of the world's first empires.
Results will transform understanding of highland-lowland interaction in greater
Mesopotamia, and will thereby offer a new model for considering similar
processes globally. In many states in the world today altitudinal variation
plays a significant role in partitioning populations and structuring relations
among them. This research places such interactions into a long term
chronological context. Furthermore, this effort will provide invaluable cultural
heritage management data in the region, documenting new archaeological sites,
evidence of looting or damage, and an assessment of future threats from
expanding agriculture and construction. As the only international archaeological
project to have ever worked within this part of Iraq, the project will also play
an important role in developing capacities of the local antiquities authorities
through training, technology transfer, and public workshops.

This project speaks to and challenges a long history of scholarship which views
the origin of Old World complex societies, from the Nile to the Yangtze, as a
process nested squarely in the urban centers of lowland river valleys.
Mountainous regions, by contrast, are generally seen as peripheral zones
inhabited by communities who lowland state propaganda, and by extension much
modern research, depicts as uncivilized and barbarous. In Mesopotamia, the
proverbial cradle of civilization, the dichotomy between perspectives on
highlands and lowlands is perhaps most stark, as virtually all archaeological
and historical data are derived from lowland cities, while the flanking
highlands of the Zagros Mountains remain nebulously blank on archaeological
maps, presumed to have been home to pastoral nomads. Focusing on the Upper
Diyala (Sirwan) River Valley in the Kurdistan Region of northern Iraq, this
project employs a multi-scalar research strategy involving regional
archaeological survey, excavations at the newly-discovered second millennium BC
site of Khani Masi, and artifactual analyses of finds, including paleobotanical
studies, stable isotope analysis of faunal materials, and organic residue
analysis of ceramics. Results will reveal nuanced insights into settlement and
land use patterns, pastoral strategies, craft production, and foodways,
demonstrating the degree to which inhabitants of distinct environmental zones
engaged in shared cultural practices, how these relationships transformed both
lowland and highland groups as well as changed over the course of the third and
second millennia BC.