* 1724732
* EAGER: Narrative and the Construction of Risk and Benefit in High Stakes Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Marlaine Figueroa Gray, Kaiser Foundation Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 68,155.00

This award is made under NSF's EAGER funding mechanism, which supports Early-
concept Grants for Exploratory Research. The researcher will investigate how
people develop new understandings of risk in very high risk/very high reward
situations. The context in which this question will be investigated is clinical
trials of new cancer immunotherapy drugs, which have the ability to achieve high
cure rates for previously incurable and rapidly terminal disease. Because the
possibility of a cure comes at the cost of serious side effects, the new
immunotherapies introduce a level of uncertainty about treatment outcomes beyond
what either patients or clinicians have heretofore experienced. This requires
new methods of communicating about and navigating uncertainty for those who run
and those who participate in clinical trials. This research will investigate the
relationship between new clinical understanding of immunotherapies and how
explanations of risk and efficacy are crafted, utilized, and contested in the
unique cultural space of the clinical trial.

Dr. Marlaine Figueroa Gray (Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research
Institute) will conduct this preliminary study by documenting and analyzing
conversations in which patients are consented into trials, focusing on how
uncertainty is framed by the provider and the patient. Figueroa Gray will use
ethnographic methods to collect data by documenting the content of consent
conversations in which providers explain benefit and risk of trial participation
to patients, and will observe the clinical space in which such conversations
take place. The researcher will also conduct interviews with providers who run
the trials and patients who participate in them at a cancer research facility in
Seattle, Washington. Findings from this research will connect biomedical and lay
understandings of new immunological therapeutics to professional and lay
conceptions of risk and management of uncertainty. Findings will contribute to
new social science theory of how people form their understandings of extreme
risk and appropriate courses of action.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.