* 1724990
* Smart and Connected Health (SCH) PI Workshop, 2017
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Ioannis Paschalidis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 93,994.00

This proposal supports the NSF Smart and Connected Health (SCH) Principal
Investigators Meeting and Visioning Workshop in Boston, MA on March 2-22, 2017.
The meeting brings together principal investigators (PI) of projects awarded by
the Smart and Connected Health program from 2011 to 2016. The SCH program was
set up in order to bridge gaps in fundamental science necessary to transform
health and healthcare, as well as to be focused on prevention and person-
centered care. In particular, the Visioning Workshop is designed to address the
next generation of challenges in advancing health with foundational research
from the computer science, engineering and the social, behavioral and economic
disciplines. An objective of the PI Workshop is to provide an opportunity for
the principal investigators to explore research progress in a diverse set of
funded projects and discuss important current issues, as well as future
challenges associated with research in transdisciplinary scientific areas. The
discussions will be supported by projects-related posters and further stimulated
by cross-talk from the Visioning Workshop. It is anticipated that the meeting
will stimulate discussions, connections, and collaborations that will facilitate
progress in the area of Smart and Connected Health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop should have a significant impact on the participants and the future of
the Smart and Connected Health program (SCH). The focus of the workshop is on
foundational research that supports the growth of smart health within connected
communities. The workshop results are likely to include new research directions
that will be publicized to the research community through publications and a
workshop website. The results dissemination should inform and the developing
Smart and Connected Health research community in their transdisciplinary
collaboration, educational activities, and spur other innovative research
directions. The broader impacts of the workshop are to facilitate progress in
the field and stimulate conversations, connections, and collaborations that will
lead toward better informed and effective smart and connected health research
and resulting technologies for the broadest possible user populations.
Additionally, there is a workshop attached to the Principal Investigator meeting
that will support the travel for ten students from under-represented STEM
disciplines to attend the PI Workshop. This should also help grow the field by
providing mentorship and support for a new cadre of investigators looking to do
work in the Smart and Connected Health area.