* 1724627
* Conference:   Harold Morowitz Symposium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* David Smith, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2018
* USD 93,841.00

The Santa Fe Institute (SFI) will host the Harold Morowitz Symposium in August
2017. This Symposium will honor the long career of a major figure in the origin
of the fields of biophysics and genetics, who also played a significant role in
science policy. The two-day Symposium will be divided into two separate
sections: first an opportunity for personal recollections of Morowitz's
contributions and influences on the participants and second, a focus on a
selection of major areas where Morowitz started new fields or made major
contributions: genetics, biophysics; and science policy. Morowitz was a leading
figure in shaping not only the scientific but also the popular understanding of
the geochemical origins of life on Earth. He was a good communicator of science
at the popular level and his work resulted in many nontechnical articles and a
permanent exhibit on the origin of life at the New Mexico Museum of Natural
History and Science. The proposed Symposium will include participants from
diverse community of fields, genders and career stages. The results of the event
will be published in one of SFI's Intelligence Reports disseminated to a wide
variety of readers including those in academia, business and the general
public&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morowitz's early academic research and writing often
dealt with thermodynamic themes and the pervasive roles of physical principles
in biology. Increasingly throughout his career, he turned from searches for
minimal life forms to more and more comprehensive attempts to frame the nature
and origin of life. Starting in the late 1960s and continuing through the end of
his life, Morowitz was a leading figure in shaping the scientific understanding
of the geochemical origins of life on Earth. In particular, his writings played
a significant role in elaborating one of two frameworks that has become
important for understanding life's origins: known as "metabolism first", this
view tries to anchor specific, universal features of biochemistry in geochemical
constraints, as a precursor and foundation for the later information-dominated
view termed the "RNA world".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
cofounded by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living System in the Division of
Physics.