* 1724713
* Advancing Synthesis, Open Access, and Reproducibility in Archaeological Research
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 169,153.00

The project will enhance the ability of archaeologists to conduct synthetic
research that will contribute better understandings of how different sorts of
societies function and change over long periods of time. General understandings
of social processes resulting from this synthetic research can, in turn,
contribute to solutions for problems that face societies across the world today.
However, such research can only be accomplished if archaeologists archive their
datasets so that they can be readily found, accessed, and used by other
investigators. Such research also requires that the datasets be thoroughly
documented so the meaning of the individual observations can be properly
interpreted. Project researchers have determined that the two major impediments
to depositing well-documented data are the time it takes to complete the data
documentation process and the lack of training in digital data management. The
project will make it easier and faster to deposit archaeological data in a
digital repository by improving the software that solicits information about the
individual data fields during the process of depositing the data. It will also
develop online help and training materials concerning the management of digital
data. As a result of these efforts, project researchers expect that more data
will be deposited for use by other investigators and that the datasets deposited
will be better documented and therefore, more usable for synthetic research. The
project helps ensure open access to the results of publicly funded research,
both to other researchers and to the public at large, and it enables the
reproducibility of key knowledge claims to be carefully examined. This project
is directly focused on enhancing the nation's infrastructure for research and
education and on expanding use of that infrastructure by researchers in
academia, industry, and government. By enabling productive reuse of academic and
private-sector research data it will enhance partnerships between academia and
industry. By expanding and improving access to results of archaeological
research, it will increase public engagement in science. Finally, synthetic
research that includes archaeology's long-term perspective, will help address
fundamental social issues that have the potential to improve well-being of
individuals in society in the U.S. and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
efforts will be focused on tDAR (the Digital Archaeological Record), the largest
digital repository in the US that is specifically dedicated to providing
preservation and access to archaeological data. tDAR already has key
infrastructure in place to support open access, reproducible science, and
synthetic research; however it seeks to greatly expand the quantity and increase
the quality of the data that the repository makes available and preserves. The
project will speed up and improve tDAR's dataset documentation process by
automatically extracting as much as possible of the needed information from the
database, spreadsheet, or other data source being uploaded. It will then verify
the inferred documentation with the human researcher. Training current and
future generations of archaeologists in sound practices of digital data
management will increase the quantity and quality of archaeological data
entering digital repositories. The project will develop online tutorials,
webinars, and topical, web-based modules directed to diverse archaeological
audiences. Project training materials will address the complete data life cycle
from creation of the data in the field, through laboratory and quantitative
analysis, to publication and archiving.