* 1724686
* Linking seismological observables and dynamic simulations of microseismicity to constrain models and improve observations
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Nadia Lapusta, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 440,000.00

Earthquakes are typically generated by rapid slip, or dynamic rupture, on pre-
existing faults inside the Earth, loaded by tectonic plate motion. While large,
destructive ruptures occur only rarely, much smaller events, often called
microseismicity, occur much more often, with the vast majority of them not felt
by people. However, the surface motion due to these much smaller events can be
recorded by sensitive instruments called seismometers and analyzed to reveal
their location and properties. In fact, microseismicity provides us with a
unique window into the stress environment, structure, and physical properties of
the Earth's crust and their changes over time. In California, for example, most
of microseismicity occurs in the same depth range that is expected to host
large, destructive events. However, the ground motions recorded for the
microseismicity are currently analyzed based on relatively simple models of
earthquake sources from several decades ago. The rapid recent progress in
computing, laboratory experiments, and observations has enabled us to create
much more realistic numerical models of how these microearthquake ruptures might
occur. This study will use new numerical models of microseismicity to advance
understanding and improve information about the properties of the crust, gained
through the important window of microseismicity studies, while advancing our
understanding of fault mechanics and of realistic sources of microseismicity.
The resulting insight into earthquake physics will contribute to the physics-
based simulation capability for seismic hazard analysis. These results may
benefit the society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance
understanding of several scientifically and practically important types of
microearthquake sources, such as foreshock-like events, repeating earthquakes,
ruptures of heterogeneous patches, and fluid-injection-induced events, by
producing and analyzing the synthetic far-field seismograms of their dynamic
models. The goals are to (i) determine how well the synthetic spectra are fit
with the currently used expressions based on the simple models, determine source
parameters using the existing seismological approaches, and study how they
relate to the actual source properties that can be determine from these models;
(ii) look for seismological signatures that would indicate that the sources in
question are more complex than the basic seismological assumptions, and
potentially distinguish between several characteristic types of sources; and
(iii) investigate the possibility of creating alternative approaches to
seismological source-parameter estimates for such sources, using models more
consistent with the specific seismological signatures identified. The study will
examine whether different types of sources can be associated with a typical set
of parameters in the currently used spectral fitting expressions, or whether
some of them require more advanced approaches such as two-corner-frequency
functions. It will also look at how the spectral properties for different types
of sources vary over the focal sphere and consider differences between P- and
S-wave spectra, which may be different for different types of sources. The
research will potentially enable observational scientists to conduct more
detailed seismological studies in areas with suitable station coverage,
knowledge of the structure, and data quality. The results of the proposed
activities will be broadly disseminated. Several graduate and undergraduate
students, including from groups that are underrepresented in science, will gain
valuable research and teaching experience carrying out the proposed
interdisciplinary activities. In addition, a wider group of students will be
educated about the issues involved in this research through course projects in
two relevant courses taught by the researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.