* 1724101
* S&amp;AS: FND: Reliable Semi-Autonomy with Diminishing Reliance on Humans
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Shlomo Zilberstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 707,512.00

Building reliable autonomous systems that can construct and execute plans to
achieve some assigned goals, without human intervention, has been the hallmark
of artificial intelligence and robotics since their inception. Reliable autonomy
is becoming increasingly important as it enables innovative new applications in
areas such as transportation, health, and sustainable living. Despite
substantial progress, there are still considerable barriers to the long-term,
large scale deployment of fully autonomous systems such as self-driving cars or
mobile service robots. These barriers range from technological and economic
constraints to ethical and legal issues. This project offers a comprehensive
approach to circumvent these barriers by building semi-autonomous systems that
rely on rich forms of human assistance, ranging from advice to constant
supervision of the system with the possibility of taking over control. The
project develops techniques to assure the safety of such systems when human
assistance is delayed and to reduce their reliance on human assistance over
time. Additionally, the project contributes to training of undergraduate and
graduate students in this interdisciplinary area, mentoring of students with
special attention to underrepresented groups, outreach activities to local
schools, and strengthening of industrial
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project answers fundamental questions
about the feasibility, efficiency, and scalability of planning and learning
algorithms to support semi-autonomous systems. The main thrusts of the project
are (1) develop techniques that can delegate autonomy to a system with some
restrictions, and provide strong guarantees that these restrictions will be
respected and that the system will maintain a safe state even when human
assistance is delayed; (2) develop planning and learning algorithms that are
cognizant of the availability of rich forms of human assistance and can
effectively factor such assistive actions into the overall plan; (3) handle the
high computational complexity of optimizing the interaction with humans under
uncertainty and partial observability by creating a hierarchical multi-objective
decision model; and (4) leverage human assistance to enable robust and accurate
mapping and navigation in new areas, while reducing the reliance on human
supervision over time. The project evaluates these capabilities in complex
realistic settings involving a campus-scale robot deployment, a driving
simulator, and autonomous vehicles in collaboration with Nissan.