* 1724282
* S&amp;AS: INT: Inference, Reasoning, and Learning for Robust Autonomous Driving
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Bharath Hariharan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,398,587.00

While research in autonomous driving has made great strides in recent years,
fully autonomous cars are still a distant goal, primarily because of a lack of
robustness. Current autonomous cars cannot drive on new roads, or roads that
have changed substantially (such as after an earthquake), or when there is a GPS
or data outage such as in parking garages, urban cities and tunnels.
Importantly, humans are good at all of this: Humans can drive without detailed
maps or high precision GPS/IMU sensors, and typically require only a small
amount of sparse information for guidance, and their performance typically gets
better over time through learning. Using the "intelligent" human driver as a
guide, the planned research will develop algorithms that can perceive and make
predictions about a scene in real time with measurable confidence, particularly
as the scene is closer to the car. New robustness characteristics will be
achieved through the ability to detect and overcome mistakes, both in the near
term (real time) and long term (learning). The planned algorithms will be
designed and validated in a way to enable an inherent robustness not currently
available in autonomous driving, and fast adoption by the community. This
project is aligned with NSF's Intelligent Physical Systems (IPS) because the
algorithms will require cognizant and reflective capabilities in a knowledge-
rich environment. Additionally, outputs of this project will impact robotics,
machine learning and cyber-physical systems. Educationally, data logs will be
disseminated to enable open ended student projects in the community, and
undergrad and high school students will collaborate with the research team to
integrate sensors, perform experiments and data collection, and disseminate data
logs to the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by researchers in Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, and Computer Science at Cornell University, the goal
of this research is to develop, integrate and validate theory and algorithms to
enable robust and persistent autonomous driving. This project is aligned with
NSF's Intelligent Physical Systems (IPS) because the algorithms will require
cognizant and reflective capabilities in a knowledge-rich environment. The
technical approach will develop a robust perceptual pipeline for detection,
scene estimation, prediction, and anomaly/mistake detection and learning;
integrate the algorithms into Cornell's autonomous car software framework and
validate the components and system in a series of experimental scenarios to
enable their faster adoption by the community. Key component level algorithms to
be developed include anytime deep learning detectors with quantifiable
performance; multiple hypothesis reasoning with memory attributes; generalized
probabilistic anticipation algorithms to mimic a human's mental model of a
dynamic scene; and anomaly/mistake detection coupled with online learning.
Outcomes will include open source algorithms and data logs; publications,
conferences, workshops; data logs for open ended projects in courses and across
the community; and undergrad and high school education and diversity programs in
the interdisciplinary area of autonomous driving.