* 1724227
* S&amp;AS: INT:  Autonomous Battery Operating System (ABOS): An Adaptive and Comprehensive Approach to Efficient, Safe, and Secure Battery System Management
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,249,998.00

Effective battery systems are a cornerstone of the next wave
of&lt;br/&gt;innovation. Emerging technologies including electric-drive
vehicles&lt;br/&gt;(EVs) and stationary energy storage systems require
integrated&lt;br/&gt;battery systems to provide sustained and reliable power. A
unique&lt;br/&gt;opportunity exists for the software-controlled battery
management&lt;br/&gt;system (BMS) to play a crucial role in enabling
continued&lt;br/&gt;innovation. However, there are several unaddressed
challenges to&lt;br/&gt;current BMS design. A battery's decreasing capacity over
time due&lt;br/&gt;to aging necessitates that BMS automatically adapt to
battery&lt;br/&gt;changes. Furthermore, future BMS systems will require
autonomous&lt;br/&gt;reasoning capabilities to make economically-sound decisions
on&lt;br/&gt;users' behalf (e.g., scheduling battery charging times in
a&lt;br/&gt;personalized fashion). This project injects
intelligence&lt;br/&gt;capabilities into BMS design with the development of the
Autonomous&lt;br/&gt;Battery Operating System (ABOS). ABOS enables
more&lt;br/&gt;energy-efficient, long-lasting, and secure battery-driven
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the PIs incorporate computational and cyber-
security&lt;br/&gt;aspects of ABOS design into their undergraduate- and
graduate-level&lt;br/&gt;courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABOS advances the science
of autonomous system design with&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously introspective and
extrospective learning. ABOS will&lt;br/&gt;learn and adapt to user-initiated
charging/discharging patterns,&lt;br/&gt;reason about how these patterns affect
the battery's&lt;br/&gt;state-of-health, and respond to potential faults or
attacks. The&lt;br/&gt;PIs and their external collaborators will develop a
hybrid EV&lt;br/&gt;simulation environment to test the ability of ABOS to
control a&lt;br/&gt;physical battery system. The simulation environment will
evaluate&lt;br/&gt;the effectiveness of ABOS in predicting battery state,
minimizing&lt;br/&gt;cost of operation, and handling failures and threats.