* 1724659
* 2017 Climate Engineering Gordon Research Conference (GRC) to be  held on July 23-28, 2017 at Sunday River in Newry, ME
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* David Keith, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 40,000.00

CBET 1724659 - Keith, David &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is in partial
support of the 2017 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Geoengineering to be
held on July 23-28, 2017 at Sunday River in Newry, ME. The funds will partially
cover registration and travel costs for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
and/or early career investigators. The GRC will focus on the scientific
questions associated with geoengineering, with the goal of fostering a better
understanding of its efficacy and risks, particularly among young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been an increase in publications on
solar geoengineering, which speaks to the number of researchers active in this
field. Yet, despite this rapid rise in publications, there is no established
periodic scientific meeting in this emerging field. As one of the world's best
and most established meeting formats in the physical sciences, the GRC provides
an extraordinary opportunity to accelerate the quality and frequency of
scientific discourse on this topic. This both means that existing disciplinary
conferences are inadequate for building the necessary cross-disciplinary
collaborations, and that the GRC format with emphasis on in-depth discussions is
ideal for promoting these. The geoengineering field is also young, with many
unanswered scientific questions. This meeting will be a unique opportunity for
both early and senior career researchers. This first GRC on solar geoengineering
will help create new opportunities for early and senior career researchers to
learn about the latest scientific findings, advance their own work, and possibly
collaborate on new projects together.