* 1724174
* Automated Analysis of Movement Disorders from Diffusion and Functional MRI
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Baba Vemuri, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,060,000.00

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most widely used diagnostic imaging tool
for detecting neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's Disease. This
project will develop new automated methods for detecting subtle effects that can
be revealed by MRI, including changes in water diffusional properties of human
brain tissue, and functional brain activity. To assess the deviation from the
normal brains, a computationally efficient algorithm will be developed to
construct a population-specific brain structural template from a normal brain
population. Further, a new algorithm will be developed to facilitate the
detection of Parkinson's using diffusion MRI data. Finally, novel algorithms for
establishing the correlation between the information derived from diffusion and
functional MRI data will be developed, enabling prediction of functional
activity given the anatomical information and vice-versa. Inferring such a
correlation will make it possible to predict functional changes due to changes
in tissue microstructure caused by neurodegenerative disorders and vice-
versa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the precise project goals are: (i) To
develop a computationally efficient template brain map construction algorithm
for features derived from diffusion MRI. In this context, the ensemble average
propagator (EAP), which captures both orientation and shape information of the
diffusion process at each voxel in the diffusion MRI data, is proposed.
Validation of the constructed template will be performed using standard
evaluation metrics for template-based segmentation. (ii) To develop novel
methods to automatically discriminate between control and Parkinson's groups
using the EAP fields as well as Cauchy deformation tensors (that capture the
changes in EAP fields). Validation of the classifier will be achieved using the
standard leave-k-out strategy. (iii) To develop a novel algorithm for kernel-
based nonlinear regression between EAP fields derived from diffusion MRI and
scalar-valued fields derived from functional MRI activation maps. The algorithm
will be able to predict the level of activation given the EAP fields and vice-
versa. These predictions will be validated using a priori labeled data sets.
Predicting functional responses from structural information and vice-versa will
significantly impact treatment planning of patients with Parkinson's Disease and
other neurodegenerative disorders. The multidisciplinary nature of this project
will provide the opportunity to collectively train graduate students from
diverse backgrounds in the STEM related fields of this project.