* 1724566
* RAPID:   Testing Storm Track Sensitivity to Resolution and Climate Change Using UPSCALE Global Model Output
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Walter Robinson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2020
* USD 101,648.00

Day-to-day weather over much of the world is driven by extratropical cyclones
traveling along the storm tracks of the middle latitudes. Accurate weather
forecasts thus require numerical models with high enough resolution to represent
critical details of the cyclones and their evolution, and it is important to
understand what constitutes adequate resolution for this purpose. Adequate
resolution is likewise required to produce simulations which capture the
response of cyclones and storm tracks to changes in global temperature, but it
is again unclear what constitutes adequate resolution. This is particularly an
issue as the expense of such simulations increases strongly with resolution.

Previous work by the PIs suggests that high resolution is necessary to represent
small pockets of intense precipitation within the cyclones that promote cyclone
intensification and produce more energetic cyclones. In addition, cyclones in
the high resolution simulations are more intense under warmer conditions, due to
the increase in latent heating that accompanies the rise in specific humidity
with temperature. But these results are somewhat inconclusive as the simulations
were performed with a regional model due to lack of access to global models with
adequate resolution.

This project addresses the role of small-scale precipitation features in the
intensification of cyclones, and the resulting potential for more energetic
cyclones in a warming climate, using high-resolution simulations carried out as
part of the United Kingdom UPSCALE project (UPSCALE is short for UK on PRACE -
weather-resolving Simulations of Climate for globAL Environmental risk, where
PRACE is the Partnership for Advanced Computing in Europe). The UPSCALE project
has produced global simulations at medium and high resolutions (up to 25km),
both for present-day climate conditions and for warmer climates which are
projected to occur due to increases in greenhouse gas concentrations. The
simulations are ideally suited for the PIs' research although they were produced
for other reasons.

The project is funded through the RAPID mechanism to expedite the research so
that it can be conducted according to the timeline of the ongoing UK project. A
key issue in the timing is that UPSCALE is a precursor to the more intensive
PRIMAVERA project, which will produce global simulations with resolutions as
high as 5km. PRIMAVERA is the European contribution to the HighResMIP sub-
project of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version 6 (CMIP6), which
will inform the next assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Near-term results of this project can thus play a critical role in
defining the research agenda of PRIMAVERA and informing the assessment report.

The work has broader impacts due to the dominant influence of extratropical
cyclones on sensible weather over the US and other midlatitude regions, and the
value of guidance regarding possible increases in cyclone intensity due to
climate change. The work also builds an international scientific collaboration
which allows US PIs access to high-resolution simulations produced at
substantial cost. In addition, the project provides support and training for a
graduate student, thereby providing for the next generation workforce in this
research area.