* 1724462
* Long Term Urban Change in Response to Social Collapse
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Sarah Clayton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 187,150.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Sarah Clayton and
colleagues will examine how the collapse of centralized states influences
subsequent processes of urban growth and the development of new forms of
government. This project employs remote sensing and archaeological methods to
investigate the spatial, demographic, and political characteristics of cities
that formed in the wake of violent conflict and large-scale migration. Results
of this research will advance knowledge of successful strategies of civic
planning and polity building among second-generation, or "post-collapse"
societies. This project contributes to scholarship concerning the evolution of
urban landscapes, modes of governance, and the ways in which the legacies of
failed states impact these developments. Such legacies may include concepts of
leadership, identity, memories of historical events, and the physical
consequences of state-related systems of resource management, transportation, or
militarization on surrounding landscapes. This project provides training
opportunities for students and enhances international scholarly collaboration
through its involvement of researchers from Mexico. The professional advancement
of women in STEM fields is supported through the involvement of female students
and colleagues in the research. The project makes a positive impact on the local
community by working to promote awareness and the preservation of archaeological
remains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried out at a large pre-
Columbian settlement in central Mexico which experienced rapid growth in
conjunction with a neighboring polity's decline. As such it provides an
important case study for examining strategies of political regeneration and
urban planning. Unlike many of its contemporaries, the site prospered following
its neighbor's collapse, and within a century had grown from a village of a few
hundred people to a city of several thousand, featuring monumental architecture
and social stratification. This growth resulted in part from the absorption of
migrants, possibly including refugees. This project examines the spatial
organization of their new city, the size of its population, and the ways in
which the construction of monuments, temples, and public spaces promoted local
strategies of leadership. This research employs a program of excavation and
remote sensing methods, including aerial photography by drone; radar; and
gradient magnetic and electrical resistivity survey to examine the spatial
characteristics of the settlement and to estimate the size of the population.
The project is methodologically innovative in its application of remote sensing
to an extensive area for the purposes of examining urban planning and polity
building.