* 1724634
* Relative Pay Comparisons in the Workplace: Field Evidence on Effort and Labor Supply
* SBE,SES
* 12/02/2016,07/31/2020
* Emily Breza, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 109,732.00

A long tradition in economics and psychology has advanced the notion that
individuals care about not only their own pay, but also their pay relative to
that of their co-workers. This project implements a field experiment with full-
time manufacturing workers over a one-month period to test whether relative pay
comparisons affect effort and labor supply. Measuring the extent to which
individuals care about the wages of their co-workers has potentially broad
implications for wage structure. If wage inequality reduces effort or labor
supply, this can generate wage compression (differences in wage that are much
smaller than differences in productivity) and wage rigidity (wages that do not
adjust to market conditions). Relative pay comparisons also have implications
for the organization of labor markets and firm boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the experiment, workers perform individual production
tasks, but are organized into distinct teams, defined by the type of product
they produce. Teams are randomized to receive either compressed wages (where all
workers earn the same daily wage, drawn randomly from one of three wage levels)
or heterogeneous wages (where each team member is paid a different wage
according to his baseline productivity ranking). If pay inequality decreases
morale, then holding own wage fixed, a worker will reduce output when his co-
workers are paid more than himself. In addition, this study explores the
conditions under which unequal pay affects morale. First, the design induces
variation in the perceived fairness of pay differences: production tasks differ
in the extent to which co-worker output is observable. Second, it induces random
variation in actual fairness: the fixed pay differences between co-workers are
less fair when a worker is close in baseline productivity to his higher paid
peers.