* 1724821
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: SLATE and the Mobility of Capability
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Robert Gardner, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 06/30/2023
* USD 3,998,494.00

Much of science today is propelled by multi-institutional research
collaborations that require computing environments that connect instrumentation,
data, and computational resources.  These resources are distributed among
university research computing centers, national-scale high performance computing
facilities, and commercial cloud service providers. The scale of the data and
complexity of the science drive this diversity, and the need to aggregate
resources from many sources into scalable computing systems.  The heterogeneity
of resources causes scientists to spend more time on the technical aspects of
computation and data management than on discoveries and knowledge creation,
while computing support staff are required to invest more effort integrating
domain specific software stacks with limited applicability beyond the community
served.  Services Layer At The Edge (SLATE) provides technology that simplifies
connecting university and laboratory data center capabilities to the national
cyberinfrastructure ecosystem and thus expands the reach of domain-specific
science gateways and multi-site research platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SLATE
implements 'cyberinfrastructure as code' by augmenting the canonical Science DMZ
pattern with a generic, programmable, secure and trusted underlayment platform.
This platform hosts advanced container-centric services needed for higher-level
capabilities such as data transfer nodes, software and data caches, workflow
services and science gateway components.  SLATE uses best-of-breed data center
virtualization components, and where available, software defined networking, to
enable distributed automation of deployment and service lifecycle management
tasks by domain experts. As such it simplifies creation of scalable platforms
that connect research teams, institutions and resources to accelerate science
while reducing operational costs and development cycle times. Since SLATE needs
only commodity components for its functional layers, it is used in building
distributed systems across all data center types and scales thus enabling
creation of ubiquitous, science-driven cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Computational Physics within the NSF Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.