* 1724493
* I-Corps: Ultra-Sensitive and Fast-Response Zinc Oxide Schottky-Contact Ultraviolet Nanosensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Zhong Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
novel approach towards producing high sensitivity, fast response, ultra-low
power consumption, low cost, and highly thermal stable UV sensors. UV sensors
have wide ranging markets from industrial, manufacturing, health, to consumer
applications, and therefore have significant potential for societal and economic
impact. The general public will benefit from the significant reduction in the
capital and recurring cost of UV sensor technologies brought by the innovation.
The technology has the potential to impact the UV sensor industry by providing
lower power consumption, wider operation temperature ranges, and the potential
for flexible device embodiments.

This I-Corps project will enable customer discovery for a core technology that
could potentially impact the ultraviolet (UV) sensor industry. Due to large
surface-to-volume ratio and reduced dimensionality of the active area, Zinc
Oxide (ZnO) nanostructures have been shown to have high photon conductance,
which leads to high sensitivity of the device performance. Utilizing the
Schottky contact instead of conventional Ohmic contact in device fabrication,
the sensitivity and response time of ZnO UV nanosensors have been greatly
improved. In addition, the device can be deposited on silicon as well as
flexible substrates. The characteristics of the ZnO UV nanosensor (i.e.
performance metrics, system integration, packaging, form factors, etc.) will be
aligned with current and future customer needs, while at the same time, a
business model will be explored for this novel technology.