* 1724519
* EAGER: Controlling Microstructure for Strong and Damage Tolerant Nanocrystalline Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Daniel Gianola, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2019
* USD 298,966.00

Nanocrystalline metals and alloys (polycrystals with grain sizes less than ~100
nm) offer a suite of appealing mechanical properties for structural
applications, including high strength and hardness, enhanced fatigue resistance,
and tribological robustness. These virtues derive from the large fraction of
material that resides at the interfaces between neighboring crystals, known as
grain boundaries. For these materials, this high fraction of interfacial volume
can cause deleterious effects such as thermal instability and relatively poor
damage tolerance. Many present and future applications of nanocrystalline metals
such as robust coatings, electrical interconnects, micro- and nano-electro-
mechanical systems, and soft magnets subject these materials to extreme
mechanical duress, which can activate microstructural transformation and alter
the beneficial materials properties. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) award supports research centered on the concept that control of
grain boundary chemistry in nanocrystalline alloys can be used to tailor the
thermal and mechanical stability of nanocrystalline materials against grain
boundary migration in extreme service environments. Control over this behavior
can allow for unprecedented control of damage tolerance, thus enabling a novel
and inexpensive structural materials design strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research program, the investigators aim to control grain boundary chemistry
in nanocrystalline alloys as a means to encode the onset of thermally- and
mechanically-driven grain boundary migration under service conditions. In cases
where extreme mechanical environments are encountered (e.g. at stress
concentrations such as crack tips), stress-driven grain boundary migration can
be triggered to respond to damage, endowing the material with damage tolerance.
This dynamic material response is predicated on local stress triggers that drive
microstructure transition and dissipate energy to mitigate catastrophic failure,
allowing for both strength and toughness. The research will be accomplished via
the following scientific and technical goals: (a) identify and characterize the
mechanisms that lead to mechanically-induced grain boundary migration and grain
growth, (b) identify and characterize the manner in which these mechanisms are
influenced by grain boundary chemistry, (c) identify elements that will
segregate to grain boundary and modulate thermal and stress-driven grain
boundary migration, (d) synthesize nanocrystalline alloys with tailored grain
boundary chemistry, and (e) perform material characterization and quantitative
in situ mechanical testing.