* 1724421
* CRCNS US-France-Israel-Research Proposal: Processing of Complex Sounds: Cortical Network Mechanisms and Computations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Tatyana Sharpee, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 950,000.00

What are the relationships between the complex and constantly changing
soundscapes that surround us and the electrical activity that represents them in
the brain? This project brings together three groups, one experimental and two
computational, to address this question at two different levels. First,
mechanistic models will be developed, based on known properties of neural
networks, to describe how different types of neurons cooperate to represent
sounds. Second, the function of these neurons will be characterized by
describing the features of sounds that they represent. These two goals will be
achieved by combining experimental studies of neural responses to sounds with
computational analyses to test candidate mechanisms for how sounds are
represented in large cortical circuits. In addition to deeper understanding of
auditory perception, this research will provide insights into general principles
of cooperation between neurons within a single neural network. As such, the
research has implications for understanding representation of signals in other
sensory modalities as well as the general principles of neural coding in the
brain. The research has a number of potential practical applications, including
the design of advanced hearing aids and artificial speech recognition systems.
Further, given that the altered balance between excitatory and inhibitory
neurons has been implicated in a number of attention deficits and psychiatric
disorders, including autism and schizophrenia, the project has potential medical
relevance. The outreach component of the project will involve demonstration
involving music and speech perception for K-12 students and
exhibitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the experimental group will
produce recordings of neural responses from the auditory thalamus and cortex in
response to pure tones and complex sounds known as tone clouds. The tone clouds
have sharp transitions like natural sounds, but with well-controlled spectral
and temporal power distributions. Computational components of this project will
aim to reproduce neural recordings through analytical modeling and simulations
of large scale neural circuits composed of multiple cell types. The experimental
and computational results will be matched not only in statistical terms, such as
average dynamics of neural responses across the population, but also in terms of
specific features of sounds that are encoded by different types of neurons in
the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering. Companion projects are being funded by
the French National Research Agency (ANR) and the US-Israel Binational Science
Foundation (BSF).