* 1724222
* S&amp;AS: FND: A Stochastic Ethical Decision-Making Framework for Long-Term Autonomy
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Katia Sycara, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2022
* USD 608,001.00

For robots to effectively collaborate with humans, they must be able to reason
about the ethical consequences of their decisions and actions, incorporating
societal values, rules, and conventions. Consider, for example, autonomous cars,
which are envisioned to become commonplace in 5-10 years. Autonomous cars will
provide many advantages for road safety, and they will offer mobility to those
with physical challenges. For such cars to be successful, however, multiple
ethical problems must be solved. For example, is it allowable for a car to break
traffic laws as it is taking a wounded person to a hospital? What should a car
do if it recognizes that an accident is unavoidable? How can a car reason in a
way that is understandable and acceptable in human society (and courts of law)?
Important ethical questions also arise in applications of robotics to areas such
as military engagements, law enforcement, and healthcare. To address these
issues, the research will provide ways for robots to reason and plan their tasks
and make ethically sound decisions. These reasoning procedures will enable
robots to learn and adapt over time as laws and social conventions change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach is based on normative
reasoning integrated with Markov Decision Process (MDP) planning to enable the
creation of an ethical intelligent Physical System (IPS) that will be evaluated
via human experiments. The research is innovative in that it will provide: (a)
an integrated way of reasoning about task performance and ethical behavior in
the context of long-term autonomy, where ethical rules can be changing and
action consequences could be task and context dependent, (b) principled ways of
evaluating consequences of robot actions, by considering and resolving conflicts
between domain goals and normative goals, (c) criteria to determine norm
priority in a flexible and context dependent manner, (d) methods to consider the
whole life-cycle of norms, namely norm activation, deactivation, contradiction,
violation and obsolescence.