* 1724551
* Collaborative Research: Thermodynamic and Dynamic Drivers of the Arctic Sea Ice Mass Budget at MOSAiC
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* C. Fairall, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,774,584.00

Energy fluxes to the sea ice, and the processes that control them in time and
space, comprise some of the largest uncertainties in current models of the
central Arctic system and are likely changing as the sea ice thins. This project
will make observations to provide the type of information that model developers
need for representing emergent Arctic processes. These observations will be the
first set of comprehensive, coupled atmosphere-ice-ocean energy and momentum
flux measurements collected within a well-defined network. They will enable a
process-based understanding of ice thermodynamics and dynamics via synergistic
use of a coupled model. The Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study
of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC) expedition is a tremendous opportunity to leverage
large US and international investments &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MOSAiC is motivated
by the changing Arctic system and declining sea ice, and their significant
implications for the global climate system and numerous stakeholders. The
initiative seeks to address leading deficiencies in model representation of
coupled, atmosphere-ice-ocean processes in the Arctic system through intensive,
year-round observations from a drifting station in the central Arctic and
coordinated multi-scale modeling. This project will examine the detailed
interplay of sea-ice thermodynamic and dynamic processes and how they control
the state of the ice over a full year. This project will entail an observational
array of five nodes installed at approximately 15 km separation in the central
Arctic sea ice, each of which has systems to measure continuously the states of
the upper ocean and lower atmosphere, the heat and momentum fluxes from the
ocean and atmosphere to the ice, and the ice thermodynamic state and mass
balance. A network of position buoys will be used to measure ice movement and
deformation across the observing domain. Regional, coupled-system model
simulations will provide the means to synthesize observational information
towards process understanding. Together these tools will be used to build
comprehensive sea ice energy, upper ocean heat, and sea-ice momentum budgets,
examine how these co-vary in space and time over all seasons, and develop
temporally-evolving process relationships among multiple key parameters. They
will use the detailed observations and coupled regional model to examine how
energy transfer processes (thermodynamics) are influenced by sea-ice deformation
(dynamics) on sub-seasonal to seasonal time scales, and they will assess sea-ice
predictability related to dynamic and thermodynamic process relationships, using
a full year of quasi-operational, 10-day sea-ice forecasts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved predictive models are an important means for
addressing major societal needs related to Arctic change and declining sea ice.
The project will provide an observational and process-based foundation for model
development that has been called for by model developers and international
experts. Moreover, it will offer insight into the sources of sea ice
predictability, which will help to constrain future research pathways for
improved sea ice models. The observations will enable a wide array of coupled
system research that reaches well beyond the proposed project to impact research
on other aspects of the Arctic physical, biological, and biogeochemical systems.
Moreover, this project will support development towards autonomous ocean and
atmospheric flux measurements that will help fill critical gaps in the Arctic
observing network. Educational content developed around the project's research
themes will support student learning on the physics of the Arctic system and
enable broader scientific outreach efforts.