* 1724240
* CRCNS US-German-Israeli Research Proposal: Multi-Level Neuro-Computational Models of Basal Ganglia Dysfunction in Tourette  Syndrome
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jonathan Rubin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 348,134.00

Tourette syndrome is a neurological disorder characterized by sudden movements
and vocalizations known as tics. The disorder can be highly debilitating with
severe clinical and social effects. The overall goal of this work is to combine
experimental and computational approaches to better understand the mechanisms
leading to tic production. In past work, tic production has been linked to
abnormal activity in a variety of brain regions, many of which are in an area
called the basal ganglia. Experiments in animals have shown that blocking
certain forms of signaling between neurons in the basal ganglia induces tics.
This project will use innovative methods to collect data from neurons in the
basal ganglia in these tic-producing animal models, which will be used in
several ways. Data analysis will identify changes in neural activity that are
linked with tic production, providing a detailed view of the neuronal
interactions involved. The data will also guide the development of two novel
computational model networks, one focused and one large-scale. These models will
be used to explore how changes in signaling between neurons within the basal
ganglia, as well as between the basal ganglia and major motor command centers in
the cortex, can lead to tic production. Results of these computational studies
will yield predictions for subsequent experimental testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For an action to be performed, it must be selected from
among the myriad of possible movements that could be made. How this action
selection is accomplished is currently not well understood. This project will
enhance our understanding of how changes in neuronal activity and signaling lead
to tic production, as well as to the selection of actions in general. The
results about tic production will have clinical implications for Tourette
syndrome by suggesting targets for interventions and providing a framework for
testing the impact of potential treatments. Currently, such a framework in the
area of Tourette syndrome is lacking, and related computational studies have
been quite limited. The models developed will also advance the field by serving
as resources for the study of additional questions relating to neuronal activity
and to signaling between neurons in movement-related brain areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Companion projects are being funded by the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF), and the US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation (BSF).