* 1724157
* S&amp;AS: INT: Socially-Aware Autonomy for Long-Term Deployment of Always-On Heterogeneous Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Peter Stone, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,116,000.00

This project studies how best to enable a team of mobile robots to fully
integrate into the social fabric of a community of people. As such, the most
important impact of this project is the ongoing development and dissemination of
core algorithms that, for the first time, enable robots to be fully integrated
in a socially-aware way into a community of people over a long period of time.
In addition to many traditional impacts on education, including a curriculum for
a project-based course, serving as a platform for graduate and undergraduate
research, this research is being used as the basis for extensive public outreach
via demonstrations, camps, and short courses, with a particular focus on
underrepresented groups such as women in Computer Science and Engineering and
Hispanic students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focusses on three main
technical challenges that are crucial to enabling robots to integrate into the
social fabric of a community. First, the project is working towards enabling
robots to be cognizant about dynamic social environments. Second, the project is
working towards enabling robots to reason about heterogeneous human-robot
capabilities while carrying out specific tasks. Third, the project is working
towards enabling safe, reflective lifelong learning in dynamic environments. In
addition to leading to focussed algorithms designed to address these specific
challenges, the project contributions are also being instantiated within a
single, coherent multi-robot system capable of long-term autonomy. A key
facilitator of the project's validation plan is a flexible, adaptable, and
reusable software and hardware infrastructure that is being developed and
expanded at UT Austin under an NSF Computing Research Infrastructure program
grant. The main experimental objective of the project is to demonstrate that
these robots can not only operate autonomously for long periods of time, but
also be fully integrated into and accepted by the community of people who use
the building in which they are situated.