* 1724508
* An Anthropological and Linguistic Investigation of Arctic Ceremonial Traditions
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Andrew Wiget, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 313,535.00

Bears are cultural keystone species for many North American peoples. Bear
ceremonialism is an important element of Algonkian cultural life, and
historically has also been characteristic of Alaska Native peoples including
interior Athabascan, coastal Inuit and Yupik, Haida, Tsimshian, and Tlingit
peoples. This award supports the scientific investigation of how ceremonies of
Athabascan communities in North America encapsulate their linguistic,
environmental, and cultural knowledge. Like many Indigenous peoples of the
world, Athabascans hold elaborate ceremonies that focus on the spiritual
relationships between human beings and animals as a means of ensuring success in
hunting and maintaining sustainable relationships with their environment. The
research will explore the extent this knowledge supports the long-term
sustainability of the environment and culture of these peoples. The approach
uses a framework of coproduction of knowledge and cultural conservation;
community members play a critical role in the collection and analysis of the
data, and the presentation of the data and outcomes. The research will test
predictions regarding the roles of traditional ceremonies and local knowledge
and experience, and their relationship to cultural identity and community health
and wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a mixed methods
research strategy collecting and assembling text and video documentation of
historical ceremonial practice, and contemporary performances. The project will
focus on traditional hunting ceremonies because these are most at risk within
the current social and cultural system. The project will focus on analyzing the
documentary record in consultation with Indigenous scholars, and key texts will
be chosen for transcription in the native language and translation to western
languages to create a corpus of digital data. Qualitative content analysis of
these native texts, cultural domain analysis, and Indigenous commentary will be
used to develop an understanding of cultural principles and practices that
support community health and well-being and a sustainable relationship to the
environment. The project will also analyze the ceremonies to describe how the
widely reported but little understood use of satire is used to dramatize
cultural values. The data management plan for the project is extensive and
includes an online, open-ended, multi-media archive accessible to other scholars
and the public. The data will be collected and stored using a Drupal-based
platform for a Mukurtu-like Collection Management System; this is a free,
mobile, and open source platform built with Indigenous communities to manage and
share digital cultural heritage. The data will also be stored with the Exchange
of Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) at the National Snow
and Ice Data Center (NSIDC). The communities will also use the project to
strengthen a master-apprenticeship program in ceremonial
traditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.