* 1724784
* CAREER:  Algorithms for Next-Generation Genomics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Benjamin Raphael, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 292,101.00

CAREER: Algorithms for Next-Generation Genomics&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to develop algorithms for new and emerging high-throughput DNA
sequencing technologies. These technologies are lowering the cost of DNA
sequencing by orders of magnitude and thereby enabling a variety of new
applications. These new applications, combined with the varying characteristics
of the DNA sequences produced by these technologies, are increasing demand for
efficient algorithms to interpret the resulting large volumes of DNA sequence
data. The PI will develop a new class of robust algorithms for genome assembly
and discovery of DNA sequence variants. Some of these algorithms will rely on
the availability of a closely related reference genome sequence, while others
will operate de novo directly from the individual DNA sequences (i.e. reads)
produced by a DNA sequencing machine. In the latter case, the PI will design
algorithms that exploit longer range DNA sequence information available in newer
single-molecule and nanopore sequencing technologies. These algorithms will
retain high sensitivity and specificity while scaling to billions-trillions of
nucleotides and thousands of genomes. Finally, the PI will introduce
combinatorial algorithms for the study of genome rearrangements in heterogeneous
mixtures of DNA sequences. Such mixtures arise in metagenomics or cancer
genomics, where the DNA that is sequenced is a mixture of genomes from different
species, or from cells harboring different mutations, respectively. The PI
collaborates closely with biologists and technology developers to ensure
relevance and applicability of the algorithms. At the same time, some of
algorithms and techniques from graph theory, combinatorial optimization, and
probability that are developed in the proposal are applicable to problems
outside of biology. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will be integrated with an educational component that includes the development
of undergraduate seminar in personal genomics, a summer research experience in
computational biology for high-school students, and the incorporation of a
computational biology module into a summer computing camp for 9th grade girls.
The PI will continue to actively mentor and recruit undergraduate and graduate
students, including women and underrepresented minorities. Finally, software
implementing the algorithms will be freely distributed to the scientific
community through a public webserver.