* 1724639
* The Utilization of Shell Oxygen Isotope Analysis to Reconstruct Past El Nino Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Christopher Jazwa, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 287,545.00

Dr. Christopher Jazwa of the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) will conduct a
research project to investigate patterns of past El Niño events and their
effects on human settlement and subsistence. The project will use data from
archaeological faunal collections to trace El Niño frequency within a broader
context of environmental variations, with implications for human responses to
present-day environment change. In general, there is an expectation that periods
with more frequent El Niños will have negative effects on marine food resources,
including stocks of economically important fish and shellfish species. In the
past, this could have prompted changes in human subsistence patterns and social
structures. Today, it could affect economic systems reliant on marine foods.
Archaeological sites and materials are uniquely positioned to model these
systems and this project will take advantage of faunal materials from well-dated
archaeological contexts from coastal California. Furthermore, this project is
designed to refine methodologies for assigning archaeological sites to different
seasons of occupation, which may shift in response to environmental change.
Funding from this project will assist in the development of the new Human
Paleoecology and Archaeometry Laboratory at UNR. This work will closely involve
graduate and undergraduate students during all stages of data collection,
providing training in field and laboratory analyses. Environmental and
archaeological research within Channel Islands National Park will assist with
the park's missions of preservation and inventorying their valuable cultural
resources. Members of the local Chumash tribe will be involved in archaeological
fieldwork for this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use stable
oxygen isotopic analysis of California mussel (Mytilus californianus) shells
from archaeological sites to reconstruct patterns in local sea surface
temperature at the time that bands of shell carbonate were deposited on the
shell. This will allow the PI to address three primary questions: (1) How has
the frequency of El Niño events varied over the course of the last 8,000 years?
(2) What are the effects of these changes on human settlement and subsistence
patterns in coastal ecosystems? And (3) with what accuracy can season of
occupation of archaeological sites be assigned with different isotopic sampling
techniques for California mussels. The PI has been collecting modern mussel
shells from a test location on southern Santa Rosa Island, California, part of
Channel Islands National Park, at three-month increments from 2015-2017. This
included the 2015-2016 El Niño winter. With the assistance of graduate and
undergraduate students, the modern shells will be sampled and analyzed for
stable oxygen isotopes to refine methodologies for observing El Niño and
assigning shells to season of harvest. Excavation of shell-rich archaeological
sites during a summer season, along with existing collections, will provide
samples to reconstruct past environmental patterns and human responses. Although
El Niño events have global effects, anomalies in sea surface temperature are
especially strong along the west coast of the Americas, making California an
ideal location to address these questions. Therefore, observed patterns of past
El Niño frequency can be applied to understand human responses to climate change
around the world.