* 1724866
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Advanced Site Characterization of Key Ground Motion and Ground Failure Case Histories Resulting from the Mw7.8 Kaikoura, New Zealand, Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2018
* USD 39,971.00

A large and widely-damaging earthquake has not occurred in the U.S. for over 20
years. However, advancements have continued to be made in earthquake engineering
by observing the effects of large earthquakes in countries that have similar
seismic design standards and well-constructed infrastructure. Documenting the
effects of earthquakes in a country like New Zealand, which has rigorous
building codes and similar infrastructure to the U.S., provides the greatest
opportunities for learning lessons that will be directly transferable to our
country. The Mw7.8 Kaikoura earthquake provides a unique opportunity to evaluate
in considerable depth the effects of earthquake shaking on diverse types of
infrastructure, in cities of different population densities, underlain by
various types of soil profiles, subjected to a wide range of shaking
intensities. These circumstances provide an invaluable opportunity to study
ground shaking amplification caused by site, basin and topographic effects, and
cases of liquefaction-induced ground failure, that will be directly applicable
to U.S. cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle and Salt Lake City.
Urgency is required because the PIs currently have access to some key
facilities, such as the CentrePort of Wellington. After they have rebuilt the
port, for example, there will no longer be access and the opportunity to
characterize the ground as it was immediately after the earthquake will be lost
. Moreover, New Zealand researchers are rapidly mobilizing to carry out initial
studies at key sites. In order to combine resources and expertise, the project
will need to also mobilize quickly. The end-goal of this project is to benefit
society at-large through increased resiliency, sustainability and affordability
of civil infrastructure via improved seismic design. This work will also serve
to strengthen international research collaborations between the U.S. and New
Zealand, and will provide U.S. graduate students with rewarding international
travel experiences that will serve to balance their technical education and
expose them to the globally-connected problems that still exist in earthquake
engineering. In short, the broader impacts of this work stretch far beyond the
borders of New Zealand and will positively impact seismic hazard practices in
the U.S. and abroad.

The intellectual merits of the research plan include an improved understanding
of: (1) ground motion stratigraphy, basin and topographic effects in complex
geotechnical settings; (2) liquefaction response of gravelly soils; (3) the
influence of non-liquefiable capping layers on liquefaction damage potential;
and (4) the response of buildings and critical port infrastructure on
liquefiable soil. Of particular interest are the much-higher-than-expected long
period ground motions recorded on natural and reclaimed soil sites 60 km from
the fault rupture in the capital city of Wellington. It is hypothesized that
highly variable topography, both above and below the valley floor, resulted in
complex interactions between stratigraphy, basin and topographic effects,
amplifying ground motions. Advanced site characterization is needed in the form
of deep shear wave velocity (Vs) profiling and topographic array studies to
investigate these phenomena. Without this information, it will be impossible to
place observations of structural damage and ground failure caused by the
Kaikoura earthquake in context. Wellington is the perfect test bed for this
study, because abruptly changing topography allows all of these ground motion
effects to be studied on a remarkably small scale of several kilometers.
Advanced site characterization is also needed at Wellington's port facility,
where surprisingly severe liquefaction damage occurred under moderate shaking
(PGA values of 0.13 - 0.24g) from this relatively distant earthquake In addition
to documenting the damage to wharves and shipping cranes due to liquefaction-
induced lateral spread movements, there are rare incidents of gravel
liquefaction to document at CentrePort Other important ground failure sites on
the South Island should also be characterized rapidly to add valuable,
perishable data to the U.S. soil liquefaction triggering and lateral spreading
empirical databases. Advanced site characterization studies are planned at key
case history sites in Wellington and the South Island using a combination of:
(1) Single-station horizontal-to-vertical spectral ratio noise measurements for
investigating fundamental site periods, (2) Combined active-source and ambient-
wavefield surface wave testing for developing deep Vs profiles; (3) Cone
penetration tests for revealing detailed site stratigraphy; and (4) Direct-push
crosshole tests for high-resolution Vs and Vp profiles. Collecting and analyzing
these data will help to better understand valuable lessons-learned that are
directly transferrable to improved seismic design practices in the U.S.