* 1724436
* RAPID: Political Party Organization and the Role of Women
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Nahomi Ichino, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 100,584.00

Women are under-represented in political parties in many new democracies, in
part because of social norms that inhibit women from becoming active in local
politics. What are the effects of reducing the gender gap in grassroots
participation? This project addresses this question by conducting two large-
scale surveys to evaluate the short- and long-run effects of a community civic
education program designed to encourage women's political participation in
Ghana. The civic education treatment takes the form of a series of large
community meetings held by Ghana's National Commission for Civic Education
(NCCE), an independent, non-partisan government agency that regularly engages in
similar activities, and addresses social norms against the participation of
women in political parties and encourages greater women's participation.
Assessing the link between civic education and levels of participation has
implications for future development policy, including efforts funded and
conducted by the US government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores (a)
whether women's political empowerment increases women's access to government
resources and reduces their economic vulnerability, and (b) whether women's
political empowerment changes attitudes and norms about women's appropriate
roles in society. It extends an emerging body of work on these questions in two
ways. First, most research on gender in the developing world has focused on the
impacts of women in leadership positions. This study shifts focus to the study
of the effects of grassroots participation. Second, endogeneity generally
complicates causal inferences on the effects of women's participation. This
research will be one of a handful of studies that have randomly encouraged or
exploited "natural" experiments on women's participation. Moreover, the field
experiment presents an unusually well-identified test of theories of how the
resources available to political parties in new democracies affect their
electoral strategies, including clientelism and intimidation of voters. The
field experiment with an encouragement design allows the estimation of the
effects of increased women's political participation on (a)political party
strategies, including mobilization and outreach to women before the election;
(b) the subsequent economic welfare of women; and (c) social norms about the
participation of women in politics and local leadership.