* 1724770
* RAPID: Quantifying the Effects of Historical Indigenous Burning and Bison on Mountain Valley Forest Structure and Fire Regimes
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Donald Falk, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 01/31/2019
* USD 27,982.00

This award is supported as Rapid Response Research (RAPID). The investigators
plan to recover data that will be destroyed by a planned forest burn scheduled
for Spring 2017. Pre and post-colonial period Native Americans actively managed
their natural environments through the use of fire to produce grasslands and
boost bison populations and this at risk data has the potential to provide
critical insights into the natural resource management practices of Native North
Americans from the 1600's to the present. A key element of the research is to
use the recovered data to map the landscape of the Clear Water Valley in Alberta
Canada and to estimate the population numbers of bison supported in the region
historically to the present. Understanding the historic ecosystem and the bison
populations in the region is a critical part of the decision to reintroduce
bison species in the Rocky Mountain region. As a subsistence species utilized by
early Native Americans for food, shelter, clothing, and religious practice,
bison are a cultural and natural keystone species in the region. As a species
hunted to near extinction by the late 1800's, currently, both public and Tribal
land managers are considering projects to reintroduce bison into contemporary
ecosystems. The researchers argue that after bison and traditional indigenous
land management were removed from these ecosystems in the late 1800's the
landscape substantially changed, to the point that it may no longer be suitable
for bison reintroduction. The project will map, quantify, and provide insights
into how Indigenous burning historically created habitats supporting substantial
bison populations in the Rocky Mountains near Banff National Park (BNP) in
Canada, which can be compared to other regions of the North where cultural
burning was also practiced. In addition, the researchers will provide insights
into the implications of these landscape transformations and their disappearance
for the management of forests, fire, and fauna today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
region for the RAPID is anticipated to be particularly well suited for study; 1)
Banff National Park has a bison reintroduction program and 2) it is a region
where Indigenous peoples, such as the Kootenai, historically used cultural
burning to create open and nutrient-enriched grassy habitat for bison. Today,
these and similar Rocky Mountain valleys are densely forested due to the
exclusion of traditional indigenous burning, the introduction of modern fire
suppression, and other factors. In order to assess and achieve bison restoration
objectives similar to what existed historically, it is vital to quantify
landscape condition during the period of traditional indigenous management.
Coordination between fire management programs and bison reintroduction groups
could benefit the interests of both groups and improve the odds of attaining
bison population restoration goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
demonstrate and quantify changes in bison habitat by creating a 3D time-lapse
map showing the transformation of the Clearwater Valley in Alberta, Canada from
the 1600s to present. The research team will recreate the valley's fire history
using modern dendrochronology, cross-dating tree scars left by historical fires.
This phase of research will produce a stand age structure reconstruction, a
traditional fire scar history using the program FHAES, a climate reconstruction
(to determine the degree of anthropogenic vs. climatic influence on the fire
regime(s) over time), a comparison of known historical human and bison
population events (such as smallpox outbreaks) with fire frequency and tree
recruitment shifts, and spatiotemporal GIS maps compiling all of the above. In
addition, an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) will collect 3-dimensional landscape
data to measure the valley's modern biotic landscape. A digital time-lapse map
will incorporate the tree-ring history to extend the 3D landscape model back in
time. Lastly, the investigators will derive estimates of how much biomass
burning has changed over the course of the last 300+ years in the Clearwater
Valley sample area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's novel fusion of
dendrochronology and 3D spatiotemporal GIS expands the realm of what is possible
for scientific methodology across disciplinary boundaries. The results of this
study will also be applicable across national boundaries by showing not only how
much change in the landscape would be necessary for Banff National Park's bison
restoration goals, but also demonstrate the need for similar investigations by
land managers across North America.