* 1724773
* GOALI: Innovative Biochar-Slag-Soil Cover System for Zero Emissions at Landfills
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Krishna Reddy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 359,395.00

Anaerobic decomposition of municipal solid waste in landfills predominantly
produces methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2). Fugitive CH4 and CO2 emissions
from landfill surfaces that are not targeted by landfill gas (LFG) collection
systems escape into the atmosphere and cause detrimental impacts on public
health and the environment. Alternate cover systems such as biocovers have
emerged as a low-cost alternative to mitigate these fugitive emissions. Biochar,
a highly porous material derived from gasification of biomass such as waste
wood, has shown to be an effective biocover material that enhances microbial
oxidation of CH4 to CO2 thereby mitigating the CH4 emissions to atmosphere.
However, the problem of LFG emissions still remains unsolved due to the
impending emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere. Steel slag, a byproduct from
steel making industries, because of its high alkalinity has shown to mineralize
CO2 to stable carbonates. The potential use of steel slag to mitigate LFG
emissions has not been explored. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) project conceptualizes and aims to achieve zero emissions
from landfills by using steel slag in combination with biochar as a landfill
cover material to mitigate the CH4 and CO2 emissions at landfills. Moreover,
such application provides a commercial outlet for discarded steel slag fines,
which have no established beneficial use currently. In order to achieve this
overarching goal, the project aims to delineate the fundamental biogeochemistry
that governs the simultaneous oxidation of CH4 to CO2 and subsequent carbonation
of CO2 in steel slag while optimizing the key influencing parameters that
control the CO2 uptake by steel slag. This interdisciplinary research involving
geoenvironmental engineering, microbiology, geochemistry and sustainable
engineering provides a unique opportunity for students to participate, learn and
explore research in various domains of science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uniquely attempts to harness
biogeochemical reactions associated with biochar and steel slag to achieve zero
emissions from landfills. An integrated research program, consisting of
controlled laboratory batch and column experiments and field demonstration, will
be conducted to specifically investigate: (1) physical, geochemical and
geotechnical properties of steel slag and it's amendment with biochar and soil;
(2) the fundamental mechanisms including adsorption/carbonation that govern CO2
sequestration by steel slag in combination with biochar and soil; (3) the effect
of various factors including moisture, temperature, particle size, and CO2
loading that control the carbonation by steel slag individually and in
combination with biochar and soil; (4) ageing/weathering effects on steel slag
fines and its impact on microbial activity and oxidation in biochar and soil;
(5) the transport and diffusion properties of a simulated biochar-slag-soil
cover system and it's performance under the influence of transient and dynamic
changes in gas flow and environmental conditions; and (6) the performance of the
new cover system with variable gas production under field conditions and it's
practical applicability with a full-scale field demonstration.