* 1724425
* 2017 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (US, German-America, China-America, EU-US)
* ENG,EFMA
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kerstin Mukerji
* 04/30/2018
* USD 110,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering, provide emerging engineering leaders from academia, industry,
and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights to
facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The nature of emerging technologies and how they fit together to
create products and processes that drive economic growth in an increasingly
competitive environment have heightened the need for engineers to understand
each other's disciplines and enhance the value in that interaction, particularly
among those developing and using these new technologies. The symposia serve as a
catalyst to spur engineering innovation and foster collaborative networks of
researchers within the United States and between engineers from the United
States and partnering countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for four Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) symposia, to be held in
2017: The German-American Frontiers of Engineering (March 31-April 2, in
Evendale, Ohio), China-America Frontiers of Engineering (June 22-24, in
Shanghai), US Frontiers of Engineering (September 25-27, in East Hartford,
Connecticut), and EU-US Frontiers of Engineering (November 16-18, in Davis,
California). Each FOE symposium will focus on topical areas such as Energy
Strategies to Power Our Future; Unraveling the Complexity of the Brain; Internet
of Things; Managing Water Supply, Treatment, and Delivery in the 21st Century;
Gene Editing and Applications; Advanced Manufacturing; and Synthetic Biology.
Approximately 100 outstanding young engineers for the U.S. symposium and 30 from
each country for the bilateral symposia will participate. Each two and one-half
day symposium will include plenary sessions, technical tours, break-out
sessions, and opportunities for developing collaborative research partnerships.
Sessions will consist of presentations on cutting-edge research, innovations,
and emerging research opportunities in engineering fields relevant to the
symposium. FOE symposium papers, abstracts, presentation videos, and slides will
be made available on the FOE website (www.naefrontiers.org ).&lt;br/&gt;