* 1724482
* Implementing and Evaluating I-Corps Training
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,286,739.00

Intellectual Merit: The United States faces significant challenges in rapidly
and efficiently bringing emerging science and engineering innovations to use in
industry and commerce. To maintain our world leadership in scientific and
engineering research and education, we need processes that enable the practical
and scalable application of promising discoveries from research and university
laboratories. For university research to achieve greater impact, academic
researchers and their students in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) need tools and preparation for evaluating whether research
discoveries can be readily translated into practical applications and eventual
commercialization. For these reasons, NSF established the I-Corps training
program in 2011 to support NSF-funded researchers in learning how to evaluate
their scientific research for commercial potential. The National Collegiate
Inventors and Innovators Alliance, Inc., d/b/a VentureWell, proposes to continue
its work with NSF to plan, implement and evaluate five (5) additional I-Corps
workshops (National Team Trainings) and two (2) National Faculty Training
events.

Broader Impacts: The I-Corps program provides NSF-funded principal investigators
and their team members with funding and training enabling them to evaluate their
technologies and research discoveries for commercial feasibility. The ultimate
goal of the program is to increase the economic and societal impact of NSF
research funding directly, through commercialization of research, and
indirectly, by equipping scientists and engineers with skills and experience in
developing and testing economically scalable models for the development of a
product or technology. By the end of the program, I-Corps grantees are expected
to reach a decision about the commercial readiness of their technology or
product and take with them a set of skills that they can continue to apply in
their research careers. Program participants evaluate and translate their
research into applications that have commercial potential and can benefit
society. Many participants will have identified promising commercial pathways
that can lead to new high tech ventures or licensing opportunities. Since the
program's inception, I-Corps teams have formed 350 companies that have attracted
over $83 million in follow-on investment and grants. These companies operate in
a broad range of sectors including health, energy, materials, agriculture and
information technology and are geographically distributed across 43 states.