* 1724591
* Student Support:   PowderMET Conference on Powder Metallurgy; Las Vegas, Nevada; June 13-16, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Sundar Atre, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 02/28/2018
* USD 42,331.00

This award supports 40 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the 2017 PowderMET sponsored by the Metal Powder
Industries Federation. This premier powder metallurgy conference acts as a
bridges between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions.
The award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas
with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and
governmental facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic
and international schools. In addition to nurturing a powder metallurgy
community, participants will learn the latest research areas and results in
powder metallurgy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides the student
participants with opportunities to exchange ideas with leading researchers and
engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental facilities, as well as with
students and faculty from both domestic and international universities. In
addition to nurturing a global powder metallurgy (traditional press &amp;
sinter, metal injection molding, isostatic pressing, and metal additive
manufacturing) vision, participants will learn the latest research areas and
results in the fields of interest. These opportunities will not only improve the
participants' knowledge in the field but also develop scientists and engineers
who are ideally suited to craft the next generation of designs in powder
metallurgy that will push the nation's manufacturing capabilities.