* 1724452
* EAGER: Fundamentals of soft heat exchangers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Konrad Rykaczewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 137,000.00

Highly stretchable heat exchangers could dramatically improve current
thermoregulatory garments used in emergency and medical applications, such as
firefighting, hazardous material cleanup, and medically required
thermoregulation. These types of heat exchangers also would be the future basis
for the thermal management of soft and wearable electronic technologies. In many
such applications, active liquid cooling would be needed to dissipate combined
heat from the electronics and the user's body. The fabrication of a stretchable,
liquid cooled pad that could dissipate thermal loads only recently became
possible due to the development of new classes of materials, such as
hyperelastic liquid metal and elastomer composites. An added benefit of
stretchable heat exchangers is that stretching the material could remove fouling
deposits that deteriorate the performance of such devices in many industrial
settings, which would provide a cost-effective, environmentally friendly
alternative to currently utilized chemical and scrubbing cleaning methods. This
research project aims to demonstrate a novel concept of soft heat exchangers
that undergo shape change during operation and to develop a theoretical
framework for prediction of their thermal performance. As part of this research
project, semester-long "soft heat exchanger design challenge" class projects are
being developed and assigned, which will increase the number of students
involved in this research and accelerate the design and generation of soft,
liquid cooled, wearable technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stretching will
violate most assumptions used in design of conventional heat exchangers (e.g.
constant areas and cross sections, heat transfer coefficients, and flow rates).
Consequently, the design of soft heat exchangers requires development of new
theoretical approaches for predicting their thermal performance. The primary
hypothesis of this proposal is that quasi-static shape model can predict the
thermal transport processes occurring within the device if its shape change
occurs on a much longer time scale than the slowest heat transfer process (i.e.,
the device operates in the "gradual shape modulation regime"). Time scaling and
the quasi-static shape models for single stream and concentric tube heat
exchangers undergoing axial stretching and compression are being developed and
tested experimentally. If the hypothesis is validated, then the quasi-static
models can be used as a predictive tool to design devices operating in the
gradual shape modulation regime. In case where the device operates in the "rapid
shape modulation regime," in which time scales for the shape change are shorter
or comparable to at least one heat transfer process, transient governing
equations with moving boundary conditions are being solved. This research
project serves as motivation for the development of theories for devices
operating in this regime and provides preliminary experimental data for their
validation.