* 1724764
* Workshop: Addressing Irrigation Aquifer Depletion and Challenges to Sustainability: Enhancing Dialogue on Solutions, Annual UCOWR/NIWR conference, Fort Collins, CO, June 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* David Kreamer, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2018
* USD 18,421.00

1724764 Williard

The proposed workshop will address irrigation aquifer depletion and challenges
to sustainability by enhancing dialogue on solutions. It will be held as a
special track in conjunction with the annual Universities Council on Water
Resources/National Institutes for Water Resources (UCOWR/NIWR) conference, in
Fort Collins, CO, June 2017. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations estimates that food production must be increased by 70 % from 2009
levels in order to feed an additional 2.3 billion people by 2050. Expected
outcomes of this special track include the collaboration and cooperation among
scientists of multiple disciplinary backgrounds in order to develop practical
solutions to mitigate this complex water resources issue.

The planned special track, addressing irrigation aquifer depletion and
challenges to sustainability, focuses upon aquifer depletion in relation to
agricultural irrigation. Supporting sessions will provide opportunities to
discuss related issues in groundwater management and security. A partial list of
topics addressing this nexus of water resources, agricultural practices, and
food security includes: groundwater assessment and management; socio-economics
of irrigation aquifer management; improving irrigation efficiency; crop
management; Arizona and Nevada programs and projects to address future Colorado
River shortages; groundwater management in a changing environment; drought
monitoring and planning for scarcity; climate disturbance impacts and shifts in
hydrology over the Western United States; the U.S.-Mexico Transboundary Aquifer
Assessment. These topics are of interest to those involved in the NSF Program,
INFEWS, Innovations at the Nexus of the Food-Energy-Water Systems, where the
intersection of water and agriculture are concerned. A primary goal of this
proposed conference track and associated sessions is to bring together a broad
range of hydrogeologists, engineers, economists, agronomists, and other
scientists and professionals studying groundwater depletion and adaptation in
critical agricultural areas in the U.S., such as the Ogallala Aquifer,
California's Central Valley, the Mississippi Delta region, and Arizona's
alluvial basins. Through this workshop collaborative research efforts may be
significantly advanced through the transfer of information, and workable
solutions may be generated in the process.