* 1724697
* Student Travel Grant: Fifth IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI 2017)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Christophe Giraud-Carrier, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 12,870.00

This project is to support doctoral student travel and participation in the IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI 2017) in Park City,
Utah. The ICHI2017 conference provides a supportive scientific forum for
students focusing on computing, health- and bioinformatics. ICHI2017 provides a
forum for expert and peer critique of students' research with the goal of
improving their science. Student participants will also have the opportunity to
receive networking support and career advice from internationally-recognized
experts. Overall, the travel support brings together students with experts who
might not otherwise engage with one another and engage in multidisciplinary
science the area of health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports
doctoral students by providing a Student Doctoral Consortium focused on
encouraging students to learn from peers and experts from multiple perspectives
to understand how innovative computing and informatics combine to make the most
impact in the area of health. In addition, student participation in rapid talks
and roundtable provided at the conference enables students to explore their
science and see different career paths for researchers in this area. The
ICHI2017 conference exposes participants to different scientific disciplinary
approaches, supports networking with conference attendees and is designed to
support the development of the next generation of scholars in health- and
bioinformatics.