* 1724744
* Collaborative Research: Methanotrophic-Mediated Methylmercury Transformation:  An Important Yet Poorly Understood Biogeochemical Process
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jeremy Semrau, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2021
* USD 373,786.00

Methylmercury is a very potent neurotoxin produced by some microbes. Once
formed, methylmercury can easily bio-magnify, that is, the concentrations of
methylmercury in organisms increase as one goes up the food chain. Other
microbes have the ability to degrade methylmercury, thus limiting this process
of bio-magnification. These known systems of methylmercury degradation, however,
do not appear to be significant in most environments. Recent work, however, has
found that different microbes, through a process yet to be full elucidated,
degrade methylmercury under more environmentally relevant conditions. This
process may thus be very important in controlling methylmercury bioaccumulation,
and its toxicity. In this project we will delineate this process and determine
how wide-spread it may be in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane-
oxidizing bacteria, i.e., methanotrophs, are widespread in the environment, but
their impact on biogeochemical cycling of mercury, has only just been
investigated. The investigators have recently found that methanotrophs bind and
demethylate substantial amounts of methylmercury (MeHg), a neurotoxic form of
mercury that is generated via anaerobic microbial activity. What is remarkable
is that methanotrophs do not have merB, encoding for the well-characterized
organomercurial lyase, indicating that methanotrophs use an as yet unknown
mechanism to demethylate MeHg. Further, methanotrophic-mediated MeHg degradation
was observed under environmentally relevant conditions (i.e., nanomolar
concentrations of mercury and circumneutral pH), unlike the organomercurial
lyase, which is operative only under conditions rarely seen in the environment.
As such, it appears that the methanotrophic-mediated MeHg degradation is much
more environmentally significant than the canonical merB-mediated pathway. The
objectives of this proposal are thus to determine how methanotrophs take up and
degrade MeHg. Investigators will examine a suite of methanotrophs that span the
phylogenetic and physiological diversity of these microbes as well as several
mutants of one of these species to determine how these microorganisms take up
and demethylate MeHg, and the impact of MeHg uptake and degradation on growth,
activity and transcriptome.