* 1724829
* A Study of Knowledge Flow and Recurring Costly Infrastructure Failures
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Julie Mark Cohen, Cohen                   Julie          M
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 22,113.00

This award is for Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER). It is a
case study of structural engineering failures due to faulty design decisions.
The PI will engage in archival research and interviews of experts in the field
(and related fields including architecture) to bring to light the culture and
traditions of structural engineering practice concerning the use of knowledge in
design decision making. Specifically, she will focus on occurrences of
inadvertent neglect of pertinent available knowledge in design decision-making
that unintentionally caused failures, in some cases soon after the structures
were placed into service. The PI has nine case studies planned. This grant will
support research for the first of the nine planned studies, which concerns the
use of galvanized high-strength steel. The PI has done preliminary historical
analysis and interviews to substantiate pursuing this case in much greater
depth. The results from this project will provide the foundation for the PI's
larger effort, serve to introduce the Science, Technology, and Society (STS)
community to an overlooked engineering profession, and bring to light decades of
recurring failures, many not well publicized that, that in some respects have
broader, deeper adverse effects on society than one-time (singular) catastrophic
events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is both innovative and potentially
transformative. It will develop a hybrid conceptual framework that combines
Actor Network Theory (an STS approach to socio-technical systems) with a
Knowledge Management Systems approach that deals with knowledge facilitators
(creators, carriers, conveyors, and users), impeders, and feedback loops within
and among organizations. The PI will argue that neither of the two frameworks
mentioned is adequate for capturing pertinent elements of her case study, which
is best understood in terms of a framework that combines the most relevant
features of both frameworks. In addition, the PI will prepare/present a peer-
reviewed paper for an STS journal, a peer-reviewed paper for an engineering
studies journal, a technical article for a professional structural engineering
magazine, and a conference paper at the 2017 meeting of the Society for Social
Studies of Science. The results of this project will be of interest to members
of the public as well as structural engineers, architects, and historians of
technology.