* 1724807
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2017 ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (ACM MobiSys)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Mi Zhang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,000.00

ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (ACM
MobiSys) is the premier event for presenting innovative and significant research
of mobile systems, applications and services. The research topics of MobiSys
span multiple disciplines, including wireless networks and communication, mobile
sensing and crowdsourcing applications, wearable computing, vehicular and
robotic wireless systems, operating systems, distributed algorithms, data
management, energy management, sensors, security and privacy. ACM MobiSys brings
together academic, industry, and government professionals to a single-track,
highly selective forum, to exchange technological advances of mobile systems,
applications and services. The goal of this student travel support is to promote
research engagement of students, especially ones who are not well-funded, under-
represented, or otherwise unlikely to be able to attend this high-profile
conference on mobile systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will support
approximate 20 student participants from recognized US institutions of higher
education. The opportunity will be widely advertised among the potential
conference attendees. A student travel grant committee is formed to select
awardees, based on student qualification and benefits to be received from
attending the conference. Priority will be given to under-funded or under-
represented students. The student awardees will attend the conference and have
opportunities to exchange innovative ideas in a vibrant field, which will
significantly influence their future research directions.