* 1724890
* Transdisciplinary workshops to advance research on urbanization and the food-energy-water nexus
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jon Padgham, START International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 554,035.00

This award provides support to the global change SysTem for Analysis, Research,
and Training (START) for a series of transdisciplinary workshops focused on the
impacts of Urbanization on the Food-Water-Energy Nexus. This organization is an
essential component of the US Global Change Research Program strategic plan as
it relates to international engagement. START?s mission "to increase
opportunities for research, education and training that strengthen scientific
capacities in developing countries to understand, communicate and motivate
action on critical global change challenges" addresses all of the US Global
Change Research Program strategic goals. The funding will enable START to
continue developing and implementing programs that advance ?research-driven
capacity building? in transdisciplinary research. This approach emphasizes
experiential learning by doing, particularly for early-career scientists, in
which targeted skill building and networking opportunities are integrated into
research on regional impacts and risks stemming from global change. START?s work
focuses on critical challenges at the nexus of food-water-energy systems and
sustainable development, urban development, water resources management, and
agriculture and food security.