* 1724741
* NSFGEO-NERC: Equatorial Line Observations (ELO) Field Campaign during the International Years of Maritime Continent Program: Oceanography and Atmospheric Perspective
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Piotr Flatau, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2022
* USD 436,867.00

The warm shallow seas and mountainous islands of the Maritime Continent (MC, the
region between the Indian Ocean and the western Pacific) pose a challenge for
atmospheric disturbances propagating through the area. The larges of these
disturbances is the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), a broad envelope of clouds
and precipitation that forms in the Indian Ocean and moves slowly eastward as
far as the central equatorial Pacific. The MJO affects weather and climate over
much of the globe, with US impacts including hurricane formation in the Gulf of
Mexico and flooding in California due to atmospheric rivers. The slow evolution
and widespread impacts of the MJO have spurred interest in MJO prediction, and
the MC presents a challenge to forecasting as models have difficulty predicting
which events will transit the region and which will dissipate within it. The
desirability of long-range forecasts of MJO impacts has thus lead to an interest
in understanding the mechanisms through which the MC interacts with the MJO and
serves as a gatekeeper for their entry into the equatorial
Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is one component of the Equatorial
Line Observations (ELO) field campaign, which seeks to understand the local MC
processes that influence MJO propagation. The campaign is a joint project
between researchers in the US, Great Britain, and Indonesia in which oceanic
observations are taken along the equator using sea gliders off the west coast of
Sumatra and moorings in the Karimata Strait between Sumatra and Borneo. The
oceanic observations are complemented by land-based observations in eastern
Sumatra and on the west coast of Borneo, with deployment scheduled between
November 2018 and February 2019. ELO is part of a larger international effort
known as the Years of the Maritime Continent, organized under the auspices of
the World Meteorological Organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The campaign targets
three factors which are hypothesized to influence MJO propagation through the
MC. The first is interactions between atmospheric disturbances and the
underlying ocean. Abundant rainfall over the internal seas of the MC produces a
shallow surface layer of fresh water which can be warmed and cooled rapidly by
variations in sunlight reaching the surface, wind-driven evaporation, and other
factors. Variations in sea surface temperature can in turn influence cloudiness
and precipitation, and the campaign seeks to understand how this air-sea
coupling affects eastward propagating atmospheric
disturbance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second is the interaction of the MJO with
convectively coupled Kelvin waves (CCKWs), which are smaller equatorial weather
disturbances which propagate eastward at a faster rate than the MJO and are
regarded as its "building blocks". The PIs hypothesize that the problems with
the representation of MJO propagation through the MC seen in forecast models are
related to poor simulation of CCKW activity in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third is the interaction of CCKWs with the
diurnal cycle of precipitation in the MC, as intense precipitation generally
occurs after noon over Sumatra and Borneo but in the morning over the Karimata
Strait separating them. The distance between the islands is such that a CCKW
passing over Sumatra during the rainy part of the day is likely to arrive at
Borneo in time for the precipitation maximum on the following day. The PI
hypothesizes that the extra condensational heating received by CCKWs which are
synchronized with the island diurnal cycles could favor their growth and further
interaction with the MJO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal as well as
scientific value given the worldwide impacts of the MJO and the potential for
improvement of MJO-related forecasts. The work also promotes international
capacity building in atmospheric science and operational forecasting, as it is
conducted in collaboration with Indonesian partners. The campaign involves PhD
students from the US, Great Britain, and Indonesia, thus providing future
workforce development in this research area.