* 1724930
* Compressive Sampling for Uncertainty Modeling and Quantification of Dynamical Systems Subject to Highly Limited/Incomplete Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ioannis Kougioumtzoglou, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 298,918.00

This project will improve the treatment of uncertainty in the process of model
identification. It is often useful to mathematically represent both the external
influences acting on a real system, and the response of the system to those
inputs. The system itself can then be modeled as a mathematical object that
converts inputs into responses. Model identification is the process of
determining the form of the model -- and of assigning values to any parameters
that it may require -- based on observation of the inputs and outputs. Systems
that are subject to random variations are called stochastic. When inputs are
applied to a stochastic system, it can be difficult to distinguish between the
repeatable part of the response and the part of the response due to random
fluctuations. This difficulty inevitably causes uncertainty in the resulting
system model. The results of this project will enable these uncertainties to be
handled as well as possible in several important cases that cannot currently be
treated. These are systems that change over time, systems with missing
input/response data, and systems with certain types of complex dynamic behavior.
The importance of such approaches is paramount for further development of system
damage/fault detection procedures. Such diagnostic methods can be integrated in
a broader framework for real-time monitoring of the dynamic behavior of the
system as well as assessing its reliability. The project will contribute to
diverse research fields such as structural dynamics, probabilistic methods, data
acquisition and signal processing, as well as structural safety and reliability.
For instance, to restore and improve urban infrastructure, uncertainties related
to ageing mechanisms and environmental excitations need to be identified and
quantified. In addition, e-learning interactive software tools will be deployed
online, incorporating research results from this project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge in the fields of uncertainty
modeling and quantification, with emphasis on stochastic excitation modeling and
structural system identification subject to highly limited data. Specific
challenges related to modeling of the uncertainties, and the identification of
the structural system properties based on knowledge of input-output (excitation-
response) data include: (1) measured/available data most often possess
evolutionary features, i.e. they exhibit a time-varying behavior, (2) most often
there are limited, incomplete and/or missing data, and (3) the system governing
equations are highly complex from a mathematics perspective, including
nonlinearities and fractional derivatives modeling. Currently, it is not
possible to address cases (1), (2), and (3) simultaneously in a consistent,
efficient manner. The research objective of this project is to create a
compressive sampling based methodology for efficient uncertainty modeling and
quantification in the field of stochastic engineering dynamics subject to highly
limited data. Specific goals include the development of techniques for spectral
analysis and stochastic process statistics estimation subject to incomplete
data, as well as for identifying the parameters of nonlinear systems endowed
with fractional derivative elements. Preliminary work suggests satisfactory
accuracy for up to 80% missing data.