* 1724197
* S&amp;AS: INT: RoboBees 2.0 Towards Autonomous Micro Air Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Gu-Yeon Wei, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2021
* USD 400,000.00

In 2009, a group of researchers from Harvard led an NSF Expeditions in Computing
project to build a colony of flapping-wing robots, called RoboBees, motivated by
the multidisciplinary challenges associated with building and controlling
effective robotic insects. The research has been exciting and it has tickled the
imagination of many "young and old" through numerous museum exhibits and
outreach activities. The severe inherent constraints associated with building
at-scale flying robotic insects required many innovations and new technologies
at each step. For example, a new manufacturing process called pop-up MEMS was
developed to enable mass production of small-scale, foldable devices. New
electronics were developed to flap artificial insect-scale wings. A new small-
scale computer chip (called the BrainSoC), connected to various sensors, was
created to control the robot. The culmination of this work has been exciting
demonstrations of RoboBees hovering and maneuvering about within carefully
controlled environments. The next phase of this work is to imbue these robots
with machine intelligence and autonomy: RoboBee 2.0. The main objective of this
proposal will be to teach the RoboBees to fly
autonomously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 10 years, while roboticists
have been busily building small-scale robots, there has been a surge of activity
in machine learning that has led to rapid advances in machine perception and
control. For example, the recent success of deep learning can be attributed to
the virtuous cycle of (i) more and higher quality data; (ii) faster parallel
computation; and (iii) more efficient learning algorithms. The time is ripe to
combine these threads of research to develop machine learning-enabled flight
control and perception for RoboBees. This project brings together a
multidisciplinary team of experts from different engineering backgrounds to
build the next generation of RoboBees. The project seeks to push the envelope by
targeting the RoboBees platform, which introduces flight dynamics and
sensitivity requirements beyond the bleeding edge of what is possible using off-
the-shelf components. This effort builds on the existing experimental RoboBee
platform at Harvard built with special onboard electronics, which will be used
to record large volumes of flight data. This data can then feed exploration of
machine learning flight control algorithms, which begins with simple hovering
before tackling more challenging maneuvers such as obstacle avoidance and object
tracking. Since hand tuning conventional control algorithms is overly
cumbersome, focus will be on modern computing paradigms that can be taught
rather than programmed. Development and demonstration of autonomous flight
control based on deep learning for insect-scale flapping-wing robots will
broadly impact the fields of microrobotics, machine learning, energy-efficient
computing, and a broad array of autonomous systems, further extending
capabilities of autonomy, to a broad range of robotic platforms, from regular
vehicles to tiny robots of diverse configurations and applications.