* 1724427
* Science Policy Research Report: Regulation, Deregulation, and Technological Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* David Hart, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2018
* USD 49,256.00

Technological innovation is alternatively provided as a rationale for regulation
and for deregulation. The actual impact of regulation and deregulation on
innovation depends on a number of factors, such as the design of the regulation,
the specific industry being regulated and the way in which regulation is
implemented. This research report summarizes this emerging literature for the
policy community, with a focus on the regulation and deregulation of energy
production, sale, and use. Energy is a very large economic sector that has been
subject to a wide variety of regulations over the past century and is vital to
the future of the economy and the environment. The report aims to advance the
national health, prosperity and welfare and improve regulatory policy decision-
making by making this expert literature more readily available and
understandable. It also builds bridges between scholars and policy-makers by
identifying key topics in this field that are of particular interest to the
latter group.

The research for this project involves reviewing literature across several
disciplines, including economics, public administration, management, and
political science. It encompasses all relevant major theoretical and conceptual
frameworks, including profit maximization under perfect information, imperfect
information, information exchange and bargaining, action under uncertainty,
public choice, and regulatory capture. Technologically innovative responses to
regulation and deregulation, particularly in the energy industry, depend on
perceptions and expectations as well as on static economic and technological
tradeoffs. To more fully understand the demand for evidence-based knowledge of
this topic and better frame the synthesis in an accessible way, the researchers
are conducting five to ten interviews with members of the regulatory community,
such as past and present officials of regulatory agencies and representatives of
regulated businesses, labor unions, and public interest organizations.