* 1724218
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Studying Competitive Neural Network Dynamics Elicited By Attractive and Aversive Stimuli and their Mixtures
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Baranidharan Raman, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2021
* USD 469,503.00

This award supports basic research regarding the question of how networks in the
brain allow odors to be detected and perceived. Such a question is of
fundamental interest in neuroscience because responding to odors or scents is
one of the most basic ecological abilities exhibited across different animal
species. Further, responses to odors are highly dependent on context. For
example, certain smells may create both attractive and repulsive reactions,
depending on small differences in dilution or whether they are encountered alone
or as components in a cocktail. Thus, studying how the brain processes odors can
provide important clues regarding how animals and humans sense and perceive in
complex environments. In seeking such understanding, this project uses a unique
combination of methods from neuroscience, mathematics, and engineering. Brain
activity from two different animal species are recorded during experiments in
which odors are presented in isolation and in mixtures. Subsequently, data
analysis and mathematical modeling is used to identify brain activity patterns
that distinguish the reaction of the animals to the odors in question. Hence,
the project uncovers how particular brain networks transform and transmit odor
information in a way that is central to the sense of smell. To broaden the
impact of these studies, the project includes the development of a summer
internship in sensory neural engineering, intended to allow undergraduate and
high school students to learn about and experience how different academic
disciplines contribute to future brain science.

The extent to which sensory networks amplify or suppress perceived differences
in odor valence remains a fundamental, unanswered question in sensory
neuroscience. The overarching hypothesis of this project is that indeed, there
exists a well-defined set of transformations, governed by neuronal dynamics,
which map sensory network activity to behavior. Specifically, the project will
determine: (a) How neural networks enable the formation of time-varying neural
activation patterns, or, trajectories, in response to sensory stimuli, (b) The
mapping from trajectories to behavioral outcome, and (c) The commonality of this
mapping across species. The research goals use an interdisciplinary approach
combining sensory systems neuroscience in two species, locusts (Schistocerca
americana) and round worms (C. elegans), with computational modeling and
dynamical systems theory. Neural and behavioral responses are recorded from
animals receiving nominally attractive and aversive odors, and these data inform
computational models of the sensory networks and ensuing behaviors. The models
generate predictions on how behavioral responses might be modulated by a change
in selectivity, or background state. The latter is tested through a paradigm
wherein animals are systematically fed or starved, thus shifting their response
dynamics on the aversive-attractive spectrum. Subsequently, model-based
sensitivity analyses is used to predict mixture response curves and paradoxical
mixtures (e.g., two aversive stimuli that when mixed, elicit an attractive
response). These predictions are tested by delivering component stimuli in
systematic ratios. Thus, the overall methodology combines physiological
experiments with new systems-level analysis in an integrated, multidisciplinary
modeling-theory loop.