* 1724735
* EAGER: Piloting a multi-campus training program in algorithmic processes, data analytics and mobile computing for sociolegal scholars
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Mona Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,927.00

Changes in technology are revolutionizing the study and practice of law. A
generation ago, law and social science scholars outlined a new paradigm for
legal scholarship, focusing on social, economic and political variables in the
interpretation and execution of the law. Today, algorithmic processes, data
analytics and ubiquitous social and mobile computing pose new opportunities for
the study of the effects of law, rules, and social norms. These new
opportunities invite the use of new methodological techniques in law and social
science research. Yet few law and social science scholars are trained to
understand these new computational processes. This is a pilot of a
collaborative, multidisciplinary, cross-campus network brought together to plan
and train the next generation of law and social science scholars in algorithmic
processes, data analytics and the opportunities presented by ubiquitous social
and mobile computing. It is for the development of a faculty board, new
curriculum, and new training activities to be centered primarily at a
Technology, Law and Society Summer Institute. The goal is to develop the updated
training necessary to ensure that the next generation of socio-legal scholars
are equipped to utilize new methodological techniques and new sites of inquiry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as the consideration of "law-in-action" shifted the
paradigm for legal research by expanding it beyond the exegesis of law as
written and into the domain of what judges, lawyers and citizens actually do
with law and how they understand it in practice, the interface between law and
computer-based and other computational systems offers the opportunity for a new
paradigm shift in socio-legal studies. The proposed series of trainings,
workshops and a summer institute will equip law and social science scholars to
develop methods for the study of these new legal objects and relationships.
During the academic year, participants will test methods and formats for cross-
training and collaboration. The broader impacts include training new researchers
and helping existing law and social science scholars to re-tool; collaborating
with the technology and policy communities to bring law and social science
research to bear on their activities; and fostering cross-disciplinary, cross-
campus collaborations.