* 1724546
* 2017 Neural Crest and Cranial Placodes GRC/GRS (GRS: February 4-5, 2017, GRC: February 5-10, 2017, Ventura, California
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Clare Baker, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 01/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The goal of the Neural Crest and Cranial Placodes Gordon Research Conference
(NC&amp;CP GRC) is to bring researchers together to exchange ideas, form
collaborations, and mentor young scientists studying this area of fundamental
biological research. The neural crest and cranial placodes are temporary
structures in growing embryos that together build all the nerve cells outside
the brain and spinal cord, such as the nerves that control the gut, the sense
organs enabling our senses of smell, hearing and balance, and also the eye
lenses, much of the skull, some cells of the teeth, and all skin pigment cells.
The conference sessions will discuss the evolutionary origins of these essential
structures, and how they work during development to form these different types
of cells and organs. The NC&amp;CP GRC is held in a setting that allows
scientists at all levels to discuss problems and advances in studying these
embryo structures. The program will also allow opportunities to mentor young
scientists of all backgrounds, including an informal forum to discuss the
professional growth and challenges women face in science, and a Graduate
Research Seminar organized and run by junior scientists. This seminar enables
junior researchers to present their data in an informal, peer-group setting, so
they gain confidence and camaraderie, and includes a faculty-led Career
Mentorship Panel discussion, "The Different Faces of Academic Research." A
diverse set of speakers has been assembled, with 19 further talks, selected from
submitted abstracts, to be presented by women, under-represented minorities, and
junior researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neural Crest and Cranial Placodes
Gordon Research Conference (NC&amp;CP GRC) uniquely considers two distinct
embryonic cell types, the neural crest and the cranial placodes, that have
traditionally been studied separately. These embryonic structures together
contribute to a wide variety of cell types during development, including the
entire peripheral nervous system, sense organs, pigment cells, the craniofacial
skeleton, and teeth. Neural crest and cranial placodes are derived from adjacent
domains within the early ectoderm and their initial patterning is influenced by
coordinated signals. They provide integrated, experimentally tractable systems
for investigating a broad array of fundamental questions in cell, developmental,
evolutionary, and systems biology. Study of neural crest cells has pioneered the
understanding of fundamental properties of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions as
well as cell migration, and has been instrumental in defining general stem cell
properties across numerous tissue populations. The use of systems biology
methods to construct the gene regulatory networks that control vertebrate
development has been pioneered in the study of neural crest and cranial
placodes. The emergence and diversification of the neural crest and cranial
placodes is thought to have been critical for vertebrate evolution. This
conference will bring together a diverse group of scientists in a collegial
atmosphere to foster substantive discussions and promote collaboration. It will
accelerate the exchange of information across different model systems, include
an evolutionary perspective, promote technological innovations, and advance
understanding of the underlying cellular mechanisms governing the formation,
cellular behavior, and differentiation of these two critical embryonic
populations.