* 1724540
* Collaborative Research: Improving the Prediction of Sea Ice through Targeted Study of Poorly Parameterized Sea Ice Processes at MOSAiC and Responsive Model Development
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Donald Perovich, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2022
* USD 868,142.00

Climate models project large uncertainty in the rate of future Arctic sea ice
loss and its climate impacts. On multi-decadal timescales, this uncertainty is
largely due to differences in the strength of feedback processes within the
models. For the Arctic system, changes in surface reflection of heat and light
(albedo) dominate the feedback process with the most significant departures in
the surface heat balance. However, models employ relatively crude
representations of many processes that are relevant to surface albedo evolution.
To improve model predictions, we need enhanced parameterizations that are
informed by the collection and analysis of relevant observations. Better Arctic
predictions are particularly critical given the large changes underway and the
urgent need to plan for and adapt to changes soon. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will improve the representation of the sea ice cover and the surface
reflection of heat and light (albedo feedback) in climate models through the
integration of climate model experiments and field measurements. Sensitivity
studies with the Community Earth System Model (CESM) will be used to assess the
relative importance of albedo-related parameterization uncertainties. These
studies will inform the snow, sea ice, and solar radiation observations
conducted as part of the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of
Arctic Climate (MOSAiC) field campaign. Measurements will then fuel process
understanding and parameterization development within CESM. Experiments with the
improved CESM will then be performed to determine the effects of upgraded albedo
feedback characterization for Earth system predictions. The focus will be on
partitioning and fate of solar energy in a seasonal ice system, the role of snow
properties in controlling the sea ice mass balance and radiation budget, and
processes affecting ice-ocean energy exchange and ice mass and area changes.
These are areas for which process understanding is lacking, model
parameterizations are crude, and uncertainties have large effects on model
projections. By integrating modeling and observational work, the basic process
understanding of controls on Arctic solar energy distribution and sea ice mass
budgets will be enhanced. The incorporation of this knowledge in improved model
process representation will strengthen prediction capabilities and allow for a
deeper understanding of the role of the albedo feedback in projected Arctic
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model developments will be incorporated into the
widely-used Los Alamos Community Ice Model (CICE) and made freely available
through standard releases of CESM and CICE. This will improve both climate model
and operational sea ice forecasting systems with wide-ranging societal
implications. Early career polar researchers will be heavily involved in this
project, including opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students and post-
doctoral scholars to be involved in both field and modeling activities. A year-
long sea ice drift experiment also provides an opportunity to capture the
imagination and excitement of students and the public. Educational outreach
efforts will include developing a network of middle school science classes with
national and international participants. Activities will include classroom
visits, hands-on measurement activities, data analysis and hypothesis testing.
Additional outreach will occur through interactions with local science museums
and educational centers.