* 1725521
* Studying Students' Mechanistic Explanations across Undergraduate Chemistry and Biology Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Melanie Cooper, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 598,925.00

Many STEM students have difficulty in transferring ideas and reasoning from one
class to another, for example in transferring knowledge gained in introductory
classes into more advanced classes, or across disciplines. This project will
examine how undergraduate students use core ideas and mechanistic explanations
across introductory courses in three areas: chemistry, cell and molecular
biology, and organismal biology. This study will carefully evaluate how students
are using what they have learned in a prerequisite course when they take
subsequent courses and how this connects with the development of reasoning and
understanding. In particular, students will be asked to generate models that
explain the problems that they are studying, such as why one patient is cured by
an antibiotic while another patient is not. Developing explanations that include
mechanisms and models of how and why things happen is an important skill for
students to master, and will help them as they enter the scientific or
professional workforce. Analysis of these explanations will provide valuable
information about: 1) how students apply ideas from chemistry to biology, and 2)
factors that help students gain skills in developing high-quality explanations
using mechanisms and models. This information will lead to improved teaching
that maximizes student application of ideas between introductory science courses
and supports the development of reasoning skills needed after students graduate
and begin their careers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
take advantage of a unique opportunity for researchers from four departments to
explore the impact of students' mastery of disciplinary ideas and skills at
developing mechanistic explanations on their ability to connect core ideas
across courses. The project will use a cross-sectional, comparative analysis of
students' mechanistic explanations within and across three sequential
introductory courses: chemistry, cell and molecular biology, and organismal
biology. In each course, students will use a combination of diagrams and writing
to explain how and why a series of three related phenomena occur. The
mechanistic explanations will be analyzed for cause-and-effect relationships
between underlying factors needed to provide a scientifically sound explanation
of the phenomena. These analyses will determine: 1) if students in undergraduate
STEM courses use relevant core disciplinary ideas to explain how and why
phenomena occur; 2) how explanation sophistication varies at different points in
the curriculum; 3) the impact of mechanistic explanation sophistication in one
discipline on the use of related disciplinary core ideas to explain phenomena in
other disciplines; and 4) relationships between demographic and academic
variables, explanation sophistication, and success on course exams. Findings
from this study will advance research on the nature of and connections between
students' disciplinary core ideas and explanatory practices beyond single
courses by looking across courses. The assessment tools and analysis techniques
used in this study will provide a foundation for further research in this
understudied area including future longitudinal studies and research on the
impact of instruction on students' abilities to construct sophisticated
explanations. Insights from this work will also be used to develop an evidence-
based instruction framework. The framework will provide a progression of
learning objectives across introductory chemistry and biology courses indicating
what needs to be mastered in each course to produce sophisticated explanations
in subsequent courses. In addition, the framework will document common ways
students use vocabulary to make connections between the courses as well as ways
how differences in vocabulary between courses prevents transfer of ideas across
courses. This framework will serve as a guide for future evidence-based STEM
course and curriculum remodeling efforts geared toward producing well-prepared
citizens and scientists.