* 1725036
* I-Corps: Infrared camera based detection of subsurface veins
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Teja Guda, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from the
use of infra-red visualization technology?s ability to offer patients and
medical practitioners at hospitals and clinics a cost-effective way to reduce
discomfort during procedures requiring peripheral vascular access. The mobility
and simplicity of the visual display also allow same solution to be used by
patients and health care professionals outside the walls of traditional
institutions, and in settings where there is currently limited or no access to
them. Missed vascular access attempts are estimated to cost the U.S. healthcare
system $6 billion dollars annually, and patient satisfaction is currently tied
to Medicare reimbursement. Vascular access is one of the most frequently
preformed procedures in hospitals, and the proposed device provides an
affordable opportunity for those facilities to improve patient satisfaction
across a broad patient population. Blood banks and donation centers rely on
volunteers for their supply and the satisfaction of such donors is crucial to
their ability to recruit future volunteers or repeat-donors. These facilities
are strongly incentivized to provide as positive a patient experience as
possible, starting with minimizing the number of vascular access attempts. The
device can also be adapted for non-clinical situations, such as emergency or
battlefield environments.

This I-Corps project uses the unique interaction of deoxygenated blood with
light at near infrared wavelengths to create a live, real time video feed of the
patients body with the peripheral vasculature clearly differentiated from the
surrounding dermal, arterial, and adipose tissue. This allows for practitioners
to observe the physical location of the veins, get an estimate for relative vein
depth, and observe factors that are known to confound access attempts, such as
vascular movement or rolling. This also allows for superior vein location in
patients with physical traits or impairments that make vascular access more
difficult. A preliminary prototype demonstrates the claims made and rudimentary
testing has been completed to demonstrate functionality in a variety of
environments.