* 1725425
* Collaborative Research: Calibration of Thermochemical Models using Bayesian Methods--Building MELTS 2.0.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Mark Ghiorso, OFM Research
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 71,271.00

Molten rocks are essential to the structure and long-term evolution of the Earth
and other planets. The properties of rocks when heated above their melting point
(including composition, density, heat content, and thermal expansion) all play
important roles in a vast array of geologic processes. These range widely from
the creation of deep magma oceans during the earliest stages of planet formation
all the way to the steady progress of plate tectonics, responsible for creating,
shaping, and destroying the Earth's oceans and continents. Unfortunately, these
geologic processes occur over planetary length-scales and time-scales, playing
out over thousands of kilometers and billions of years. Due to this complexity,
it is not possible to perform experiments that directly probe the evolution of
planetary interiors. Instead, scientist rely upon thermodynamic models, which
can predict the physical and energetic properties of rocks, melts, and fluids
based on the results of laboratory experiments performed under controlled
conditions. The usefulness of these models thus depends entirely upon how well
they are calibrated, including the amount and variety of experimental data as
well as the statistical methods used to extract the thermodynamic modeling
parameters. In this proposal, the team will develop new modeling techniques
needed to improve and extend the geologic thermodynamic models used to predict
the properties of solid and molten rocks at planetary conditions, relevant to
our understanding of rocky planets both within and outside our solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these overarching goals, the
collaborators will design the analytic tools needed to construct flexible and
robust self-consistent thermodynamic models for the geologic community using
Bayesian statistical methods. Currently, the calibration procedure for
thermodynamic databases (like the popular MELTS model) is an unfortunately
onerous task. Updating these models is time-consuming and restricted to the very
few experts with the skills required to integrate new information without
breaking the accuracy and self-consistency of the model. The purpose of this
proposal is to dramatically reduce the challenges associated with recalibration,
enabling simple and rapid incorporation of new experimental data into the
database by a wide variety of users. The proposal objectives are: (1) Design and
create statistical calibration tools (using novel Bayesian techniques) to
simplify thermochemical model building; (2) Expand and augment the calibration
database with the large quantity of previously ignored data, including solid
phase-absent constraints, melt-free sub-solidus experiments, and observations of
melt coexisting with solid phases of unmeasured-composition; (3) Use the new
methods and data to produce MELTS 2.0, a new tunable silicate melts model that
provides model prediction uncertainties, enabling users to rapidly pinpoint and
address model weaknesses. The resulting calibration tool will thus be able to
generate and visualize model prediction distributions - useful for geologic
process modeling, teaching, and future experimental planning -and help to close
the large gap that still exists between model-use and model-design.