* 1725338
* SusChEM: Exploring Links Among U, Fe, and Hydrocarbon Movement in the Paradox Basin, Colorado Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Mark Barton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2020
* USD 98,482.00

The Paradox basin and other sedimentary basins of the Colorado Plateau host many
significant mineral and hydrocarbon resources, including iron, copper, cobalt,
manganese, silver, and oil and gas, and are best known for hosting one of the
world's great uranium-producing provinces. New reconnaissance geological studies
in the Paradox basin revealed unexpected spatial and stratigraphic connections
between uranium mineralization, hydrocarbon migration, and mobility of iron and
other elements. These connections suggest that a new model for uranium
deposition is required: one where oil, and possibly natural gas, leads to
localized trapping of uranium perhaps in mixing zones, in contrast to the
prevailing model where uranium is trapped by organic matter that is indigenous
to the host rock. This new hypothesis does not preclude the alternatives, but it
predicts that the larger deposits may have higher grades and have a distinct and
more localized distribution. Evidence for concurrent redistribution of iron and
other elements suggests that the same fluids move many elements; such element
redistribution gives clues to fluid geochemistry and movement. This project will
advance the fundamental geochemical understanding of metal movement and mass
transport in the Paradox and other sedimentary basins and it may provide novel
approaches to mineral discovery in a region with world-class mineral resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five focus sites along the 100+ km-long Lisbon Valley salt
wall in the Paradox Basin have been selected for field mapping, core logging,
petrographic, fluid inclusion, and elemental and isotopic analyses. The focus
sites represent diverse stratigraphic and structural settings and range from the
deep central part of the basin to the fringes, but all show uranium
mineralization, iron mobility, and bleaching or other evidence of hydrocarbons.
The mapping of alteration minerals, petrography, and whole-rock analyses will be
used to document the distribution and paragenesis of iron, alkali, and base
metal enrichment and depletion at scales from the single deposit to the sub-
region. The investigators will correlate these observations with the
distribution, evolution, and temporal sequence of uranium and related (vanadium,
copper) mineralization and the loci of hydrocarbon reservoirs and migration
paths. Coupled with fluid inclusion and isotopic analyses of alteration minerals
and geochemical modeling to evaluate fluid characteristics and sources, these
data will enable a systematic test of the interplay between metal-bearing
basinal brines, hydrocarbons, and local structures and rock types - e.g. whether
the movement and deposition of U, Fe, and hydrocarbons represent different
facets of a single short-lived system, represent the evolution of a single
system over a long time, or were produced by multiple unrelated superimposed
events. This is a first step toward an integrated approach to studying linkages
among mass transport phenomena in the Paradox Basin, which can be applied on the
Colorado Plateau and worldwide both to understanding the geological and
geochemical evolution of important resource provinces and to exploring and
managing resource development therein.