* 1725340
* Strategies Which Foster Long Term Social Stability
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Sarah Kurnick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2022
* USD 111,921.00

Dr. Sarah Kurnick, of the University of Colorado Boulder, David Rogoff, of
Methodist University, and Maya colleagues in Punta Laguna, Mexico will conduct
archaeological excavation and analysis to understand better how politically
authoritative relationships are regenerated in the wake of major societal
transformations. Those exercising political authority often tie themselves to,
and draw power from, the past. But how, if at all, do leaders use the past in
the aftermath of drastic social change? What happens, in other words, when the
past is traumatic? Do leaders continue to emphasize their ties to the past,
distance themselves from the past, or alter the past to suit present political
needs? This research will also examine whether and how archaeology - and a
detailed knowledge of their past - can empower marginalized groups and alleviate
social inequality. Can greater knowledge of one's history and heritage help
combat economic, social, and political marginalization? To answer these and
related questions, a research team comprised of academic archaeologists and
indigenous Maya individuals will examine the regeneration of Maya society during
the Postclassic period (1100-1500 CE) - the time after the infamous Maya
"collapse" - and in so doing will work collaboratively to generate a better
understanding of ancient Maya history with and for contemporary Maya people. The
research also has the potential for generalization and to provide insight into
processes which occur in the contemporary world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars
have identified the manipulation of the past as a crucial element in the
exercise of political authority. Two common methods of manipulating the past
include the veneration of ancestors and the modification of existing structures
and monuments. Consequently, Dr. Kurnick and colleagues will analyze Postclassic
Maya political authority by using archaeological excavation and analysis to
determine how the Postclassic residents of one specific community - Punta Laguna
- practiced ancestor veneration and whether and how they modified the existing,
Classic period built environment they re-inhabited. Did the Postclassic
inhabitants destroy existing architectural features, venerate them, modify them,
or ignore them? Scholars have further demonstrated that inequality derives, in
part, from the unequal distribution of economic, social, and cultural capital.
The research team will thus work collaboratively with the local community to
design workshops, tour guide trainings, and museum exhibits to produce forms of
capital with and for a local, marginalized group.