* 1725838
* Workshop: Grammar across the Curriculum: Workshop at 2017 Linguistic Institute
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Scott Schwenter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2018
* USD 8,356.00

From a linguistic perspective, "grammar" refers to the system of implicit rules
that govern the construction of words, phrases and sentences in a language. This
award will support a one-day workshop about the teaching of grammar from a
descriptive linguistic viewpoint, addressing the challenges, opportunities, and
strategies for grammar instruction across the curriculum. Understanding
grammatical structure is a central part of understanding human language, and
linguistic knowledge is increasingly seen as part of the core knowledge students
should acquire as part of their education at the primary, secondary, and higher
education levels. The workshop will educate junior scientists and teachers,
improving grammar pedagogy, and increasing dialogue about connections between
linguistic research and teaching. Furthering linguistic knowledge on the part of
the public is additionally important for addressing linguistic prejudice that
exists in society; the workshop will include discussion of how dialect variation
can be incorporated into grammar courses, as a way of improving understanding
about language as one dimension of social diversity. By facilitating
collaborative dialogue about the links between linguistic research on grammar
and grammar pedagogy, the workshop will simultaneously contribute to linguistics
research and teaching concerns. Ultimately, the event will develop an agenda for
making grammar pedagogy a more systematic concern, as part of a larger project
of increasing attention to the scholarship of teaching and learning in
linguistics.

Five invited speakers, all respected scholars and experienced teachers of
grammar and related subjects, will address themes related to the teaching and
learning of grammar: Attitudes, Goals, Frameworks, or First- Versus Second-
Language Study. Each speaker's talk will be followed by ample time for a
question-and-answer session, enabling audience members to respond and
contribute. Two other sessions will provide opportunities for interaction,
exchange, and practical implementation. To address a larger theme of Methods, a
methods-sharing session will allow participants the opportunity to present their
own teaching tools, assignments, or strategies, and to get feedback on potential
strategies. A final roundtable will give participants the opportunity to raise
new questions or revisit unanswered ones.