* 1725931
* MRI: Acquisition of an ion chromatograph mass spectrometer for research and education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Yaoling Long, Voorhees College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 259,392.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation, and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs. Professor Jianye Zhang from Voorhees
College and colleagues Omar Bagasra (Claflin University) and Yaoling Long (South
Carolina State University) are acquiring an ion-chromatograph mass-spectrometer
that serves three Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex
samples. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer
where they are ionized and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows the detection and determination of the structure of molecules
in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
the university and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by
involving a diverse group of students in research and training using this modern
analytical technique. Because the investigator team includes researchers from
three HBCUs: Voorhees, Claflin and South Carolina State University, there is a
positive effect on undergraduate student researcher. These institutions have
populations that are more than 95% African American and more than 60% female. By
using the popular communication/social media tools, as well as the publication
in journals and conferences, the impact of the project reaches broader audiences
and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mass spectrometer enhances research
and education at all levels. It impacts research investigations of arsenic
speciation in sulfidic environments and in evaluating the products of the
reaction. The mass spectrometer is also used in studies of the interference
mechanisms and antimetabolic effects of natural phytochemicals (Amygdalin) that
might be useful to understand cancerous processes. The instrument also serves
researchers designing and selecting porous materials for lithium recovery from
the environment.