* 1725401
* Applications of Field Theory to Condensed Matter Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Eduardo Fradkin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 660,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education aimed at understanding condensed matter systems whose
behavior is governed by strong effects of quantum mechanics and strong
interactions between their constituent electrons. Such understanding could lead
to the prediction of new states of matter with novel properties as well as to
the discovery of new materials with potentially useful
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his collaborators have predicted
the existence of strongly interacting quantum states of matter, named
intertwined orders, in which electrons organize themselves in complex patterns.
Intertwined orders describe physical systems in which, due to the strong
interactions between the constituent electrons, different and seemingly
competing types of organization coexist and emerge together with nearly equal
strength. Superconductors are a relevant example. These are materials in which,
at sufficiently low temperatures, electrons enter a cooperative quantum
mechanical state that enables them to conduct electricity without any
resistance. High-temperature superconductors are a particularly interesting
species because they exhibit superconductivity at much higher temperatures than
many other known classes of superconductors. The PI's proposed state of matter
may help explain how this is possible, and how materials that exhibit
superconductivity at room temperature might be discovered. This could lead to
virtually lossless transmission of electric power and other energy-related
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The other focus of the research concerns the
understanding of new states of matter, called topological phases, which are
essentially immune to the usually destructive effects that disorder and other
defects have on material properties. Topological phases are predicted to have
unusual properties that could enable computation based on the laws of quantum
mechanics. A quantum computer could solve certain problems much faster than any
currently existing computer.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves
cutting-edge problems in the physics of materials and provides excellent
opportunities to train the next generation of theoretical scientists. It also
opens new possibilities for future technologies related to advanced solid-state
materials for electronic devices. Research and education will be further
integrated through the development of advanced curricular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education aimed at understanding condensed matter systems involving many
strongly coupled degrees of freedom whose behavior is governed by strong effects
of quantum mechanics. The electrons in such strongly correlated systems organize
spontaneously in electronic liquid-crystal phases and in topological phases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An unavoidable feature of these phases is that they
naturally describe intertwined orders. The main focus of the project is on the
theory of intertwined orders in strongly correlated systems, and on topological
phases of matter. Both lines of research require the development of new
theoretical insights and the use of methods and ideas from quantum field theory.
The projects include studies of the emergence of pair-density-wave
superconducting states in microscopic models, both in a quasi-one-dimensional
setting and in ladder systems, developing an effective field theory of pair-
density-wave and charge 4e superconducting states, and uncovering the mechanism
connecting electronic nematic order and superconductivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's work on topological phases of matter aims to
establish a relation between electronic nematic order and paired quantum Hall
states (a form of intertwined orders), and to develop the lattice Chern-Simons
gauge theory of frustrated quantum antiferromagnets, with applications to the
theory of fractionalized Chern insulators. An important new project aims at
finding a relation between the theory of quantum critical loops that the PI
developed earlier and the recently conjectured quantum dualities for Dirac
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves cutting-edge problems in the
physics of materials and provides excellent opportunities to train the next
generation of theoretical scientists. It also opens new possibilities for future
technologies related to advanced solid-state materials for electronic devices.
Research and education will be further integrated through the development of
advanced curricular materials.