* 1725389
* Communities Supporting Teacher Learning: Using Videocase Analysis of Teaching and Learning to Support Undergraduate Preservice Secondary Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Betty Stennett, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,807,423.00

This project seeks to address the conundrum of multiple and inconsistent models
of teaching that individuals experience as K-12 students, as undergraduate
students in STEM courses, as pre-service teachers in education courses, and when
they go into schools and work with cooperating teachers. It is often difficult
for pre-service science teachers to know what constitutes best practices for
teaching science. These pre-service teachers encounter a wide variation in
teaching practices throughout their educational careers, first as students in
K-12 classrooms and then in undergraduate STEM courses, as well as in pre-
service education courses in which they are confronted with educational theory
and practices that are often incongruent with these other two experiences. In
the last stage of their undergraduate pre-service teacher preparation, they are
placed in schools to begin their internship teaching classes alongside a
cooperating teacher, who may not have a teaching and learning philosophy that is
consistent with the evidence-based best practices promoted in their pre-service
STEM education courses. How are pre-service science teachers expected to develop
an effective model for teaching and learning with confounding messages from
their experiences? This project will study the effects of developing a strong
community of support for pre-service teachers preparing to teach secondary
science as they develop a common vision for teaching and learning based on the
Science Teachers Learning from Lesson Analysis (STeLLA) Conceptual Framework.
The community will include university science faculty, university education
faculty, and cooperating teachers that the pre-service teachers encounter along
their preparation journey as an undergraduate. The community will apply the
STeLLA approach to their own courses that pre-service teachers take as part of
their teacher preparation programs. The pre-service teachers in participating
universities will receive a consistent message--one that has over a decade of
research on the approach. This project will also examine three different
instantiations of the model as it is implemented across different universities
with secondary pre-service science teachers. It will employ a Videocase Analysis
of Teaching and Learning (VATL) model, backed by evidence from the STeLLA
approach, for a coherent approach to science teacher preparation. This important
work is supported with funding from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
program and the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a strong line of research
dating back to 2004 that studied a successful model of professional learning
with elementary teachers and elementary pre-service teachers (STeLLA; Roth et
al., 2011; Taylor et al., 2017). This VATL project will leverage and study the
STeLLA professional learning model with undergraduate pre-service teachers
preparing to teach secondary science. VATL has two key phases. In the first
phase, the lead institution engages a community of undergraduate pre-service
teacher leaders (university science faculty, university education faculty, and
school district cooperating teachers) in developing an understanding of the
STeLLA professional development model and creating a shared vision of how to
apply the STeLLA model in each of the three university settings. After the first
phase, each university will have their own pre-service course built on a shared
understanding of the STeLLA model, as well as science and education faculty
members incorporating STeLLA approaches in their own teaching in other relevant
courses. In the second phase of the project, the community of teacher leaders
implements this course at their respective institutions with pre-service
teachers. The impact of this new program on pre-service teachers and their
students will be studied using a quasi-experimental pretest-posttest control
group design. Outcomes for secondary science pre-service teachers include
content knowledge (pre and post), ability to code videos for key teaching
strategies (pre and post), and classroom practice (post only). The outcome for
middle and high school students will be a content knowledge measure (pre and
post). Because secondary pre-service science teachers often teach across all
science disciplines, the study will include content outcomes across science
disciplines. The study will include approximately 66 pre-service secondary
science teachers in the quasi-experiment, along with roughly 2,000 middle and
high school students in the state of Colorado. This project will inform the
community of researchers and educators about the potential efficacy of the
highly successful STeLLA professional learning model in a new context:
undergraduate secondary pre-service science programs. Research findings will
also be able to show how variations on implementation, across three universities
in Colorado, may affect the outcomes.