* 1725571
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanofabrication and Materials Research Etching System
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Nathan Newman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 09/30/2020
* USD 770,604.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The primary
problem to be studied with the advanced material etching system is the
nanofabrication of optical and electronic devices from state-of-the-art
materials such as semiconductors, which are key to the information technology
revolution that we presently enjoy. Etching is generally described as the
removal of a material to make a pattern and was first practiced by applying
acidic solutions to metals centuries ago. The advanced etching system to be used
in these studies is capable of using gases to dry etch a wide variety of
materials of technological importance, including silicon, other semiconductors,
metals, glass, and plastic. The information technology revolution has been
fueled by the ability to make smaller and smaller structures in such materials,
thereby increasing the density of computing power in a given area. This research
is critical for continuing to advance the state-of-the-art in nanofabrication so
that the benefits of information technology can continue to grow and
proliferate, by enabling advances in photonics, electronics, Nano-printing,
materials science, and materials physics among other areas. The advanced
material etching system will provide for a holistic teaching approach,
consisting of the key steps of design, patterning (by etching), and testing,
which will prepare students for jobs in the semiconductor, communications and
aerospace industries, to name a few. By having the entire process flow
available, students will be able to master the individual steps and tailor their
use of all tools to their own research projects. A standardized training program
for students will be developed and the research-training goal is for students
from all disciplines is to carry through a nanofabrication task that uses the
advance material etching system in conjunction with other tools in the
University of Arizona's Optical Sciences nanofabrication facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The primary motivation for
this work is to complement an ultra-high resolution 100 kilovolt electron beam
lithography system and high speed maskless lithography system with a state-of-
the-art inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching system, to thereby
establish a regional hub for nanofabrication and nanosciences. The system has
capabilities, such as cryoetching and multiple endpoint control techniques that
are not available anywhere else in Arizona and the surrounding region. The
system will enable research on all aspects of nanophotonic device and materials
development, ranging from fundamental materials processing, to nanophotonic
modulators, to establishing manufacturable procedures for photonic circuit
interconnection; ongoing efforts in microelectromechanical devices such as
microfabricated ion traps and diffractive optical elements; and advanced optical
masks for exoplanet exploration. Semiconductor processing will be enhanced by
the availability of spectroscopic capabilities that can enable atomic layer
etching, while fundamental device research in two-dimensional materials such as
graphene will also benefit; the system will further provide cryogenic etching
for high aspect ratio nanostructures, crucial for organic electronics; the
fabrication of metal-insulator-semiconductor capacitors and sensors;
microelectronics development for Internet-of-Things devices, as well as novel
Josephson junctions and microwave resonators. A standardized research training
program will be established for students that will be based around the
fabrication of optical ring resonator filters in silicon or silicon nitride;
ring resonators are very common devices in silicon photonics. An introduction to
the optical background needed to understand the functioning of such a device
will be provided, with the critical hands-on part of the work consisting of
defining the structure through e-beam lithography, etching the structures with
the advanced etching instrument, and testing the fabricated devices in
established testbeds.