* 1725837
* GeT Support: An online professional learning community to support the geometry course for teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Patricio Herbst, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,299,864.00

This project seeks to provide a mechanism and resources for improving the
alignment of the Geometry for Teachers (GeT) course with the mathematical
knowledge needed for the teaching of high school geometry, as well as for
meeting the demands of the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. Although
teacher certification in most states requires that teachers have a course in
Euclidean geometry, because Euclidean geometry is no longer an area of active
mathematical research, mathematicians tend to be less invested in this course.
Yet, the teaching and learning of geometry is still vital in high school to
induct students into mathematical reasoning. This project will develop and
implement a system of professional support for the improvement of the GeT course
that mathematics departments teach to pre-service secondary teachers. This
project will convene a network of 24 college instructors and 8 high school
geometry teachers to create an inter-institutional system of professional
support anchored in an online platform and a set of common resources. The
project will develop a professional learning community that will use and draw
information from an existing assessment instrument, and that will use the
resources of an online platform to share and interact about resources for the
course. The project will generate information that describes how geometry
courses for teachers contribute in preparing future teachers to teach geometry
in high school and documents the association between participation in the
professional development and students' gains in mathematical knowledge for
teaching geometry. The project will contribute improvements to the assessment of
mathematical knowledge for teaching geometry that enable instructors to use this
assessment for diagnostic and formative purposes. The project team will study
the assessment results, and examine the interactions among instructors and
materials with the goal of documenting the difficulties that instructors
experience and using an iterative process to address identified
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage mathematics faculty
and high school geometry teachers in a range of online forums destined to
connect MKT-G (mathematical knowledge for teaching geometry) with the GeT
course. To gather diagnostic and formative feedback for these activities,
faculty teaching GeT will administer MKT-G assessments to their undergraduate
students and answer a survey of curriculum and instruction practices every year.
Participants will be involved in online forums in which they will examine the
work high school students do in geometry, examine how pre-service teachers solve
MKT-G problems, and discuss issues of course conceptualization, curriculum
development, and pedagogy. The project staff will examine changes over time in
MKT-G scores and on instructional practices, as well as distill from the online
discussions observations about the rationality that GeT instructors involve in
their work. This will allow the project to provide recommendations for improving
the alignment between the high school geometry course and the GeT course. In
doing so, the project will contribute to the institutional support of the GeT
course in ways that no single mathematics department can, given the limited
presence of the courses in most university mathematics departments. The proposed
system of professional support for college geometry instructors will collect
artifacts, house discussions, and create resources for assessment and
instruction that will be usable beyond the group of participants. The resources
will be open to all geometry instructors in Year 5 of the project and beyond.
The archived discussions will be a rich resource for use by college geometry
instructors long term. The project will increase mutual awareness between
instructors of the geometry course for teachers and teachers of the high school
geometry course--the nature of the activities proposed broaden the scope of work
of both groups of individuals. The project is supported by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Program and the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program of the Division of Undergraduate Education in the
Directorate of Education and Human Resources.