* 1725513
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoindentation Equipment for Research and Education Training in Nanomechanical Characterization of NanoBio Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,455.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activity of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences enables Tuskegee University (TU) to acquire a state-of-the-art Hysitron
TI-980 Triboindenter to strengthen its research capability in the emerging areas
of nanobio, self-healing materials and other structural and multifunctional
materials. Particularly, the instrument will improve TU's research support
infrastructure by giving TU a unique set of resources to pursue funding in the
micro/nanomechanical aspects of material behavior. The instrument will be used
by faculty and students at TU and those at collaborating partners, thereby
encouraging synergistic research collaborations. In addition, a collection of
course related projects and experiments will be made available to undergraduate
and graduate students. Also, the addition of this facility will assist TU
faculty in developing new proposals that will not only help understand the
fundamental science of materials, but will also help TU to produce a talented
and well qualified pool of African-American graduates with the necessary
training to compete in a market for high technology applications. It is also
anticipated that the fundamental studies delineated in this proposal will
eventually result in advancing the nanobio materials applications in aerospace,
automobile, biomedical and pharmaceutical areas. Results generated through these
research projects will be disseminated through journal and conference
publications for the benefit of the scientific community. Tuskegee University
(TU) has, over the years with support from National Science Foundation (NSF) and
other federal agencies, developed a program of research and education in
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), which is not only very comprehensive
but also very effective in recruiting, motivating, mentoring and graduating
students with advanced degrees in MSE. The program has produced the largest
number minority PhDs in MSE of which over 50 percent are
female.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Bulk properties of multiphase composite
materials (nanoparticles, polymers, fibers) largely depend on the response on
how individual phases perform and the load transfer at the interface of these
phases which is of a length scale of less than 5 micrometers. Moreover, the
structural scale of materials such as polymers, films, bone scaffolds, skin
tissue etc. is in nanometers. Also, the polymer properties are highly time-
temperature-frequency sensitive due to its inherent viscoelastic nature, and its
performance varies significantly at small length scales. Therefore, nanoscale
characterization of these materials is extremely critical in understanding the
fundamental behavior. Automated state-of-the-art TI-980 TriboNanoindentation
equipment is suited for characterizing properties at nano/micro scale due to its
high spatial resolution and throughput. The specific studies that will be
carried out using the proposed automated nanoindenter include: Biobased resin
polymeric nanocomposites as a scaffold material for bone tissue engineering
applications, Nanomechanics of skin in the transdermal delivery proteins and
vaccines after microneedle treatment, Polymer nanocomposites for structural
applications, Self-healing of composites using microcapsule bleeding concept,
and Probing the interfacial adhesion of perovskite solar cells. To accomplish
these broad range of research activities, the tribonanoindenter system is
equipped with modules for dynamic mechanical analysis; extended travel stage and
optical microscope with color camera; high load transducer; nanoscale
electromechanical characterization; high-resolution mechanical property mapping;
high-temperature stage, and ultra-low force mechanical characterization. This
state-of-the art all-in-one equipment will serve as an excellent tool in
developing science and technology of nanobio materials, while enhancing the
research and education capabilities at Tuskegee University (TU).