* 1725077
* 2017 EFRI ACQUIRE Grantees Meeting, San Jose, May 14, 2017
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Shayan Mookherjea, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2017
* USD 26,500.00

This proposal requests funds for the "2017 EFRI ACQUIRE Grantees Meeting",the
first annual meeting for the NSF-funded Advancing Communication and Quantum
Information Research in Engineering (ACQUIRE) program. It will be held, this
year, on May 14, 2017 at the San Jose Convention Center, San Jose, California,
United States. The goal of this one-day grantees meeting is to review current
grantees research progress, hear about latest international research progress in
this area, discuss future research opportunities and challenges in a workshop-
like environment through breakout sessions, and provide feedback to ACQUIRE
researchers. The support requested in this grant will be distributed to invited
speakers and students to partially defray travel costs, and to help cover a
portion of other key logistical and organizational costs. This meeting provides
an opportunity for grantees students to make poster presentations to, and get
feedback from reviewers, ACQUIRE PI's and plenary invited speakers. The workshop
will provide inter-disciplinary interactions between engineering and physics
disciplines for enabling student participation and learning opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this one-day grantees
meeting is to review current grantees research progress, discuss future research
in the ACQUIRE program, and provide feedback. Engineering and physics
researchers are confronting major challenges in a four-year quest to engineer
micro-scale quantum communication system components for large-scale networks.
The challenging goal is to create a compact and practical quantum communication
technology operating near room temperature with low energy in a fiber optic
network with entangled photons. A diverse range of topics and techniques are
being investigated, including sources, detectors, up-converters, quantum
memories, synchronizers, error correctors, etc. with various material platforms.
This annual grantees meeting offers an opportunity for recommendations for the
ACQUIRE program and future growth of the related and broader topics of quantum
optical communications research, and secure optical communications with key
researchers and decision makers from academia, industry, government laboratories
and funding agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of educational aspects, this
meeting provides an opportunity for grantees students to make poster
presentations to, and get feedback from reviewers, ACQUIRE PI's and plenary
invited speakers who represent the broad international diversity of this topic.
Students will benefit and learn from attending and scribing focused breakout
session discussions. Students will benefit from discussions involving different
perspectives ranging from university experts and industry scientists, and be
exposed to diverse aspects of quantum optical communications which bridge
traditional physics and engineering disciplines.