* 1725491
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope to Enhance Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Michelle Personick, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 202,300.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Michelle Personick from
Wesleyan University and colleagues are acquiring a field emission scanning
electron microscope (FE-SEM). The instrument focuses a beam of electrons at a
sample. The electrons interact with the sample to produce an image of the
material. The SEM is a workhorse tool in many fields which study the composition
and structure of materials. The research enabled by the FE-SEM addresses
fundamental societal issues and broad ranging questions involving the
sustainable production of chemicals and energy, the origin of the Earth's
oceans, and the paleo-carbon dioxide concentration of the atmosphere. The FE-SEM
is integrated into six courses, in line with Wesleyan's commitment to the
training of undergraduate students, even those who do not participate in faculty
research. The instrument is also made available for use by faculty from
surrounding primarily undergraduate institutions.

This field emission scanning electron microscope enhances research and education
at all levels. It impacts research on the use of bimetallic nanoparticles for
sustainable catalysis and the study of charge carrier transport in
nanomaterials. The instrumentation is also used in searching for water on the
moon and Mars, investigating mineralogy of minerals relevant to Mars, and
reconstructing paleo-atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. The microscope is used
by researchers studying micropaleontology as well as exploring fault processes
and earthquake mechanics. In addition, this field emission scanning electron
microscope is used in the analysis of Antarctic marine sediments - exploring
sediment geochemistry and diagenesis.