* 1725508
* MRI: Acquisition of an Eye Tracking System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Anthony Barnhart, Carthage College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 37,190.00

This award supports the purchase of an EyeLink Portable Duo eye-tracking system
in the interest of advancing scientific exploration by faculty and undergraduate
researchers at Carthage College, a small, liberal-arts institution. The EyeLink
system provides researchers with a continuous report of where a participant is
looking on a computer screen (relative to events within an experimental
protocol) via the non-invasive measurement of near-infrared light waves as they
bounce off the participant's cornea. Most of the eye-movements that people make
are not under their conscious control. Consequently, eye-movements are a robust
measure of online cognitive activity across many contexts and are frequently
used as a proxy measure for attention. Researchers across disciplines at
Carthage College will be using the EyeLink to explore a variety of topics,
including: The relationship between eye-movements and awareness, how acuity
changes across the visual field, the timecourse of eye-movement planning, the
readability of fonts, interaction with video games, and visual search behaviors
of expert and novice paleontologists at an archaeological dig. Beyond
facilitating research, the EyeLink will be integrated with content in
Psychological Science courses to ground and reinforce relevant concepts and
increase student exposure to cutting-edge research methods. All the proposed
studies - discussed below -will involve undergraduate researchers, thus
affording students a rich opportunity to gain hands-on experience with this
state-of-the-art research tool. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two principal
investigators are faculty in the Department of Psychological Science who
regularly engage undergraduates in senior thesis and summer research projects,
and affiliated faculty from a variety of other departments have expressed
interest in integrating the EyeLink into their research programs and student
projects. The principal investigators study how information is sampled from the
visual environment. The EyeLink will facilitate more direct testing of
hypotheses in this domain. One study will explore whether entrainment to an
irrelevant auditory rhythm impacts saccade generation during reading, an outcome
that could adjudicate between competing models of eye-movements in reading. In a
similar vein, a series of studies will explore the occurrence of express
saccades, saccadic eye movements with a short latency (80-100 msec), during
viewing of naturalistic environments. This interest in perception under
naturalistic viewing conditions is echoed in two other projects. The first
explores whether factors moderating attentional capture in artificial laboratory
tasks continue to impact capture with dynamic, real-world stimuli. The second
examines visual field inhomogeneities under more naturalistic conditions.