* 1725252
* MRI: Acquisition of a Zeiss PALM Microscope for Molecular and Microbiological Research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Kathleen Treseder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 365,812.00

This award funds the acquisition of a PALM microscope that enables individual
cells and tissue sections to be manipulated and sub-sampled from complex
mixtures of cells and tissues. The microscope has two main features: the "laser
optical tweezers" allow cells to be moved and separated from one another, and
the "microdissection" feature allows cells and tissues to be cut out and
isolated for downstream analyses. The instrument will form the core of a shared,
interdisciplinary facility that serves researchers at the University of
California, Irvine (UCI) and others in southern California. In addition to its
vital role as a research hub, the facility will be used to train graduate and
undergraduate students, and will support science outreach for local school-aged
students from underrepresented groups in the sciences. The PALM microscope will
have a strong positive impact on marine and other environmental research,
training, and teaching. The microscope will provide a core facility in which
researchers can collaborate, and where instructors can offer students hands-on
access to a cutting edge instrument to provide authentic research experiences to
graduate students and undergraduates. Over half of the incoming undergraduates
at UCI each year are the first in their families to attend college, and the
majority are from underrepresented minority groups; hence, strengthening marine
and environmental research and teaching supports a diverse community of learners
in southern California. The specific broader impacts plan includes (1) direct
training of student researchers to support UCI's commitment to conducting
progressive interdisciplinary research, (2) generating passion for field
research and providing authentic research experiences for UCI undergraduates
through the microscope's incorporation into an "Aquatic Field Methods" course at
UCI, and (3) inspiring curiosity and enthusiasm in young learners in local
community schools via the UCI Laboratory Experiments and Activities in the
Physical Sciences (LEAPS) Program, which organizes visits and hands-on-
activities for middle school students from the culturally diverse Santa Ana
school district. The LEAPS educational program will include core oceanography
curriculum, feature research-oriented mini-lectures, demonstrations, and a
laboratory tour. Students will work with real data to practice graphing
techniques and will explore the beauty of microscopy photographs by completing a
mixed media art project inspired by specimens they view using the
PALM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PALM microscope will enable fine scale
manipulation, microdissection, and sampling of cells and tissue sections,
enabling researchers to apply the newest molecular and microbiological
techniques at the single-cell level. Research that will be supported by the
instrument fall into two broad categories: (1) research that sorts and separates
single cells or groups of cells with similar characteristics using optical laser
tweezers followed by collection via microdissection, and (2) research that seeks
to excise tissue or biofilm sections via laser microdissection. Examples include
sorting individual phytoplankton cells that express a particular enzyme from
mixed assemblages of cells in environmental samples, to excising fungal tissue
sections with specific traits from intact specimen. The common theme of all the
projects the PALM facility will support is that the very fine scale resolution
and sorting capabilities of the microscope will allow more detailed and
mechanistic questions to be answered by honing in on cells or tissue sections of
interest. This will enable researchers to apply cutting edge molecular
techniques on very precise samples with known phenotypic/physiological
characteristics, an ability heretofore unavailable for these types of complex,
mixed environmental samples that are too large for cell sorters and too small
for traditional dissecting microscopes.