* 1725266
* EAR-PF:   Climate sensitivity in mountain lakes of the Sierra Nevada, CA: controls on thermal regimes and carbon cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Adrianne Smits, Smits                   Adrianne       P
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2020
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Adrianne Smits has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and educational activities at the University of California, Davis.
The main research goal is to examine how physical characteristics of high
elevation lakes mediate the influence of snowmelt in determining lake
temperature and carbon chemistry. This study will advance understanding of
interactions between climate, geomorphology, and lake temperature in high
elevation watersheds, as well as landscape controls on carbon cycling in
mountain lakes. This study will benefit water resource management in mountain
regions by developing models that predict high elevation lake temperature and
identify lake sensitivity to climate change. Dr. Smits will directly involve
undergraduate students in the proposed research, training them in scientific
methods and analysis. In addition, Dr. Smits will develop education and outreach
materials that integrate art and science via collaboration with the Art/Science
Fusion Program at UC Davis, in order to communicate the results of this research
with broad audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are
(i) to develop predictive empirical models of high elevation lake temperature by
investigating how local and regional drivers interact to affect lake heat
budgets and warming rates and (ii) to quantify landscape patterns and controls
on ecosystem metabolism and carbon emissions in mountain lakes. A combination of
in-situ high frequency temperature data, remote sensing products, heat budget
algorithms, and time series analyses will be used to achieve the first
objective. Dr. Smits will improve existing algorithms for quantifying lake heat
budgets by including the advectic role of snowmelt, therefore better reflecting
the hydrology of mountain lakes. To achieve the second objective, Dr. Smits will
conduct a multi-lake survey of carbon biogeochemistry across relevant
environment gradients and will use an oxygen mass balance approach to quantify
ecosystem metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.