* 1725763
* EAR-PF:  The role of temperature of the crust and lithosphere in the magnitude and style of far-field deformation: EarthScope Transportable Array in Interior Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* JENNY NAKAI, Nakai                   Jenny
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Jenny Nakai has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship to carry out
research and education activities at the University of New Mexico. Seismic data
from the NSF-funded Transportable Array in Alaska and northwestern Canada are
being utilized to investigate how deformation of a continent far from a plate
boundary is controlled by the material properties of the Earth's crust and upper
mantle. The influence of temperature, and therefore the strength, of the crust
and upper mantle on topography of Interior Alaska north of the Alaska Range and
a large (2000 km long), potentially weak continental fault are being explored.
Analyzing the temperature of the crust and upper mantle will lead to improved
understanding of why strike-slip faults form inland of major continental
boundaries. Undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities in earth
science are participating in the research. The PI is engaging in outreach to the
Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program and Albuquerque Native American
community college and undergraduate students in order to disseminate results and
expose students to active Geophysics and Seismology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature of the lithosphere is known to
influence the style of deformation inland of a major plate boundary (for
example, in Tibet), but data sets on a continental scale in these environments
are rare. The advent of the Transportable Array in Alaska and northwestern
Canada provides the opportunity to investigate the strength profile of the crust
and lithosphere. Key methodologies will include using Pn seismic velocities to
constrain upper mantle lithologies and extrapolate upper mantle heat flow and
investigating seismic energy attenuation using local earthquakes to infer
temperature of the crust and upper mantle. The resulting lithologic and
temperature constraints will be combined with local geologic information to
recover strength profiles of the crust and lithosphere. The profiles will be
interpolated to produce a 3D map of crustal and upper mantle strength throughout
Interior Alaska, a region which the seismological community knows little about
due to its inaccessibility. Results will be jointly interpreted with existing
geophysical data to determine the role of rheology and temperature in the far-
field deformation of the continent, and as a consequence, earthquake hazard in
Interior Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.