* 1725265
* RUI: Paleobiology of the Eocene Giraffe Fossil Locality: Response of an Arctic Ecosystem to a Greenhouse Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Peter Siver, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 226,763.00

Global warming is proceeding at an unprecedented rate and one that will
ultimately result in large-scale reorganizations of ecosystems worldwide with
greater impacts at high latitudes and with shifts in climate patterns. Responses
of these northern ecosystems could be varied: some organisms may disappear, some
may thrive, and still others migrate to these Arctic regions. Although the
answers to these questions are largely unknown due to the lack of modern
analogs, potential answers lie buried in the fossil record of ecosystems that
existed when the Earth was engulfed in a greenhouse world. Giraffe Pipe is the
best known geologic analog of an Arctic lake that existed under a warm climate.
The main objective of this project will be to utilize the microfossil remains to
reconstruct the evolution of this Arctic lake ecosystem. Undergraduate students
will be involved in the research, a high school teacher will be trained in
methods, and an interactive presentation will be developed with the Connecticut
Library Consortium for public use.&lt;br/&gt;The study will develop a novel
suite of proxies that incorporate attributes of individual microfossil taxa and
whole ecosystems; there will then be used to reconstruct the ontogeny of the
Giraffe waterbody. Shifts in biological organizations, changes in chemical
conditions, and modifications of the physical setting will be resolved and
coupled with regional climate through concurrent pollen analyses. The findings
will also document associations of organisms that were highly successful at
colonizing warm water habitats and simultaneously able to survive long, dark,
and mild Arctic winters. Further, the work will result in documentation of
numerous new fossil species, contribute to the evolutionary histories of poorly
studied organisms, and document the migration capabilities and survival
strategies of microbes under changing environmental conditions. In summary, the
Giraffe locality represents an unparalleled opportunity to examine an Arctic
lake ecosystem and the numerous organisms that inhabited it, under a warm
greenhouse world.