* 1725932
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared Use Integrated Next-Generation Sequencing Platform
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* John Gaynor, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 202,125.00

An award is made to Montclair State University (MSU) to purchase a Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) platform (Illumina MiSeq) to expand and update the
shared-use genomic infrastructure of MSU, Seton Hall University, Passaic County
Community College, and Bergen Community College. NGS technologies have
revolutionized the biological sciences and until now have, for the most part,
been sheltered from undergraduate research and teaching institutions.
Acquisition of the MiSeq will immediately improve the teaching infrastructure of
all involved institutions. The MiSeq system will in effect impact ethnically
diverse students both in the classroom and in field/laboratory -based research
programs. The student body at MSU is growing at an astonishingly fast rate
(9%/year). With this increase in student body size, the number of MSU research
faculty is likewise increasing. The MiSeq will be incorporated into well-
established biology classes and ultimately a new NGS elective class will be
formulated targeting undergraduates early on in their careers. These classes
will effectively train students in laboratory-based research projects where they
will learn experimental design, effective use of NGS, analysis, interpretation,
and dissemination of the DNA data sets in scientific paper format. These classes
will have the added benefit of training students wishing to enter into the
biotechnology workforce further strengthening the economy. The NGS certification
workshops will help advance the careers of participants or give attendees an
advantage when applying for jobs in biotechnology or even graduate school. The
annual NGS public talks will help to educate the community at large in regards
to what is possible in the age of NGS hopefully inspiring the next generation of
future scientists. Upcoming scientists in surrounding high schools will also
gain inspiration through the Weston Scholars Program (high school student
science mentoring).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MiSeq will support the ever-
expanding DNA based research projects being investigated by the faculty,
students, and collaborators at all involved institutions. These projects are
both multi/inter-disciplinary covering various sub-disciplines within biology,
medicine, chemistry, and ecology. In the immediate future, these projects
include: 1) Examine the evolutionary loss of functional teeth genes across
vertebrate animals; 2) Determine the diet of gelatinous animals such as
jellyfish; 3) Identify jellyfish venom genes with potential applications to the
treatment of human ailments; 4) Further investigate gene regulation in maize
(corn), an agriculturally important crop; 5) Investigate the genetic variation
and uniqueness among wildlife pathogens implicated in amphibian declines and
mass mortality events worldwide; 6) Characterize the biodiversity of microbes in
multiple soil types (e.g. organic soils, contaminated soils); 7) Characterize
macroinvertebrate biodiversity in New Jersey streams; 8) Characterize the
microorganisms making up harmful algal blooms in order to better manage these
blooms and protect drinking and recreational waters; 9) Further explore
causative agents of cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms by looking at the metal
stress response; 10) Further develop parallel computing software to generate
phylogenetic trees; 11) Identify molecular changes that could be targeted for
treatment when the parasite responsible for lymphatic filarialsis
(elephantiasis) undergoes stress.