* 1725618
* MRI: Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope to Enable Cross-Disciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 12/31/2020
* USD 471,519.00

Researchers in several colleges at the University of California, Davis use an
environmental scanning electron microscope to visualize and study changes in
materials with time, from nanometer to the size of a whole device or system. The
measurements are carried out in the working environment of materials, e.g., from
water vapor to controlled type and pressure of gases. The microscopy is located
at a broadly shared facility in the materials science department on the UC Davis
main campus, serving users from campus, the medical center, local community
colleges, industry and with high-school teachers and students in the Central
Valley, California. The team uses a general theme of "Seeing in Science" to
attract and increase participation from underrepresented minority students on
and off campus. The environmental scanning electron microscope allows the team
to demonstrate imaging of various samples on multiple length-scales at or close
to their native environments with minimal need of prior sample treatment and
preparation.

Acquisition of an environmental scanning electron microscopy, with a small
modification by the principal investigators, enables in-situ characterization of
materials and complex systems under high temperatures, applied mechanical
stress, and controlled atmospheres. Operation under appropriate gas or vapor
environments up to 4000 Pascals makes it possible to image insulating, electron
beam-sensitive and hydrated materials and systems, such as ceramics, polymers
and plant tissue. Research conducted using this microscope advances our
fundamental scientific knowledge in interdisciplinary research topics, including
the agglomeration kinetics of thin metal films, ceramics microstructure
evolution during nanoscale processing, 3-dimensional assembly of nanostructures,
fracture mechanics of bone, plant-microbe interaction for food safety,
structure-functionality relationships of ocular lenses, and failure mechanisms
of high-powered electronics. During the course of investigation, the researchers
also identify approaches to enable data correlation between different imaging
modes, disciplines, and data sources. Correlative characterization makes it
possible to achieve structure-morphology-functionality relationships in entire
device structures and whole organisms.