* 1725094
* Calcium in Bridgmanite in the Deep Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Sang-Heon Shim, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2020
* USD 271,735.00

Volcanic activity, such as that seen in Hawaii today and Yellowstone in the
recent past, are linked to heat coming from deep in the Earth's interior.
Although seismic studies have identified a few large scale candidate structures
in the deep mantle that could represent the source of heat or material to feeds
these large volcanic centers, little is known about the origin and nature of
those structures. In this project, the team will investigate probable
compositional changes in the dominant mineral in the Earth's deep mantle, in
order to better understand the nature of the global-scale structures in the deep
mantle that could affect our planet's changing surface. It is expected that the
experiments to be conducted in this project will result in advancing our
knowledge of the formation of deeply rooted volcanism and their evolution. Such
knowledge is important in a range of topics that include assessing some types of
natural hazard and providing insights into the processes that led to the
formation of the Earth as a planet. The project will support undergraduate
research at Arizona State University, providing laboratory research
opportunities for students interested in the geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary experiments suggest that Ca, Calcium,
dissolves into bridgmanite (the dominant lower mantle mineral) at the pressure-
temperature conditions of the deep mantle. In this project, it is planned to
measure the pressure-temperature conditions where Ca enters into the crystal
structure of bridgmanite. An additional goal of the study will be to measure the
physical properties of Ca-bearing bridgmanite to compare with the properties of
the seismically identified large scale mantle structures, such as Large Low
Shear Velocity Provinces. The proposed experiments include in situ X-ray
measurements at high pressure-temperature and chemical analysis of the recovered
samples using electron microscopy. Because Ca-bearing minerals play an important
role in the storage capacity of the lower mantle for heat producing elements,
this research project is expected to close a gap in our knowledge of how heat
producing elements are distributed among different geochemical structures in the
deep mantle.