* 1725636
* MRI: Acquisition of a Power-Hardware-in-the-Loop (PHIL) System to Enhance Research and Student Research Training in Engineering and Computer Science
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Cheng Chen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 297,318.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical &lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
award will enable the acquisition of a state-of-the-art Power-Hardware-in-the-
Loop system that is currently revolutionizing test engineering on many levels,
including power/smart grids, vehicle and communication systems, civil
structures, robotics, and aerospace. The acquisition of this highly scalable and
configurable, computationally efficient simulation and experimental testing
platform will enable the diverse multi-user community of engineers, computer
scientists, and student researchers at San Francisco State University and San
Jose State University to develop and evaluate complex systems and/or physical
components in an integrated fashion. This system will significantly enhance the
research capability at the two participating Hispanic-serving, non-Ph.D-granting
institutions that rank among the leaders in ethnic diversity in the U.S. It will
create well-equipped research environments that integrate research and research
training and provide crucial research infrastructure needed to catalyze cross-
disciplinary collaborations among faculty members and initiate and/or strengthen
their collaborations with other research institutions and industrial partners.
It will enrich the education of Hispanic, female, and African-American students
by providing them hands-on research training in frontier technology. It will
advance the careers of junior female faculty members enabling them to serve as
role models for female students who remain underrepresented in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. It will also lead to the creation of
new teaching and research laboratories that will be integrated into the
engineering and computer science curricula.&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The
Power-Hardware-in-the-Loop system will become an indispensable tool to stimulate
new research in four key sectors of engineering and computer science research:
vehicle system, power/smart grid, prosthetic robotic arm development, and
structural analysis. In vehicle system research, it will be used to catalyze
progress in the following areas: (1) improvements of the reliability, cost-
effectiveness, and efficiency of key electric drive components in electrified
vehicles; (2) development of hybrid energy storage systems to accelerate the
introduction of electrified vehicles in the transportation sector; and (3)
development of in-cylinder control strategies for advanced combustion modes in
compression-ignition engines. In the power/smart grid research sector, it will
be used to enhance research opportunities in the following areas: (1)
investigation of the grid integration impacts of electric vehicle charging and
renewable energy sources; (2) experimental evaluation of power electronic
interfaces in smart grids; (3) failure analyses of power equipment in power
grids; and (4) development of communication and/or smart sensing infrastructure
in smart grids. The instrument will also enhance the computational capacity for
high-fidelity simulation of analytical substructure and facilitate the
developments of advanced control interfaces for the next-generation of
myoelectric prosthetic robotic arms.