* 1725699
* Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR for Research and Training at Grand Valley State University, Grand Rapids Community College and Aquinas College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* John Bender, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 289,990.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. With it, Professor Shannon Biros
from Grand Valley State University and colleagues have acquired a 400 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. An NMR spectrometer enables the
identification of the atoms (for example, hydrogen, carbon, etc.) in the
material. This analytic technique is used to identify chemicals, drugs, proteins
or unknown substances. The spectrometer is housed at Grand Valley State
University (GVSU) and used by their faculty and students, as well as faculty and
students at Grand Rapids Community College (GRCC) and Aquinas College. The
instrument advances research on metals important for potential uses in optical
materials and biosensors, on protein binding to antibiotic substances and on new
materials with applications such as photovoltaics and solar cells. Many students
at GVSU and GRCC (40-60%) are the first in their family to attend college. The
exposure of these students to cutting edge instrumentation facilitates their
development as scientifically literate individuals and contributes to a
competitive scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts investigations of selective f-element extraction agents;
studies of bond fission regioselectivity in nucleophilic aromatic substitution
of arylsulfonates, the preparations of main group derivatives, and d,f-block
metallation of mono- and diphosphines. The instrument also serves researchers
investigating the structure lactamase enzymes and studying the relationship
between ligand/additive structure and reactivity.