* 1725771
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Nanoindentation System for Multidisciplinary Research and Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Dwayne Arola, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2020
* USD 454,179.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a state-
of-the-art nanoindentation system to catalyze fundamental research leading to
more resilient infrastructure, novel materials, advances in medical treatment
and energy production, and enhanced vehicle and aircraft design. Nanoindentation
is an important tool for measuring mechanics at a small scale; this
instrumentation has nanomechanical characterization capabilities that are not
available at the University of Washington (UW) or the Pacific Northwest. It will
enable multidisciplinary research, education and outreach at the UW and partner
schools. More than 10 research associates and 50 graduate researchers will be
trained on the instrument annually, greatly expanding the next generation of
researchers with nanomechanical characterization experience. The system will
facilitate educational programs at four regional partner institutions and public
outreach events in the annual "Meet the Mammals" family day at the Burke Museum
and "Engineering Discovery Days" of the UW College of Engineering. These
activities enhance public understanding and help to attract the next generation
to careers in science, technology, engineering and math.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hysitron TI 980 Triboindenter, with an ultra-low noise
floor down to 1 nN force and 0.01 nm displacement, is equipped with a powerful
multi-head base capable of seamlessly operating multiple measurement modes such
as nanoindentation, nanoscratch, and nanowear. Complemented with high
temperature, high/low load, conductive and submerged indentation options, the
system will enable researchers to pursue advanced knowledge from the nano and
molecular levels in energy and health, to the micro and larger scales in
aerospace and infrastructure renewal. It will enable engineers to study
biological, cementitious and granulated materials, composites, metals and
polymers, and medical, health science and dental researchers to investigate the
biomechanics of cells, tissues to whole organs. It will facilitate fundamental
understanding in pulsed-laser strengthening of metallic multi-layers, the
properties of nanohelical ferromagnetic robotic actuators, and the mechanical
performance of semiconducting organic polymers, high temperature composites, and
polymer composite sensors. The instrument will also enable studies aimed at
extending the durability of next-generation li-ion battery electrode materials.
Lastly, new research will be possible regarding strategies for age-related
degradation of hard tissues, for improving adhesive bonds to hard tissues, and
for remineralizing hard tissues assisted by amelogenin-derived peptides. The
system will become a major regional resource to researchers at the University of
Washington and the greater Pacific Northwest.