* 1725663
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Multicore to Wide Area Analytics on Streaming Data
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Phillip Gibbons, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2021
* USD 492,000.00

In today's big data era, there is an urgent need for methods that can quickly
derive analytical insights from large volumes of data that are continuously
generated. Such streaming data include video, audio, activity logs, and sensor
data, and are generated on a massive scale all over the world. The need for
real-time streaming analytics can only be fulfilled with the help of
appropriately designed parallel and distributed algorithms. However, parallel
and distributed computing systems come in a variety of shapes and sizes, and
algorithms should be designed to match the characteristics of the underlying
system. This project develops methods for analyzing massive streaming data on
computing systems ranging from machines with multiple cores sharing memory to
geo-distributed data centers communicating over wide-area networks. The results
of this research are expected to improve the efficiency, latency, and throughput
of streaming analytics. Due to the foundational nature of the analytical tasks
considered, results of this project will impact disciplines that use large-scale
machine learning and graph analytics, including cybersecurity, social network
analysis, and transportation. Resulting software will be released as toolkits on
stream processing platforms, and deployed in a smart-city camera infrastructure.
Synergy between the research goals and the teaching goals of the PIs will lead
to new instructional material in existing courses as well as development of new
courses in data analytics. Individuals from underrepresented groups will be
included as a part of the project. The project will benefit from and strengthen
collaborations between academia, industry, and national labs on streaming
analytics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The first technical thrust of the project is on
designing shared memory parallel algorithms for computation on data streams,
that can achieve a high throughput and fast convergence for complex analytics
tasks. The second thrust is on designing distributed streaming algorithms that
can tolerate variable communication delays and adapt to available bandwidth in a
wide-area network, through identifying good tradeoffs between freshness of
results and volume of communication. These advances will be studied in the
context of fundamental graph analytics and machine learning tasks such as
subgraph counting, graph connectivity and clustering, matrix factorization, and
deep networks. The project will utilize the vast body of theory and techniques
developed in the realm of parallel computing in the design of methods for
processing streaming data, leading to a toolkit of techniques that can be reused
across applications. The project will also lead to advances in sequential
streaming and incremental algorithms for certain problems; for instance,
problems in machine learning that use iterative convergent methods. Based on the
techniques designed, the project will design and build a hierarchical parameter
server that operates effectively across the spectrum from multicore machines to
data centers to wide-area data sources.&lt;br/&gt;