* 1725917
* MRI: Acquisition of an Amplified Ultrashort Pulse Laser for Imaging and Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Michael Grubb, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2019
* USD 667,405.00

This MRI acquisition will establish the first amplified ultrashort pulse laser
facility for spectroscopy and energy science in the Four Corners region of the
United States. The facility will be based at Fort Lewis College (FLC) in
Durango, Colorado. The acquisition of this instrument will significantly boost
the research and teaching capacity of the proposing investigators, the college
and the region. This acquisition will directly increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in scientific research. FLC is a Native American serving
institution and ranks fourth in the nation in percentage of full-time Native
American undergraduates but first in baccalaureate degrees and second in STEM
degrees awarded to Native Americans. FLC students, along with students from
collaborating schools (i.e., Colorado Mesa University and San Juan College) will
perform research in a state-of-the-art facility. This acquisition will vastly
improve the research infrastructure of the region in addition to facilitating
closer ties with local industry, regional laboratories and colleges. This impact
will extend to students throughout the region, and the community as a whole will
benefit from a better prepared and diverse workforce. Finally, data generated
will be disseminated to the wider research community leading to a lasting impact
on the knowledge in spray breakup processes, nuclear cooling, energy transfer
and liquid phase molecular dynamics and other research planned for the
instrument. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrashort pulse amplified laser systems have
evolved into robust, turnkey systems capable of generating coherent pulses with
several millijoules of energy and, when combined with an optical parametric
amplifier, wavelength ranges from the ultraviolet to the infrared. Ultrashort
laser pulses provide unprecedented temporal resolution for a wide range of
applications within biology, chemistry, engineering, and materials science. Many
fundamental physical processes occur during ultrafast time scales, and
ultrashort pulsed lasers have created a host of new and innovative ways of
investigating such processes. This laser facility will be used in research
programs focusing on combustion and propulsion science, Generation IV nuclear
reactors, the dynamics of liquid phase molecular energy transfer,
photoluminescence and surface morphology of porous silicon, laser patterning,
laser assisted deposition, characterization of photovoltaic materials,
photothermal therapeutics, materials characterization, and the development of
innovative microscopy capabilities at Fort Lewis College. This award is co-
funded by the CBET Division and CMMI Division.