* 1725199
* MRI: Acquisition of a high speed cell sorter for interdisciplinary student research and training in Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Laura Vogel, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 316,778.00

An award is made to Illinois State University to purchase a high-speed
fluorescence activated cell sorter (FACS). These powerful instruments are widely
used in many fields of basic research for identification and rapid isolation of
living cells on the basis of size/shape and the color of their fluorescence
after incubation with specific dyes. Four major faculty users and seven minor
faculty users in three different departments on campus will benefit from the use
of this state-of-the-art instrument in their research, which permits experiments
that are not currently possible. The FACS will be widely used by undergraduate
and graduate students directly as part of their research training. Additionally,
students in several courses on campus will receive hands-on training on sample
preparation, data collection and analysis, which provides them with important
laboratory skills. Underrepresented minority students in other campus programs
will be actively recruited to participate in these research activities. These
unique opportunities support the institution's goal for students to engage in
high-quality, high-impact educational experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FACS
accommodates particles of many sizes ranging from bacteria to very large cells.
Multiple lasers allow for simultaneous detection of numerous different
parameters and mixtures of cells can be rapidly isolated to greater than 99%
purity. This instrument will enable interdisciplinary research on white blood
cells and immune function in reptiles, aging and the immune system in mice,
disease ecology in bumblebees, host-parasite interactions in insects, separation
and study of avian blood cells, analysis of Leishmania parasites, study of
neuron function in the insect brain, and studies on pollen production in plants.
Acquisition of this instrument will also help recruit and retain talented
faculty, including women. The results of these diverse studies can have wide-
ranging impact from disease ecology to conservation efforts to understanding
basic cell functions and will have a significant impact on research productivity
at Illinois State University.