* 1725349
* Shock Wave Studies of Liquids in Earth's Core and Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2022
* USD 878,896.00

This award will support experimental shock wave measurements of molten rocks and
metals at the pressure-temperature conditions of the deep Earth. Shock wave
experiments use controlled high-speed collisions to generate high pressure and
temperature for a short time, allowing unique measurements of the response of
Earth materials to damage, high-speed deformation, and conditions like those in
the lower mantle and core of the Earth. These data are needed to support next-
generation models of lower mantle structure, the deep carbon cycle, evolution of
an early terrestrial magma ocean, and the composition of the Earth's core.
Molten materials are central to the understanding of planetary evolution and
structure, but our understanding of them lags our understanding of solids
because liquids are more complex and more difficult to study. Data from these
shock wave experiments is often the only experimental data available at extreme
pressure for validation of atomistic models of liquid structure and dynamics.
This work leverages collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory to
exploit the expertise in the Department of Energy's shock physics group for
geophysical problems and, in turn, the measurements made and methods developed
in this work will have wide impact not only in experimental geophysics but also
in condensed matter physics and the broader shock compression community. The
project includes training of young scientists and outreach through television
specials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project incorporates technical advances that
enable new experiments, more extreme conditions, higher precision results, and
faster turn-around time. Advances in shock temperature measurement technique,
reducing uncertainty from ~500 K to ~30 K, will be used to look at temperatures
of shocked silicate liquids. The one experimental constraint on the heat
capacity of a silicate liquid (pure SiO2) at high compression shows great
complexity; measuring shock temperature in liquid defines this heat capacity and
completes the description of the equation of state. Experiments that measure
shock temperature can also be configured to measure the sound speed in the
shocked liquid state, which defines high-order constraints on the equation of
state and allows a key test of the Mie-Gruneisen formulation for silicate
liquids. Measurement of sound speeds and densities of liquid Fe alloys along
actual outer core adiabats will use a combination of shock-and-release and
shock-and-ramp loading paths to bring molten Fe and Fe-alloy samples to the
outer core isentrope without the need for pre-heating or extrapolation.
Isentropic experiments will make the well-defined observed gradient in sound
speed with depth in the outer core a new constraint on its
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.