* 1725221
* MRI: Development of an instrument combining optics, transport and strain for studying quantum matter at low temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Oscar Vilches, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 665,000.00

The diversity of electronic properties of matter continues to grow, for instance
recently to include so-called topological insulators and a wide variety of two-
dimensional states in layered materials like graphene. Careful control of
temperature and magnetic field is standard and essential in their study, but
another important thermodynamic variable, mechanical strain, is usually
neglected. Strain can have enormous impact on what is measured, but generally
samples are simply mounted or wired up with either no strain or random
uncontrolled built-in strain. At the same time, it is rare that sensitive and
powerful optical techniques are deployed at lower temperatures and in
combination with other techniques such as electrical transport. The instrument
to be developed in this project will address both of these issues, combining
careful control of strain and free-space optics with more conventional
measurement capabilities at temperatures down to below 0.1 K, using a helium
dilution refrigerator. The team of PIs includes world-leading expertise in
optical probes, application of strain using piezo transducers, and low
temperature techniques. After completion and testing, the instrument will be
operated as a cost center, and maintained with other facilities under the
Education and Research program of the Clean Energy Institute at the University
of Washington. It will be a key facility for research supported on multiple
other grants, including a new NSF MRSEC at UW having a focus on phase
transitions in two-dimensional materials. It will thus enhance training of
students at UW in a wide range of materials physics and techniques. Although
dilution refrigerators are standard facilities in physical science laboratories
worldwide, this will be the first used for condensed matter studies in the US
Pacific Northwest, filling an important gap and fostering quantum materials
activity in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique instrument to be
developed under this MRI grant will combine real-time control of strain in the
sample with a flexible confocal optical system with dc and ac (up to microwave)
electrical transport capability at dilution refrigerator temperatures (below 100
mK) and high magnetic fields (14 T). This will enable a wide range of studies of
regimes and phenomena in quantum materials that have not been accessible before,
for example inducing and studying phase transitions between trivial and
topological insulators, or symmetry breaking in exotic superconductors. Samples
with dimensions down to the micron scale will be mounted on a custom low-
temperature stage which allows three-axis positioning and ability to apply
uniaxial strain. A silicon-chip cassette system with mechanical/piezoelectric
drive and strain gauge technology is to be developed, properly attacking a
number of challenges including thermal expansion of the piezo stacks, the need
to quantify the strain, spatial constraints inside the magnet bore, maximizing
optical field size with minimal distortion and aberration, vibration isolation
and heat sinking, and heating due to internal friction and light absorption.
Free-space optics will allow scanning, control of polarization, coherent optical
spectroscopy with multiple beams, and ultrafast optical spectroscopy and
photocurrent measurements. The stage will include electrical, microwave and
fiber-optic access. Close attention will also be paid to minimize electrical,
magnetic, vibrational and optical noise sources, to achieve high precision and
resolution in all parameters and electron temperatures below 100 mK.