* 1725320
* Using Networks to Scale Improvement of STEM Undergraduate Education: A Comparative Study of Network Goals, Processes, and Strategies to Advance Organizational Change
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Susan Singer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,798,710.00

This project will advance knowledge of organization-focused change networks as a
potentially powerful lever for advancing improvements in undergraduate STEM
education. This four-year project will examine how organization-focused change
networks support and advance STEM undergraduate educational improvement. Based
on a theory of change that networks can scale advances in STEM education, this
research builds on and integrates knowledge from 3 different knowledge bases:
organizational change, networks, and STEM education. Six networks that connect
organizations or that connect institutional leaders working directly with
organizational units or departments will be studied: the Advanced Technological
Education Network; the Bay View Alliance; the Center for the Integration of
Research, Teaching, and Learning; the Network of STEM Education Centers; the
Partnership for Undergraduate Life Sciences Education; and the Reinvention
Center. The project will use cross-case analysis to identify lessons concerning
effective strategies and processes for optimal network functioning and impact.
During year 3, teams from each network will be convened in a knowledge exchange
symposium to discuss emerging findings, exchange perspectives on network
development, functioning, and impact, and identify important implications and
lessons for other networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use rigorous
qualitative methods, including document analysis, interviews, and site visits,
to examine three aspects of each network. The first is the network's design,
including its purpose and problem addressed, and the theory of change guiding
its work, membership, and structures. The second concerns the network's
lifecycle and processes, including stages of network development, strategies
used to advance goals related to STEM undergraduate education, issues and
challenges, and how those issues are handled. The third aspect is the network's
outcomes, impact, and scale, including: metrics and processes used to provide
feedback on progress, what outcomes and impacts are assessed to determine
progress toward network goals, and strategies used to extend the reach and scale
of the network.