* 1725730
* EAR-PF:  Volume flux comparison using seismically derived tilt, infrasound, and gas data at Stromboli Volcano, Italy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Kathleen McKee, McKee                   Kathleen       F
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Kathleen F. McKee has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the Carnegie Instituion for Science.
This project will quantitatively assess the input and output volume flux of
Stromboli Volcano, Italy using infrasound, tilt-affected seismic, and gas data.
This invesgitation will contribute to the need to quantitatively link subsurface
changes to the subsequent erupted product. Volcano observatories use a variety
of geophysical techniques to monitor volcanoes in near-real time to mitigate the
threats volcanoes pose to local and global communities. For people living near
and aircraft flying over active volcanoes, the improved understanding of the
relationship between monitored volume input and detected volume output will
enhance volcano monitoring in an effort to minimize casualties and economic loss
when eruptions occur. PI McKee will also create a public virtual tour of
Stromboli, develop a K-12 education activity exploring how scientists use sound
to study the earth and train a graduate student in seismo-acoustic field
techniques.

Multiparameter data will be used to constrain the input and output volume flux
at Stromboli Volcano, Italy. Three-component, broadband seismometers are
sensitive to tilt. As such, PI McKee and collaborators will deploy a seismo-
acoustic network and a gas measurement instrument (MultiGas) at Stromboli. PI
McKee will characterize and locate the pre-explosion tilt and subsequent
acoustic sources to determine the volume input (via tilt) and output (via
acoustic and gas data). She will also investigate the relationship between the
tilt and acoustic sources, and how they relate to degassing through comparisons
with MultiGas data and SO2 flux from a permanently installed ultraviolet camera.
Infrasound determined volume flux is selected for this study, as it is robust to
environmental changes (e.g. clouds, lack of daylight, and plume direction change
from wind) that can hinder gas quantification methods. This will provide vital
information on the current and future eruptive activity at Stromboli Volcano and
aid in understanding general connections between subsurface and subaerial
processes. This will be the first quantitative volatile budget evaluation using
tilt and infrasound data.