* 1725115
* Student Travel Support - 26th International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT 2017)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Carole-Jean Wu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The 26th International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation
Techniques is the premier forum for presenting, discussing, and debating
innovative compiler and architectural techniques for advanced computing and
communication systems. This conference brings together researchers in fields
related to architecture, compiler, application, language and systems for
technical exchange on traditional system topics and emerging research areas. The
PACT community has enjoyed a close interaction between academic researchers and
industrial designers and aims to continue this tradition at PACT 2017. This
project funds student travel grant, and includes a goal to broaden and diversify
the student participation in the 26th International Conference on Parallel
Architecture and Compilation Techniques (PACT 2017). This year's conference,
being in its 26th year, will be held from September 9-13, 2017 in Portland,
Oregon, USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has two primary Broader Impacts.
First, the students receiving travel support will benefit from the opportunity
to engage in the technical, professional, educational and social exchanges that
PACT fosters. The conference serves as an open forum to exchange research
results and develop new ideas, as an educational platform to expose students to
new research methodologies, tools, and infrastructures, and as a social event to
network and prepare students as future researchers. Second, the PACT conference
will be indirectly strengthened. More tutorials and workshops can be associated
with the main conference, as a result of increased number of student attendance
that this travel grant will enable. More broadly, this travel support will
increase the attendance of under-represented minorities and talented
undergraduate students, attracting them to graduate schools.