* 1725459
* MRI: Acquisition of a Leica M205 FA Stereomicroscope with Fluorescence
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jinyan Guo, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2018
* USD 83,270.00

An award is made to State University of New York at Oswego to purchase a Leica
M205 FA Stereomicroscope with fluorescence to facilitate analyses and to provide
high quality bright field or fluorescence images of fixed and living whole-mount
organisms, tissues, or organs in culture. This microscope will not only allow
investigators to make significant progress with their individual research
projects and collaborations with faculty of the chemistry and anthropology
departments, but will have broader impacts with regards to expanding
interactions with local high school teachers and their students. Being a NCATE-
accredited institution, SUNY Oswego offers courses and training program to
teachers of advanced placement (AP) biology and to students entering grades
2-10, enabling direct connections and communication between the faculty of SUNY
Oswego and the local science teacher and student community. The investigators
are particularly committed to promoting training and participation of students
from local schools, which are in a socioeconomically challenged region of New
York State. The Leica M205 FA Stereomicroscope with fluorescence significantly
bolsters programs at SUNY Oswego by enhancing research, research training,
teaching, and community outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will
immediately facilitate the study of the following biological processes:
interactions between various signaling pathways to learn about formation of
unique body forms; genetic factors leading to the evolution of chromosomes in
the nematode C. Elegans; pathogenicity of aquatic mites in freshwater mussels,
which will aid in conserving these biological indicators of ecosystem health;
directed cell migration, which is essential for understanding physiological and
pathophysiological. Microscopy of intact organisms and tissues, coupled with the
advance of fluorescent markers that can be genetically encoded to overexpress or
knock down gene signaling pathways, is a powerful tool for basic research into
biological structure, development, and function. Improving spatial and temporal
resolution of whole-mount or organ imaging techniques is essential to realize
the full potential of this approach. The Leica M205 FA Stereomicroscope with
fluorescence system will be housed in the Molecular Biology &amp; Biochemistry
Center (MBBC) at SUNY Oswego, ensuring the availability of the microscope to
train new users, and facilitating maintenance of the instrument due to the
proximity of the MBBC facility to faculty.