* 1725656
* MRI: Acquisition of a Micro-CT system for 3D tissue and materials structure analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Daniel Engebretson, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 262,735.00

This research project involves acquiring a high-resolution, non-destructive
3-dimensional specimen micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) imaging instrument
to study the structure of 3-dimensional biomaterials as well as animal and plant
tissues. This state-of-the-art instrument is a state-wide resource available to
all researchers across the South Dakota region. The acquired micro-CT
significantly enhances the infrastructure and collaborative atmosphere in three
research universities, namely the University of South Dakota, South Dakota State
University, and South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, as well as the non-
profit research organization, Sanford Research. This instrument enables an
increased number of successful research projects and the training of future
scientists and engineers. This instrument-acquisition project leverages the
long-standing state-wide network, enabled by the NSF EPSCoR, the NSF REU, and
the NIH IDeA Network of Biomedical Research Excellence programs, to attract new
faculty researchers and to inspire young people in STEM studies and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired instrumentation enables important studies
expected to contribute to the fundamental understanding of the signaling
pathways in determination of a variety of tissue development (e.g., bone, blood
vessel, tumor and plant root system) and the relationships between the structure
and function of materials and tissues. The specific projects enabled by the
micro-CT instrument include: 1) Modulation of adult stem cell functions by
innovative bone-matrix mimicking 3-dimensional scaffolds; 2) Imaging of novel
antibacterial materials for bone repair; 3) Engineering of desensitizing and
remineralizing scaffolds in the dentinal tubules of human teeth; 4) Study of the
role of Notch signaling pathway in bone development and tumorigenesis; 5)
Development of innovative 3D electrospun nanofibrous polymer/mineral composite
scaffolds; 6) Identification of the role of miRNAs in soybean nodule
development; and 7) Biomechanical investigation of the effect of irradiation
therapy on healthy and cancerous bone. Results from these studies form the
foundation for the development of innovative biomaterials and new drugs. This
award is funded by the Office of Assistant Director of Engineering.