* 1725219
* Collaborative Research:  Estimating the Technology of Skill Formation and Maternal Well-Being
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ronni Pavan, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2021
* USD 195,291.00

This research project will study the effects of parental skills and investment
on children's cognitive and non-cognitive skills development thus impacting the
long term social and economic development of these children in later life.
Previous studies of these effects rely on mothers' assessments of child non-
cognitive skills---an assessment that may be biased---and do not account for
maternal well-being on the dynamics of the child's cognitive and non-cognitive
skill development. These omissions may affect the results of the effects of
parental skills and investments on child development. The proposed research will
use the Millennium Cohort Study (MCS) to study the effects of parental skills
and investment on children's cognitive and non-cognitive skills. In addition to
assessment of non-cognitive skills by parents, the data set also contain
assessment of non-cognitive skills by teachers and interviewers as well as the
physical, mental, and emotional health of the mother. This will allow the
researchers to study the reciprocal link from child to parent may generate
important feedback effects on the child's development; therefore, limiting the
biases that may arise from the omissions discussed above. The results of this
research project will provide guidance to practitioners, educators and
policymakers as they develop policies to improve to improve cognitive and non-
cognitive skills of children. Helping to understand how to improve cognitive and
non-cognitive skills among children will result in a stronger work force, thus
improving the long-run performance of the U.S. economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies of the effects of parental skills and
investment on children's cognitive and non-cognitive skills development suffer
from two potential sources of bias: they rely on the mother's, possibly biased,
assessment of the child's non-cognitive skills and do not allow for possible
feedback effect the child's cognitive and non-cognitive development may have on
the mother's skills. To address these issues, the PIs will use two features of
the Millennium Cohort Study (MCS). First, the MCS dataset collects measures of
child non-cognitive skills from mothers, and from interviewers and teachers.
Second, the MCS interviews mothers on their mental health and life satisfaction
during each wave of the survey. Using this data, the PIs will estimate a
technology of skill formation characterized by dynamic, nonlinear production
functions where both inputs and outputs are unobserved. Key inputs include
contemporaneous child skills, parental skills, and parental investment, while
the next period's cognitive and non-cognitive skills for both the child and the
mother are the relevant outputs. To achieve identification, the researchers rely
on the availability of noisy measures of child skills, parental skills and
parental investment each period, following the methodology of Cunha, Heckman and
Schennach (2010). The identification of the contamination of mother-assessed
child non-cognitive skills relies on allowing the observed measures of non-
cognitive skills, as reported by teachers and interviewers, to be a function of
both maternal skills and child skills. The results of this research project will
contribute to a better understanding of the link between parental skills and
investment and child outcomes and will provide guidance to practitioners,
educators and policymakers as they develop policies to improve cognitive and
non-cognitive skill development of children.