* 1725966
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Police Technology and Urban Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Jeff Maskovsky, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 9,598.00

This dissertation research project explores the role of technology in urban
policing. Anthropology doctoral student, Elliott Liu, under the supervision of
Dr. Jeff Maskovsky at the City University of New York Graduate Center, will
study the arrangement of technical and governmental relationships through which
knowledge about disorder, crime, space, place and other social characteristics
are produced. Today technology not only informs police patrol and investigative
activities, but also broader discussions of the mission, effectiveness, and
legitimacy of police institutions and city governments. Yet not enough is known
about the use of the spatial, demographic and statistical knowledge produced by
police departments, the circulation and effects of this knowledge in other
governing institutions, and how this has changed over time.

The research will be undertaken in New York city. The researcher will combine
archival and ethnographic methods in his investigation. He will undertake
participant observation at public meetings and ride-alongs with officers in four
precincts currently targeted for city intervention. He also will conduct
interviews and focus groups with former police department officers and civilian
employees about past technology use. Finally, he will evaluate these data
against the backdrop of archival research tracing the development of police
technologies from the automation of data processing in the 1950s to the
analytics-driven policing model developing currently. Findings from this
research will broaden insights into the role of technology in shaping police
practices and public perception of police, safety, and urban governance.
Conclusions will advance anthropological theory by extending work on actor-
network theory and techno-politics to the study of urban governance and spatial
management.