* 1725952
* Supporting and Sustaining Scholarly Mathematics Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Mako Haruta, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 583,525.00

The Supporting and Sustaining Scholarly Mathematics Teaching (SSSMT) project at
the University of Hartford seeks to improve teaching and learning in
undergraduate mathematics courses. Recent projections suggest that the United
States needs to dramatically increase the annual award rate of STEM degrees by
34% in the next decade to remain competitive internationally. A critical step
towards improving the recruitment, retention and success of STEM majors is the
adoption of research-based teaching practices in first-year and second-year
college mathematics courses. These introductory courses often act as gatekeepers
that filter students out of STEM majors. There is mounting evidence that
suggests active learning can be much more effective than direct instruction in
engaging students. Despite this evidence, there continues to be an overwhelming
reliance on lecture as the primary method of delivering content in college
mathematics courses. The goals of the Supporting and Sustaining Scholarly
Mathematics Teaching (SSSMT) project are: 1) to form a collaborative community
of faculty who are committed to implementing active learning and flipping
pedagogy in a variety of first-year and second-year mathematics courses with
diverse student populations; 2) to studying the effectiveness of this pedagogy;
and 3) to sharing the results with the larger mathematics community.
Collaboratively and collectively, SSSMT faculty participants will develop a
shared understanding of how to best leverage these strategies and processes to
support a more widespread adoption of engaged teaching and learning strategies
locally, regionally, and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on existing
research on active learning, flipping pedagogy, and faculty development, the
SSSMT project seeks to create a multi-institutional network of faculty to
implement its goals in these areas. The network is comprised of college
mathematics faculty at different stages of their careers, from a variety of
institutions, who are interested in implementing active learning and becoming
scholarly teachers who conduct and publish research on their own teaching and
their students' learning. In the short term, this project promises to identify
and disseminate best practices regarding the use of engaged learning strategies
in a variety of mathematics courses populated by diverse student populations.
The project will produce comprehensive sets of resources for faculty interested
in using active learning and flipping pedagogy in courses ranging from college
algebra to introduction to proofs and will develop a more robust understanding
of the challenges, opportunities and necessary supports for mathematics faculty
who have different levels of experience with the scholarship of teaching and
learning. Project outcomes will be investigated using a mixed-methods approach
involving qualitative and quantitative data collected from participants through
surveys, reflective journals, and teaching practice inventories. The longer-term
goal of this project is to expand the cross-institutional network, inviting in
and involving the departmental colleagues of project participants, as well as
faculty at other institutions, thereby broadening and enriching the virtual
community of faculty engaged in this work of enhancing the teaching and learning
of undergraduate mathematics.