* 1725984
* MRI Consortium: Acquisition of a Leica TCS SP8 STED 3X Super Resolution microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Chaitanya Ullal, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,030,611.00

An award is made to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) to purchase a super-
resolution microscope (Leica STED) that will serve as the super-resolution
center in the New York Capital Region. This project will impact many layers of
our society. First, information about STED microscopy and its applications will
be incorporated in several courses (Methods in Biophysics BCBP4800-RPI; Bio513
Modern Use of Light Microscopy-SUNY; Bioimaging AMC 608; Learn, Design, Teach
Nanotechnology RPI MTLE 4960; Microscopy and Analysis "Tools"-Wadsworth Center).
It will be part of the CBIS Annual Hands-On Workshops. It will be part of the
Biological Sciences Seminar Series at all four institutions. Second, it will be
incorporated in community outreach programs to encourage students into STEM
fields: Black Family Technology Awareness Day; the High School Summer Research
Program and the LSAMP Summer Research Program; the annual Science, Technology,
Arts, and Architecture at Rensselaer Program that reaches out to talented
underrepresented minorities and young women. Third, information about this
technology and the research that it enables, including in nontraditional fields,
will be distributed throughout the region's biotechnology community via
Bioconnex, a network dedicated to the development of partnerships between
research, education and business in the NY Capital region. Fourth, one of the
RPI "Public Interest Research Forums" will be dedicated to STED and will
establish the connection between this cutting-edge technology, the Nobel prize
and implications to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is the research activities that are enabled through the
application of simulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy. STED microscopy
creates super-resolution images by the selective deactivation of fluorophores,
minimizing the area of illumination, and thus, bypassing the diffraction limit
of conventional light microscopy. The microscope will enable very
interdisciplinary research: 25 investigators across four institutions are
strongly supporting this application, representing fourteen different
Departments/Centers. Areas of research enabled include the study of cellular
adherens and cellular permeability, STEM cell research, smooth muscle cell
development, intracellular molecular interactions, endothelial cell development,
and functional characterization of presynaptic terminals at small central
synapses. The critical need for this technology and the diverse research
applications for the instrument demonstrate that the super resolution microscope
will become an extraordinary regional resource. Knowledge accumulated as a
result of using STED imaging will have a tremendous positive impact in the
fields of biological sciences, materials characterization and tissue engineering
in the greater New York Capital Region.