* 1725347
* Collaborative Research: Implementing 21st century geodesy learning through faculty development and expanded applications of data to societal issues
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Beth Pratt-Sitaula, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2022
* USD 451,798.00

Over the last two decades, technical advances in geodesy - the study of the
size, shape, and mass of the Earth and their changes with time - have
revolutionized our understanding of Earth processes and produced discoveries of
major societal impact related to water resources, ice sheet and glacial melting,
natural hazards such as earthquakes and landslides, and environmental change.
Three collaborating institutions, UNAVCO, Inc., Mount San Antonio College, and
Indiana University and other organizations including, Science Education Resource
Center (SERC) at Carleton College, the National Association of Geoscience
Teachers (NAGT), the American Geophysical Union (AGU) and the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science (CUAHS) will further
develop and disseminate undergraduate learning materials that apply geodesy data
and methods to critical societal issues, concurrently engaging faculty in
significant professional development. A previous award, the GEodesy Tools for
Societal Issues (GETSI)"exploratory" Phase 1 (1245025), produced five teaching
modules on a subset of geodesy topics, but additional modules, dissemination,
and widespread faculty development are needed to fully integrate geodetic data
and applications into undergraduate programs, including civil engineering,
ecology and forestry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GETSI Phase 2 plan in this
proposal will support four components: &lt;br/&gt;1) development of three new
teaching modules and three modules adapted from existing modules to work at
different curricular levels; &lt;br/&gt;2) twenty or more in-person and virtual
short courses on module implementation (&gt;450 faculty served); &lt;br/&gt;3)
research on the process of adaption/adoption of curricula by instructors; and
&lt;br/&gt;4) research on the challenges and benefits of building modules that
serve both geoscience and allied science/engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;GETSI
project goals are to: 1) improve geoscience (particularly geodetic) knowledge
base of undergraduate students both for general science literacy (introductory
courses) and future science workforce (majors-level) and 2) improve
effectiveness of teaching resources and pedagogy employed by faculty members
teaching geodesy, geoscience, and allied science/engineering fields.