* 1725625
* EAR-PF:  Monitoring the role of subsurface physical processes in carbon flux from a degraded permafrost site using novel multidisciplinary observations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Stephanie James, James                   Stephanie      R
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Stephanie R. James has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out a research and education plan at the U.S. Geological Survey, Crustal
Geophysics and Geochemistry Science Center, in Denver, CO. Her research project
will improve the understanding of how Arctic boreal peatlands respond, both
physically and chemically, to thawing permafrost. The release of permafrost
carbon has the potential to impact the global carbon budget. However, the
magnitude of this impact is uncertain due to the complex relationships between
processes above and below ground, dramatic seasonal changes, and limitations in
subsurface measurement capabilities. Dr. James will use a novel combination of
geophysical and biogeochemical techniques in a multidisciplinary field
experiment near Fairbanks, Alaska to improve the understanding of the physical
controls on carbon fluxes at the site scale. This will lead to improved
predictions of the permafrost-carbon feedback in climate models at the global
scale. In addition, this project will advance a passive seismic technique
capable of continuous monitoring for permafrost degradation, which could improve
infrastructure security in local communities. Dr. James will also conduct an
education plan to advance academic and professional scientific inquiry and
public education. A multiday geophysical workshop will train college graduates
and professionals in cutting-edge hydrogeophysical methods. Then, a series of
Earth science outreach visits to middle schools in Denver, CO and Fairbanks, AK
will broaden student awareness and encourage science participation. This project
entails a one year multidisciplinary field experiment and the integration of
field data with numerical simulations of water and energy transport using the
code SUTRA 3.0. Passive seismic, nuclear magnetic resonance, temperature, soil
moisture, and carbon flux measurements will be collected along a transect
between intact permafrost and a collapse-scar bog. By using a unique combination
of geophysical and biogeochemical methods, this project will address how
subsurface physical processes, such as seasonal freeze-thaw dynamics and changes
in water content, impact carbon exchange with the atmosphere across a permafrost
thaw gradient. Numerical modeling will improve the understanding of
relationships between surface conditions and subsurface processes, as well as
aid with interpretation of seismic velocity changes. This work builds off
previous studies of the Alaskan Peatland Experiment (APEX) and will advance
passive seismic techniques for permafrost monitoring.