* 1725093
* Special Conference on Set-Theoretic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Ziqin Feng, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This award supports participation in the Special Conference on Set-Theoretic
Topology held at Auburn University in Auburn, Alabama, from Oct 20th to 22nd,
2017. The conference focuses on the advancement of research in topology and
outreach in mathematics, with specific emphasis on set-theoretic topology. Set
theory and general topology are fundamental mathematical disciplines, with
common historical roots, and they serve as essential tools in many areas of
mathematics. Set theoretic applications to topology have invigorated both fields
since the proof of the independence of the continuum hypothesis fifty years ago,
and the synergy between them continues to invigorate the field of set-theoretic
topology. Techniques developed to solve central questions in the field were
instrumental in the development of the method of forcing, combinatorial set
theory, and Ramsey theory. Set-theoretical techniques are also fundamental in
recent work on the structure of non-separable Banach spaces and the study of
rings of continuous functions and topological vector spaces. Quite naturally,
set-theoretic topology also is close to logic and has much in common with finite
combinatorics and theoretical computer science in its study of partial orders,
Boolean algebra, and continuous lattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference
will feature both three plenary talks and eighteen contributed research talks,
as well as a session on open problems. This grant will be used to support travel
for participants, especially for students, young researchers, women, and
underrepresented groups. More information may be found on the conference
website, https://sites.google.com/view/auburntopologyconference2017.