* 1725711
* MRI: Development of a Unique Ion Trapping System to Test the Standard Model of Physics at the Nuclear Science Laboratory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Michael Wiescher, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2023
* USD 530,000.00

The human need to understand the inner workings of our universe has driven
scientific questions both at the elementary level and at astronomical scales
prompting the establishment of the Standard Model (SM), one of the cornerstone
theories of physics that successfully predicted the Higgs boson. This theory
however fails to reproduce many unexplained features of our visible universe,
which currently prompts several different searches at the energy, intensity, and
precision frontiers. By performing very precise measurements of fundamental
quantities related to a special case of radioactive decay, one can probe for
physics not included in the SM. The funds from this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant will support the construction of an ion trapping
apparatus, called NSLtrap, that will hold radioactive nuclei unimpeded in free
space, allowing these delicate measurements to be performed. The research done
with this instrument will raise the possibility of discovering physics beyond
the SM, which could open wide new avenues for theoretical, experimental, and
fundamental research. At the same time the development and operation of NSLtrap
will train some of America's future scientific workforce in various aspects of
research and development, including computation, design, assembly,
troubleshooting, data gathering, data analysis and the dissemination of results.
The skills acquired by the students will be transferable to careers that can
advance the national health, prosperity and security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSLtrap project will aim at testing the Standard Model by providing a more
stringent test of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix unitarity that
relates the weak interaction and mass eigenstates of the quarks. The largest
matrix element, Vud, can be extracted from four types of decay: pion decay,
neutron decay, superallowed mixed decay, and superallowed pure Fermi decay
transitions. Despite the high precision achieved in the pure Fermi decay
studies, there is currently a growing interest in the other transitions to test
the accuracy of Vud. The NSLtrap project plan is to expand the ensemble of
mirror transitions from which the conserved vector current (CVC) hypothesis can
be tested and Vud extracted by measuring a missing quantity called the Fermi-to-
Gamow Teller mixing ratio. As a result, the more precise extraction of Vud from
mirror transitions will create further constraints on the Vud matrix element
determination from pure Fermi decays, improving its accuracy.