* 1725678
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF A PULSED ELECTRON SPIN RESONANCE SPECTROMETER TO AID BIOPHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND OUTREACH
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Sunil Saxena, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 616,042.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs. Professor
Sunil Saxena from University of Pittsburgh and colleagues are acquiring an
X-/Q-band pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer. This
instrument allows research in a variety of fields such as those that provide
insight on how biologically relevant species with unpaired electrons behave. The
instrument also allows researchers to conduct advanced environmental studies. In
general, an EPR spectrometer yields detailed information on the geometric and
electronic structure of molecular and solid state materials. It is used to
obtain information about the lifetimes of unpaired electrons (free radicals) - a
short-lived, highly reactive species - involved in valuable chemical
transformations. A number of graduate and undergraduate students use the
instrument. This spectrometer expands access to pulsed EPR instrumentation to
undergraduates at a 4-year college in Pennsylvania (Westminster) College) and a
predominantly African American institution (Fisk University). The spectrometer
furthers the development of an EPR Center of Excellence that is regional in
nature, thus having a broad impact in research infrastructure for the entire
tri-state area. Current users include groups at University of Pittsburgh,
Carnegie Mellon University, Ohio State University, Fisk University and
Westminster College. The results of the research help modernize the high-school
curriculum by rapid dissemination of research ideas to high-school teachers via
workshops. The spectrometer is used in classes to expose students to modern
ideas in biophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EPR spectrometer enhances
research and education at all levels. It allows sensitive delineation of
backbone versus spin label motions in proteins and macromolecules ,and enables
high resolution measurements to determine constraints on macromolecular
structure and conformational dynamics. The spectrometer also allows
discrimination of metal-protein interactions and enables the determination of
the identity of transient and stable radicals.