* 1725123
* Testing models of ancient forager social and territorial organization with a strontium isoscape
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Stanley Ambrose, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 170,654.00

For most of human history, people have developed different technological and
social strategies to reduce the risk of food insecurity in different
environments. These strategies are expected to differ systematically depending
on the abundance and predictability of food resources in time and space. This
project will use chemical and archaeological evidence to investigate how human
hunter-gatherers used flexible social and territorial organization strategies to
minimize risk in different environmental conditions. The research will shed
light on how humans have coped with variable environmental conditions in the
past, and how they may do so in the future. This project will create
opportunities for American undergraduate students, especially those from groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields, and postdoctoral researchers, to
learn chemistry laboratory methods. It will also build research infrastructure
through the training of collaborators from the developing world in environmental
sampling protocols. Results will be disseminated by peer-reviewed publications,
conference presentations, and science outreach. Primary data will be permanently
publicly available through the Digital Archaeological Record website.

Chemical "fingerprinting" of foods in different landscapes and human teeth
formed at different developmental ages permits reconstruction of human
residential histories and mobility patterns. This project will use multiple
analytical chemistry techniques, including multi-elemental and strontium isotope
ratio-based provenience analysis, to investigate diet and residential histories
of pre-agricultural Later Stone Age (LSA) humans between approximately 12 and 6
thousand years ago. The primary objective is to determine how LSA peoples
adapted to different resource distributions through contrasting social and
territorial organization strategies: territorial defense to preserve exclusive
access to abundant and predictable resources, versus extended social networks
for sharing information to reduce risk of resource failure in unpredictable
environments. Chemical methods for determining the geographic source of human
and animal remains will be refined through the analysis of samples of modern
soil, airborne dust, plants, mollusk shells, and mammal teeth, and
archaeological human teeth. East-Central Africa is an ideal place to examine the
relationships among environmental conditions, resource distributions, and socio-
territorial organization strategies. Environmental records from East-Central
Africa suggest more stability and thus less dramatic contrasts in resource
structure during the last 15 thousand years compared to eastern and southern
Africa. At present, this region has a long stressful dry season. This dry season
may have been longer and more severe during past arid phases and shorter and
less severe during wetter phases. Therefore, this an important time and place to
investigate contrasting social and territorial strategies for resource
exploitation and risk reduction. The results of this research may provide
guidance for developing policies and predictive models of human strategic social
and territorial organizational responses to changing environments. The
methodological refinements developed in this project will be readily
transferrable to the earth, environmental, and social sciences, as well as
forensic investigations, food origins authentication and biological
conservation.