* 1725053
* Stability and Thermochemistry of some Chlorine-bearing Calcium Amphiboles
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Jenkins, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2022
* USD 289,112.00

Chlorine-rich fluids are important agents in basic geological processes such as
(i) transporting metal ions in aqueous brines, (ii) controlling the temperatures
and depths in the Earth where hydrated crustal rocks react to denser anhydrous
rocks (e.g., granulites and eclogites), and (iii) controlling the nature of the
aqueous phase coexisting with silicate melts. These geological processes
control, respectively, the formation of economic mineral deposits, the dynamics
of mountain building and plate tectonics, and the style of volcanic eruptions.
The details of how chlorine-rich fluids interact with crustal rocks are poorly
understood, ranging from the near-surface incorporation of chlorine at the
seawater-to-rock interface in oceanic crust to the migration of brines in mid-
to lower-crustal levels. One of the most common rock-forming minerals into which
chlorine is known to substitute at weight-percent levels is calcium-rich
amphibole. The amount of chlorine that substitutes into amphiboles depends on
the concentration of chlorine in the ambient brine or melt as well as the
chemical composition of the host amphibole. A starting point for examining this
complex interplay is to determine what compositional variables in the host
amphibole exert the greatest control on its chlorine content. The first goal in
this proposal is to examine the role that potassium plays, which, based on prior
results obtained in this lab, now appears to be extremely important in
controlling the chlorine content of amphiboles. Second, the effect of chlorine
on the upper-thermal stability of this normally hydrous mineral will be
investigated. Third, basic thermochemical data for one or more chlorine-rich
amphiboles will be determined. Any rigorous analysis of the substitution of
chlorine into an amphibole ultimately requires the fundamental thermochemical
data for a given chlorine end-member amphibole. Obtaining these data, which
simply do not exist at this time, would be a major contribution to the sciences.
This proposal provides educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, and welcomes the participation of under-represented minorities.
Opportunities will also be made available for the training of pre-service Earth
Science, Chemistry, Physics, and elementary
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in this proposal will focus on the
following three main goals. First, the effect of several key compositional
variables (ferrous iron content, potassium content) on the incorporation of
chlorine into several calcium amphiboles will be examined. This will build on
research already done at Binghamton University on potassium-free calcium
amphiboles which were generally found to have very limited chlorine contents.
Second, the upper-thermal stability of chlorine-rich amphiboles will be
determined by phase-equilibrium methods and compared to the stabilities of their
hydroxyl-rich equivalents. At present there are no experimental data
demonstrating the effect of chlorine on the thermal stability of an amphibole,
so that this information will be of considerable importance. Third,
thermochemical data (volume, heat capacity, enthalpy of formation, and third-law
entropy) will be obtained by a combination of direct measurements and derivation
from the phase-equilibria data. Volume and heat capacity measurements can be
made at Binghamton University, while the enthalpy of formation will entail
measurements at the University of California at Davis. The third-law entropy
will be derived from the thermal stability boundary. Thermochemical data on
chlorine-rich amphiboles are absent in the scientific literature, yet such
information is fundamental to any rigorous treatment of the partitioning of
chlorine between amphibole-bearing rocks and the brine with which it
equilibrates. Results from this study should be of interest to those working in
a wide range of geological settings, including ocean-rock interactions, mantle
chloride metasomatism, deep crustal and upper-mantle metamorphism, and ore-
forming bodies and skarns.