* 1725674
* A Comprehensive Model for Improving the Success of STEM Majors through the STEM Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mary Swarthout, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,028,798.00

In 2012, the "Engage to Excel" report from the President's Council of Advisors
on Science and Technology (PCAST) declared a national need for an additional one
million college graduates in STEM fields over the next decade. The 40% retention
rate among STEM majors nationally presents a major hurdle to meeting this need.
The goal of this project is to increase the number and quality of STEM graduates
by adapting and combining three proven approaches. The first, aimed at students
who intend to pursue STEM majors at the outset of their college careers, will
prepare students for success in STEM coursework by creating community among
participants; developing necessary reading, note-taking, and time-management
skills; reinforcing fundamental concepts in mathematics; and helping students
understand their individual approaches to effective learning. The second
approach will expand the use of effective, evidence-based teaching methods
across STEM disciplines. The third approach will engage students in research in
a course early in their college careers. The project's components will form a
comprehensive model for increasing the quality and quantity of STEM graduates
that can be replicated and sustained across many
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM Center at Sam Houston State
University will integrate and improve upon tested interventions for retaining
students in STEM. Using methods and materials developed by the Charles A. Dana
Center at the University of Texas at Austin, the project team will create an
immersive summer experience for entering STEM majors, "Frameworks and
Foundations," to focus on frameworks of field-specific skills for collegiate
success and foundations of STEM content in mathematics, chemistry, and
engineering technology. The STEM Center will broaden the use of Inquiry-Based
Learning (IBL) practices and Process-Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL)
methods across STEM disciplines and degree programs. To specifically engage
students in scientific practice, the project will embed a course-based
undergraduate research experience (CURE) in the STEM curriculum. This new
research-focused course, which students will take as soon as they complete their
first-year STEM coursework, will quickly prepare them to conduct meaningful
scientific research on an original topic developed by each student along with an
identified faculty mentor. This course will particularly target transfer
students and those from groups traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.
Although the project will utilize proven practices, its innovation mainly lies
in its comprehensive approach. The project evaluation will add to the body of
knowledge about the effectiveness of the interventions and, especially, their
integration in this model. Elements of the evaluation will include measures of
retention, course completion, and graduation; comparison of students taking IBL
and POGIL courses with respect to gains in critical thinking skills,
argumentation skills, academic performance, etc.; comparison of students'
performance across disciplines to identify transferability of skills; comparison
of learning outcomes of students who complete the "Frameworks" and "Foundations"
courses with learning outcomes of students who do not; and surveys of students
in the modified learning environments to examine perceived differences in
teaching and learning strategies.