* 1725033
* I-Corps: Acoustic tweezing elastometry
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Damir Khismatullin, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in novel
non-contact technology for rheological testing of biological materials,
polymeric liquids, and complex fluids. When used in healthcare industry, this
acoustic tweezing rheometry technology allows for fast and reliable assessment
of blood coagulation using small blood samples collected by a finger prick
instead of venipuncture. Additionally, photo-optical tests used in plasma
coagulation assays can be integrated in the acoustic tweezing device with
viscoelastic tests used in whole blood analysis. The acoustic tweezing
technology can dramatically improve the quality of care for millions of trauma,
major surgery and coagulation disorders patients in the United States and
worldwide. When used in petroleum industry, the potential application of the
technology is reliable and accurate measurement of rheology and aging of crude
oils, which is important for formulating optimal strategies for their extraction
and transportation. In chemical and pharmaceutical industries, the technology
could be very useful for preparation of polymer materials with required
properties and small-scale containerless processing of unique polymer materials
that lack impurities generated during polymer contact with solid walls.

This I-Corps project further develops a non-contact acoustic tweezing technology
in which a drop of a fluid sample is levitated in air by acoustic radiation
forces and its time-dependent rheological properties are measured from drop
shape changes. Key disruptive features of this technology, tested using the
laboratory prototype, are the increased reliability and accuracy due to non-
contact measurement, the ability to assess temporal changes in rheological
properties during processes such as polymerization and coagulation, small sample
volume requirement and relatively short procedure time. The goal of this project
is to do focused customer discovery work in the healthcare, petroleum, chemical
and pharmaceutical industries to evaluate the commercial potential of the
acoustic tweezing technology.