* 1725774
* EAR-PF Dynamics from drones: using high-resolution repeat topography and grain size to differentiate between physically-based models of debris creation and debris flow initiation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Katherine Barnhart, Barnhart                Katherine      R
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2020
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Katherine R. Barnhart has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the University of Colorado and
University of Kansas. The project seeks to assess the mechanisms responsible for
initiating debris flows - water-laden slurries of soil and rock from landslides
- that move rapidly through channels in steep landscapes and present hazards to
human life, infrastructure and property. To benefit the public, the outcomes of
this project will include a landscape evolution model incorporating processes
responsible for the recharge of debris, and processes responsible for the actual
debris flow initiation. This model will improve predictions and risk assessment
in debris flow prone areas. For the education component of this project, Dr.
Barnhart will develop a senior-undergraduate and first-year graduate student
course focused on the philosophy of science as applied to the geosciences and an
investigation into the ingredients of a good research question.

Debris flows are among the most dangerous and frequent natural hazards; once
initiated in a steep region, a debris flow can continue to travel over shallow
terrain, greatly extending the hazard, frequently destroying houses and covering
streets with mud, which is costly to remove. Models for debris flows that relate
antecedent conditions (e.g., soil moisture) and external forcing (e.g., surface
hydrodynamic stresses) provide an opportunity for mechanistic understanding and
prediction of natural debris flows. However, the steep and difficult terrain in
debris flow prone regions precludes the observation of initiation zones which,
in turn, prevents attribution of debris recharge and flow initiation to specific
mechanisms. The project will employ novel methods -including drone-based
photography- to make observations within the steep terrain in debris-flow
initiation zones. Maps of topography and sediment characteristics will be made
from these images which will constrain numerical models for (1) the amount and
size distribution of material delivered to the channel between debris flow
events, (2) the timing and (3) mechanisms of debris flow initiation.