* 1725456
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Ula! - An Integrated Deep Neural Network (DNN) Acceleration Framework with Enhanced Unsupervised Learning Capability
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Hai Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 08/31/2022
* USD 520,000.00

In light of very recent revolutions of unsupervised learning algorithms (e.g.,
generative adversarial networks and dual-learning) and the emergence of their
applications, three PIs/co-PI from Duke and UCSB form a team to design Ula! - an
integrated DNN acceleration framework with enhanced unsupervised learning
capability. The project revolutionizes the DNN research by introducing an
integrated unsupervised learning computation framework with three vertically-
integrated components from the aspects of software (algorithm), hardware
(computing), and application (realization). The project echoes the call from the
BRAIN Initiative (2013) and the Nanotechnology-Inspired Grand Challenge for
Future Computing (2015) from the White House. The research outcomes will benefit
both Computational Intelligence (CI) and Computer Architecture (CA) industries
at large by introducing a synergy between computing paradigm and artificial
intelligence (AI). The corresponding education componentsÂ  enhance existing
curricula and pedagogy by introducing interdisciplinary modules on the
software/hardware co-design for AI with creative teaching practices, and give
special attentions to women and underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project performs three tasks: (1) At the
software level, a generalized hierarchical decision-making (GHDM) system is
designed to efficiently execute the state-of-the-art unsupervised learning and
reinforcement learning processes with substantially reduced computation cost;
(2) At the hardware level, a novel DNN computing paradigm is designed with
enhanced unsupervised learning supports, based on the novelties in near data
computing, GPU architecture, and FGPA + heterogeneous platforms; (3) At the
application level, the usage of Ula! is exploited in scenarios that can greatly
benefit from unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. The developed
techniques are also demonstrated and evaluated on three representative computing
platforms: GPU, FPGA, and emerging nanoscale computing systems, respectively.