* 1725321
* Experimental Investigation of Chemical Zoning in Olivine: Applications to Hawaiian Basalt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Thomas Shea, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2022
* USD 346,000.00

Basaltic eruptions are the dominant type of volcanism on Earth by volume. At
Kilauea Volcano (Island of Hawai'i, USA), eruptions involving basalt magma have
caused societal harm over the last three centuries, including significant human
loss and damage to infrastructure. It was recently discovered that far from the
tame reputation that Kilauea gained through decades of effusive, lava-flow
dominated activity, the volcano actually undergoes cycles of explosive and
effusive activity lasting several centuries each. The state of magma reservoirs
underneath the volcano, their size, and the frequency at which they receive
recharge from the crust and mantle, are main factors in determining whether
explosive or effusive activity dominates in any period of time. At Kilauea and
in other volcanoes that erupt basalt, olivine is the most commonly occurring
mineral phase. Its potential as proxies for unraveling the subterraneous history
of magmas cannot be overstated: olivine is a major information capsule that
petrologists examine to recover the timing of magmatic processes occurring prior
to an eruption. This project focuses on the mineral olivine as a forensics tool
to characterize magmatic systems and the tempo of magma recharge under volcanoes
like K&amp;#299;lauea. Laboratory experiments and detailed studies of olivine
chemistry within the products from select 20th century Kilauea eruptions will
provide critical constraints for identifying transitions in eruptive
cycles.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The history of magma recharge, mixing and ascent
is preserved in olivine in the form of 'chemical zoning', non-random spatial
variations in the crystal-forming elements. However, reading and interpreting
chemical zoning in olivine can be complicated because different processes may
overprint each other. Primary chemical zoning in olivine can be acquired during
initial growth in a melt, but this zoning tends to smooth out through time by
element diffusion within the crystal lattice. The extent of this diffusion
smearing is increasingly used to backtrack the timing of magma mixing and ascent
before an eruption occurs. These modern petrological applications have yet to be
subject to thorough experimental verification. Using a suite of carefully
planned laboratory experiments, this project therefore focuses on deciphering
the mechanisms by which olivine acquires chemical zoning for a whole suite of
elements during its birth and growth in a basalt melt, and how fast this zoning
is modified. A basalt melt will be cooled to different temperatures and left for
various durations at the final conditions to induce crystallization and track
diffusive re-equilibration through time. To exploit and apply the experimental
results to natural systems, olivine from the products of several 20th century
eruptions from K&amp;#299;lauea Volcano (Hawaii) will be investigated for their
chemical zoning patterns. The reasons for choosing K&amp;#299;lauea as a
laboratory for olivine studies are manifold. There have been no less than 50
eruptions in the last century (one that is ongoing since 1983), and existing
work suggest that the volcano has been undergoing a surge in magma supply since
the 1950s. Examining the zoning patterns of olivine in those eruption products
and extracting critical timescale information pertaining to pre-eruptive magma
injection and recharge will be essential to establish informed projections about
future behavior.