* 1725057
* MRI:  Acquisition of Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) Scanner for Computer Vision Research and Interdisciplinary Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Brittany Morago, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2019
* USD 118,977.00

This project, acquiring a Leica ScanStation P30, aims to develop methods for
aligning two dimensional (2D) and three dimensional (3D) data and to assemble
educational tools using the produced 3D visualizations. The LIDAR (LIght
Detection And Ranging) scanner will be used by professors and students studying
and performing research in the fields of computer science, film, and art at the
institution. The group builds on the researcher's existing work that creates
navigable 3D environments from sets of 2D pictures and videos that are
registered with 3D LIDAR scans. With the instrumentation this project would
enable the following intertwined goals.&lt;br/&gt;(i) Build an interdisciplinary
research group to further study how to describe and register multi-modality
data, or data obtained with different cameras and sensors.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Use
the developed methods to build educational 3D applications with collaborators in
film and history.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Develop new, cross-disciplinary courses that
use the proposed scanner to provide access for many students to the state-of-
the-art technology.&lt;br/&gt;The developed courses would help the investigator
train and recruit students for her research lab that can work on
interdisciplinary projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although at present collecting
and storing both 2D images and 3D LIDAR scans might be easier and more
economical, fusing such multi-modality data remains challenging. Confusion is
often created in automatic matching methods by the repetition and ambiguity that
often occur in man-made scenes as well as the variety of properties on different
renderings of the same subject. Image sets collected over a period of time
during which lighting conditions and scene content may have changed, different
artistic rendering, as well as varying sensor types (Camera, LIDAR, etc.), can
all contribute to visual variations in data sets. However, by incorporating
contextual information to visualize the regional properties that intuitively
exist in each imagery source, the proponent has successfully addressed many of
the obstacles. Her research group will also study how human perception can be
used for registering 3D LIDAR data with other types of visual information.