* 1725555
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Asynchronous, Parallel-Adaptive Solution of Extreme Multiscale Problems in Seismology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Reza Abedi, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2022
* USD 178,680.00

This collaborative project among scientists at the University of Illinois and
the University of Tennessee will develop parallel software for efficient
earthquake simulations on exascale supercomputers. State-of-the-art systems now
resolve seismic response at frequencies up to 1 Hz, but design engineers require
resolution up to 10 Hz. Synchronization barriers may limit performance on
exascale systems. This project will develop scalable, barrier-free asynchronous
simulation tools and space-time adaptive meshing to meet the seismic resolution
requirements on exascale platforms. It will develop improved fault-gouge physics
models and extend asynchronous hyperbolic solvers to address elliptic (and
eventually parabolic) systems. These extensions will enable the first regional,
full-cycle seismic simulations, covering fast earthquake events and much slower
crustal motion between earthquakes, as well as the use of asynchronous exascale
solvers in most PDE-based scientific and engineering applications. The
asynchronous solution technology will support more reliable earthquake hazard
maps and the design of safer, more economical earthquake-resistant buildings and
infrastructure. In view of its broad applicability, the unprecedented simulation
power afforded by this research could trigger numerous breakthroughs in the
commercial and defense sectors. Four graduate research assistants will receive
cross-disciplinary training, and undergraduate students will participate through
the National Center for Supercomputing Application?s SPIN (Students Pushing
INnovation) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
among scientists at the University of Illinois and the University of Tennessee
will develop parallel software for efficient earthquake simulations on exascale
supercomputers. State-of-the-art systems now resolve seismic response at
frequencies up to 1 Hz, but design engineers require resolution up to 10 Hz.
Synchronization barriers and load balancing across subdomains may limit
performance on exascale systems. This project will replace the standard bulk
synchronous parallel model and Domain Decomposition Method (DDM) with scalable,
barrier-free asynchronous solvers and space-time adaptive meshing without DDM to
meet the seismic resolution requirements on exascale platforms. It will develop
Shear Transition Zone models for fault-gouge physics and use pseudo-time methods
to extend asynchronous hyperbolic solvers to address elliptic (and eventually
parabolic) systems. These extensions will enable the first regional, full-cycle
seismic simulations, covering fast earthquake events and much slower crustal
motion between earthquakes, as well as the use of asynchronous exascale solvers
in most PDE-based scientific and engineering applications. The asynchronous
solution technology will support more reliable earthquake hazard maps and the
design of safer, more economical earthquake-resistant buildings and
infrastructure. In view of its broad applicability, the unprecedented simulation
power afforded by this research could trigger numerous breakthroughs in the
commercial and defense sectors. Four graduate research assistants will receive
cross-disciplinary training, and undergraduate students will participate through
the National Center for Supercomputing Application?s SPIN (Students Pushing
INnovation) program