* 1725651
* MRI: Acquisition of an NMR Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research and Teaching at Austin College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Ryan Felix, Austin College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Ryan Felix from
Austin College and colleagues Bradley Smucker, Andrew Carr and James Hebda have
acquired a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. In general,
NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
The results from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate students via
independent student research and traditional academic coursework. Students work
on these projects year long and especially during the summer months. The
spectrometer is also used by chemistry faculty at Grayson Community College and
by chemists at Southeastern Oklahoma University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
for a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels, especially in areas such as: (a) borenium ion mediated enyne
cyclization, (b) organogelation, (c) luminescent supramolecular complexes and
(d) protein chaperone functions.