* 1725969
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Ultra-Small-Angle to Wide-Angle Dual Source X-ray Scattering Instrument for Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Zahra Fakhraai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2018
* USD 538,840.00

This award supports the purchase of a state-of-the-art X-ray scattering
instrument that will be operated as an open-access facility within the
Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter (LRSM), host of an NSF-funded
MRSEC at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn). The Xeuss 2.0 from Xenocs allows
the structural characterization over length scales from 0.09 to 600 nm and thus
facilitates study of hierarchical structures in a wide range of hard and soft
materials. The anticipated scope of materials to be studied includes metals,
ceramics, plastics, biological tissue, and novel combinations of these. The
instrument will also play a vital role in the materials education and training
of the many high school, undergraduate and graduate students, visiting
scientists, post-doctoral associates and local high school teachers who
participate in LRSM programs. The facility will also develop and administer
workshops and online training materials to promote its broad use by beginners
and to fully develop expert-users and thus promote knowledge exchange and
technology transfer. The open-access facility will be used by scientists and
engineers from local companies and colleges/universities to advance their
research. Besides providing unique training in fields critical for US
technological competitiveness, the discoveries and understanding facilitated by
the new instrumentation will underpin future technologies, thereby informing
industry, stimulating the economy, and offering benefits to society at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant enables the purchase of a state-of-the-art
X-ray scattering instrument for an open-access facility within the Laboratory
for Research on the Structure of Matter (LRSM), host of an NSF-funded MRSEC at
the University of Pennsylvania (Penn). The Xeuss 2.0 by Xenocs enables materials
characterization across an extraordinarily wide range of cutting-edge research
programs at Penn and in the Philadelphia/Delaware-Valley region. The dual Cu-Mo
source and adjustable sample to detector distances provide structural
information at both high and low spatial resolution across a wide range of
length scales (0.09 to 600 nm). An assortment of sample environments enables
materials to be manipulated in situ and operando to probe their structural
evolution in response to temperature, tensile stress and electric/magnetic
fields, even in humid and liquid environments. Thus, the instrument will advance
research on the synthesis, fabrication, processing, and assembly of a wide range
of materials systems, and will provide crucial insight about structure relevant
to their chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical, optical, thermal, and
transport properties. The anticipated materials usage portfolio includes
nanoporous metals for catalysis and energy storage; nanocrystals, nanorods, and
nanocrystal superlattices for light harvesting; polymer nanocomposite films for
thermal management, optical properties, and scratch resistance; acid- and ion-
containing polymers displaying micro-phase separation for ion transport;
dendrons, dendrimers, and their self-assembled structures; hierarchical polymer-
based films for controlled wetting; chromonic liquid crystals with novel self-
assembled structures and phase transitions; inorganic microlaminated thin films
wherein fabrication methods control magnetic properties; thin film molecular
glasses with controlled stability and toughness; hierarchical protein structures
in squid lenses and other tissues; polycarbonates in ionic liquids to manipulate
chemical reactivity; and oriented protein films for electromechanical coupling.
The new instrumentation is critical for at least 17 research groups, including
12 from Penn spanning 7 academic departments, and 3 from local universities.
Additionally, the instrument will advance proprietary/open-publication research
of nearby industrial partners. The Xeuss 2.0 will play a vital role in the
materials education and training of the many high school, undergraduate and
graduate students, visiting scientists, post-doctoral associates and local high
school teachers who participate in LRSM programs.