* 1725154
* EAR PF CLARIFYING MAMMALIAN RESPONSES TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE: IMPROVING NICHE MODELING THROUGH THE INTEGRATION OF CLIMATE AND DIETARY INFORMATION
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Melissa Pardi, Pardi                   Melissa        I
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 02/29/2020
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Melissa I. Pardi has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at Vanderbilt University. This study
examines long-term evolutionary responses of mammals and communities to
environmental changes in aridity during the last 35,000 years in North America.
The study uses oxygen isotope data from fossil tooth enamel to produce climate
reconstructions to model species distribution and integrated stable isotope
analysis and dental microwear texture to gain an understanding of how species
respond to variability in aridity. Dr. Pardi is engaging high school and
undergraduate students in research. Dr. Pardi is also designing teaching modules
for middle school students and working with her mentor on outreach programs to
the Tennessee School for the Blind working with small groups of students on
science activities.

Taken together, modern and paleoecological perspectives inform on the expected
responses of biota to aridity over time. Dr. Pardi's project unites three
separate tools to understand various aspects of both modern and ancient
ecological systems and the merging of these tools is a novel approach to
understand species dynamics. Models have been used to project distributions of
species under future scenarios of aridity, but their inability to predict past
distributions using the fossil record causes concern about reliability for
predictions. This project is improving the data for the models and investigating
whether dietary shifts in the fossil record can explain the mismatch between
observed and predicted occurrences in species distribution models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.