* 1725377
* RAPID proposal: Impact of storm surge on coastal forest demography in response to repeated hurricane disturbances
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Thomas O'Halloran, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 01/31/2018
* USD 152,268.00

Large infrequent disturbances, such as hurricanes, significantly alter coastal
forests through damaging winds and salt water carried with the storm surge.
Depending on the frequency of the hurricanes and concurrent extent of the wind
damage and salt water intrusion, coastal forests can be significantly damaged
and may transition into salt water marsh. With a more variable climate system,
hurricane return times will decrease and projected increasing sea level rise
will enhance the opportunity for salt intrusion. Current understanding of
hurricane effects is based largely on the effects of a single hurricane; few
studies exist that document effects of repeated storms in one location or that
separate the effects of storm surge from wind. In October 2016 Hurricane Matthew
hit the South Carolina coast in largely in the same area affected by Hurricane
Hugo in 1989, thus providing an opportunity to study multiple hurricane impacts
on the same coastal forests. Hurricane Matthew differed in intensity and areas
inundated with salt water. The project will introduce newer remote sensing
capabilities to expand the studies to understand the short term and long term
impacts on structure and functioning of the affected forests and at larger
landscape and regional scales. This project's timely field assessments of wind
damage, salt stress, soil chemistry, tree functioning, and tree establishment
coupled with the remote sensing will test theoretical predictions and advance
understanding of large infrequent disturbances on coastal forests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large infrequent disturbances may structure forest
ecosystem responses for very long periods of time and may trigger threshold
responses that cause multiple paths of ecosystem response or even shifts in
complete ecosystem structure and function. Much of the theory devoted to
hurricane disturbance effects on coastal forest ecosystems arises from the study
of single hurricanes or immediate response following the hurricane. Empirical
tests and data are needed to evaluate multiple hurricanes across short and long
time and site to regional space scales to fully understand the recovery and
trajectories of change. This project leverages data and research sites from a
long-term field study of coastal ecosystems to examine the consequences of the
Hurricane Hugo on the recovery from wind throw and salt stress. The new studies
will examine how wind damage and the salt intrusion from Hurricane Matthew
affected soil processes, forest mortality and succession, forest functioning,
and invasion of non-native species in response to differential hurricane
disturbance. The remote sensing will assess forest structure, stress, phenology,
and plant traits across the marsh/forest landscape and at multiple study areas
along the coast of South Carolina. This work will provide critical tests of
disturbance theory, succession, ecosystem structure and function across multiple
space and time scales.