* 1725394
* TPSE Math Chairs +1 Conference #2
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Phillip Griffiths, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 02/28/2018
* USD 49,999.00

An established United States workforce need and critical challenge is to recruit
and train students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
fields. Because mathematics is a fundamental part of all STEM disciplines,
success of undergraduate students in mathematics is a crucial ingredient in
addressing this challenge. This "TPSE Math Chairs+1 Conference #2" project, with
leadership team from the Transforming Post-Secondary Education in Mathematics
(TPSE Math) group, will organize and convene a conference primarily of
mathematical sciences department chairs and other academic leaders from a
diverse set of institutions of higher education from across the country. This is
the second conference of this nature with the first having been held in October,
2016 (NSF 1651738). Workshop topics will include several key questions and
issues to be addressed to catalyze improved teaching, learning, retention, and
overall student success in undergraduate mathematics.

Although recent education research has provided the STEM education community
with indications and suggestions for various directions for change to improve
undergraduate teaching and student learning, this community as a whole has not
always been quick to foster such changes. Among the purposes of the workshop
will be to encourage more collaboration among members of the mathematics
community, help department chairs develop capacities to catalyze change in their
own departments, and serve as a vehicle for chairs with common interests to work
together for change after the conference, especially in areas of developing more
diverse and modern curricula for mathematics majors and non-mathematics majors
alike. To help guide the discussion and conference outcomes, the conference
organizers with input from participants plan to address a wide range of
questions and determine research needed to address them. The questions and
categories include: (1) What do the various STEM disciplines want for their
students who take mathematics? What mathematical training do other disciplines
want for their majors? Is this training appropriate for careers in those
disciplines? (2) What kinds of mathematical sciences training do employers want?
Do employers in fact know what mathematics training can be most useful for their
employees? (3) What are the levels of career satisfaction experienced by
students who have - and have not - taken particular mathematics courses or
pathways? (4) What menu of mathematics training best supports basic numeracy
(general quantitative and reasoning skills) for citizens in today's society? and
(5) Why are the current post-secondary pathways variations of algebra and
calculus unsatisfactory? What should replace them? The conference also will
showcase extant models, resources, and research results, and participants will
be asked to suggest how they can be adopted, adapted, disseminated, scaled up,
and evaluated, and to recommend what additional research is needed.