* 1725015
* Collaborative Research: Inquiry into the Origins of Modern Human Distributions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Michael Benedetti, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 106,796.00

Since their discovery over 150 years ago, Neanderthals have captured the
imagination of scientists and the general public. Researchers have been trying
to understand their life ways and the processes through which they disappeared.
Archaeology and the earth sciences are particularly well placed to address this
dilemma because both investigate processes that act over deep time. Within this
broad context, Dr. Jonathan Haws (University of Louisville) and Dr. Michael
Benedetti (University of North Carolina Wilmington) will lead a three-year study
of Neanderthal extinction and replacement by anatomically modern humans . The
project brings together an international team to recover high-resolution
archaeological, geological and paleoecological records from the excavation of
Lapa do Picareiro, a cave in central Portugal. The project is designed to test
whether or not differences in land use and diet allowed Neanderthals to survive
in southwestern Europe longer than anywhere else. The ultimate goal is to
determine why Neanderthals went extinct and were replaced by modern humans. The
benefits of this project to society at large include a deeper understanding of
human evolution, particularly the role played by environmental change,
technology and diet choice. The project also offers scientific engagement and
cultural enrichment for student participants who will join an interdisciplinary
research team in an international setting. The PIs and their institutions have
shown commitment to undergraduate research and demonstrated success in mentoring
student research in previous NSF-funded projects. Many of the students involved
in this project over the past 5 years have been first-generation college
students from under-represented, working poor, and rural demographic groups in
Kentucky and eastern North Carolina. Recruiting these students has the dual
benefits of diversifying the field crew and enriching the educational experience
for students who may not otherwise have opportunities for international travel
or study. Building on the success of our previous work in Portugal, this project
will also continue to generate scientific partnerships among American,
Portuguese and Czech universities, creating new collaborative learning and
research opportunities for students and faculty alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lapa do Picareiro is a unique site, with about 10m of
sediments spanning over 50,000 years. The sequence includes almost 2m of intact
deposits dated between 30-42,000 years ago, making it an ideal place to track
changes in paleoenvironments and human ecodynamics during the critical period of
Neanderthal extinction and modern human colonization of Europe. The proposed
methodology uses radiocarbon dating to establish age control, stone tool
analyses to understand the decision-making of Paleolithic humans, animal bone
assemblages to reconstruct paleoenvironments and understand Neanderthal and
modern human diets, and sedimentological analyses to infer site formation
processes and environmental context of human occupation. Taken together, the
work will establish a complete paleoenvironmental and geoarchaeological
chronology for the Middle-Upper Paleolithic transition at Lapa do Picareiro,
providing critical context that is missing from many other sites in the region.