* 1725018
* Special Projects (CNS): National Center for Women and Information Technology (NCWIT): Moving Toward Sustainability for Women in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Lecia Barker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 8,214,300.00

The University of Colorado proposes to extend and scale the National Center for
Women &amp; Information Technology (NCWIT) as a means to increase women's
meaningful participation in information technology careers. NCWIT seeks parity
in computing for girls and women of all ethnicities, ages, and disability
status. NCWIT is a coalition of corporations, academic institutions, and non-
profits committed to a nationally unified approach for realizing computing
reform at all levels. NCWIT's partnerships and collaborations have broad reach
into K-12, higher education, and the U.S. technical and research workforce.
NCWIT creates and manages national programs and campaigns to provide an
infrastructure for a multi-tiered learning community, making it possible for
members to take internal action, pilot reform efforts, collaborate, scale, and
innovate. NCWIT research-based resources build capacity for implementing change,
raising awareness, and reaching out to critical populations. NCWIT has a strong
record of success, and will amplify its impact through (1) extending its
learning communities, (2) improving the research base related to diversity and
computing and (3) increasing national awareness and voice through collaborative
outreach efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NCWIT is uniquely situated for
successfully overcoming the complex and lingering conditions that hinder women's
participation in computing. Increasing women's participation in IT has far-
reaching national consequences. Not only do information and computing
technologies pervade all aspects of our everyday lives in an unprecedented way,
but engineering and science discovery and innovation are now increasingly
dependent on computational science. Increasing the pool of qualified computing
professionals supports the goals of national initiatives and our economic,
security, defense, and health care systems are computing-centered. Increasing
the participation of women not only supports national goals, but also improves
the development and design of computing systems, applications, and products
through the integration of diverse ideas while helping to overcome economic
disparities for women.