* 1725784
* EAR-PF:   A new archive of Paleoarchean ocean chemistry: the 3.24 Ga Panorama volcanogenic massive sulfide district, Western Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Benjamin Johnson, Johnson                 Benjamin       W
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Benjamin Johnson has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the University of Colorado. The
investigation will focus on examining the biogeochemistry of altered oceanic
crust from the Paleoarchean (3,400 to 3,200 million years ago), a crucial time
in Earth evolution. Dr. Johnson will be deciphering the role of planetary
geochemical and geologic processes on biological evolution and nutrient cycling.
The education plan will focus on interacting with a wide range of audiences
through programs at the University of Colorado sharing knowledge on early Earth
and astrobiology. The PI will engage a diverse group of students through CU-
Boulder's Summer Multicultural Access to Research Training (SMART) initiative,
advise undergraduate research through the Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program (UROP), and promote science education by utilizing resources of the
Science Education Initiative (SEI), SAGANet, and the Cooperative Institute for
Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES).

The overall goal of this research is to address four outstanding questions in
biogeochemistry during the Paleoarchean: what controls the delta-18O value of
Paleoarchean seawater? does hydrothermal circulation add or remove N from the
Paleoarchean ocean? was sulfate in the Paleoarchean ocean high or low? and what
is the depth of Paleoarchean mid-ocean ridges? While previous work has utilized
sedimentary rock archives to elucidate Paleoarchean mineral chemistry and
surface conditions, in this project, the PI will use a new archive of
Paleoarchean mineral chemistry: hydrothermal deposits. Specifically, the 3.24 Ga
Panorama volcanogenic massive sulfide (VMS) district in Western Australia, which
represents a remarkably complete section of hydrothermally altered oceanic
crust, including heat source, a 7 km thick outcrop of volcanic crust, and
sedimentary cover serves as an archive of Paleoarchean biogeochemistry. The area
has been investigated by the economic geology community, but has of yet not been
utilized to answer questions of Earth history.