* 1725604
* ADVANCE Partnership: Building Relationships to Increase Diversity and Gender Equity in Hawaii's Two Year College System
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Joshua Kaakua, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,250,281.00

The project, which is a partnership between the University of Hawaii Community
College (UHCC) system and the University of Hawaii Hilo (UHH), will identify and
address unique obstacles to the retention and career progress of STEM women
faculty of different race and ethnic groups in the context of seven remote
community college campuses. The project will use virtual tools to connect these
remote campus locations in mentoring and coaching trainings for administrators
and senior faculty, and will implement a mentoring and coaching program for
women STEM faculty of diverse race/ethnic backgrounds. This project will provide
a model for addressing the challenges STEM women faculty face in two-year
colleges and in remote locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
generate systemic change for gender equity in the context of community colleges
through a multi-stage process involving: institution-specific assessments of
barriers to equity; implementation of proven strategies for change developed at
the University of Hawaii Hilo and other previous ADVANCE institutions; and
coaching and mentoring programs involving over 400 men and women in STEM fields
on the seven University of Hawaii Community College campuses. These strategies
will involve the use and evaluation of virtual tools for multi-institutional
participation across remote island locations, and the training of up to 60
mentors (senior STEM men and women faculty) and 32 coaches (STEM women faculty),
who will in turn serve a minimum of 75-100 unique participants, and be
sustainable and scalable to other fields and to other UHCC system and University
of Hawaii campuses. Coaching and mentoring programs are designed with the unique
circumstances of smaller institutions in mind and will be further informed by
the institutional assessments. The approach implemented with this project will
be disseminated as a model for other 2-year college campuses and campus systems
nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
women faculty in academic institutions.  Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate.