* 1725621
* EAR-PF: Mapping the effects of drought on human evolution and East African ecosystems during the late Pleistocene using triple oxygen isotopes and bulk geochemistry in paleosols
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Emily Beverly, Beverly                 Emily          J
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2021
* USD 152,250.00

Dr. Emily Beverly has been granted an EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out
research and education plans at the University of Michigan. Using geochemical
characteristics of ancient soils (paleosols) understood through the use of
multiple proxies, Dr. Beverly will reconstruct paleoenvironmental conditions in
the Lake Victoria region in East Africa from about 100,000 to 33,000 years ago.
This data will be used with in situ fossils and Middle Stone Age artifacts to
bring insights to the question of whether humans migrated out of Africa during a
wet or dry period. The education plan will focus on engaging undergraduate
students in research. In addition, Dr. Beverly will continue her efforts to
encourage and mentor young female scientists by participating in the Females
Excelling More in Math, Engineering, and the Sciences (F.E.M.M.E.S.) program at
the University of Michigan. The investigator will organize an event related to
this investigation for girls in 4th through 6th grade with the goal of
increasing excitement about the STEM fields and confidence in their abilities as
scientists. Lastly, Dr. Beverly will partner with the Global Learning and
Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program to encourage science
education in local African schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new triple oxygen
isotope proxy will be used to isolate the influence of evaporation in the water
balance in combination with more traditional isotopic proxies and non-isotopic
bulk geochemical methods. Complimentary studies of these proxies in modern
Serengeti soils will anchor the paleoenvironmental interpretations and allow for
the reconstruction of aridity for landscapes occupied by humans to help evaluate
the role of long-term drought on human evolution and the emergence of the modern
Serengeti Ecosystem. The addition of the triple oxygen isotope proxy will
provide a means to reconstruct evaporation and will expand the ability to
extract paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic data from paleosols. In addition,
the proposed study in East Africa will provide key calibration data for
interpreting these geochemical proxies and expand modern soil data available in
a climate sensitive region.