* 1725002
* Rare Earth Elements Tracing Crustal Evolution Through Time: A Detrital Zircon Study
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2021
* USD 212,633.00

Multiple recent lines of evidence suggest that the onset of modern-like plate
tectonic processes started rather abruptly in the Archean (about 3 billion years
ago) and that tectonically, the Earth has evolved through several distinctive
dynamic stages. The overarching question here is to test the hypothesis of
several step-like changes in the tectono-magmatic evolution of the Earth. Such
change should be reflected in the geochemical composition of intermediate and
felsic igneous rocks - the basic building blocks of continental masses. If this
did happen, can we better constrain the age of that change, was it sudden or
gradual? Unraveling tectonics stages and transitions between them on our dynamic
planet has important implications for our overall understanding of resource
distribution as well as feedbacks with other evolutionary processes in the
mineral and biologic realms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, the
researchers will use detrital zircon U-Pb ages and trace elemental
concentrations (with a focus on the rare earth elements) on grains from
sediments and sedimentary rocks that satisfy the following conditions: (1) are
draining sizable segments of the continental mass, and (2) contain zircons
encompassing large geologic time intervals, especially from the Precambrian. The
age range target will especially focus on the Hadean, Archean and Proterozoic
area. Recent work shows that whole rock geochemical parameters measured on young
igneous rocks correlate positively with crustal thickness globally and
regionally. La/Yb and other trace elemental ratios are calibrated against
crustal thickness on intermediate igneous rocks from modern subduction systems
and have been used to show variations in crustal thickness over time in a few
Phanerozoic orogenic regions. The implied variation in crustal thickness is
consistent with the tens of million years cyclicity of crustal thickness in
continental areas being affected by modern plate tectonics and is also
indicative of the fact that the deepest parts of the continental crust
(regardless of its thickness) are the factories of differentiation leading to
the diversity of intermediate igneous rocks found in subduction and collision
systems.