* 1725170
* Collaborative Research: Using Titanite as a Petrochronometer for Direct Fabric Dating of High Temperature Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 107,323.00

Mountain ranges form when the Earth's crust contracts due to the collision of
tectonic plates. This contraction generates granite plutons in the crust and
deforms those granite plutons through shear zones (localized regions of intense
deformation). Both processes imprint a "fabric" on the granite, an arrangement
of minerals that records the deformation of the rock. The mineral titanite
crystallizes during the formation of granite in the crust and during the
formation of rock fabric, and both events can be dated using the radioactive
decay of uranium into lead within titanite crystals. This new method for dating
shear zones will be used to examine mountain building processes and the
development of rock fabrics that subsequently can control further magma
emplacement, faulting, fluid flow, and metal ore mineralization.

This study will focus on the physical and chemical changes in the mineral
titanite during deformation. Structural geology techniques will investigate the
physical changes through the outcrop and microscale structures of the rock, and
electron microscopy will quantify the recrystallization of individual mineral
grains. Chemical changes in titanite will be measured by X-ray and mass
spectrometry techniques, and individual crystals will be dated using
measurements of uranium-lead isotope ratios. These techniques will be applied in
two study areas, in shear zones in western Idaho and east-central California.
Rocks from these areas show a wide range of fabric development, from non-
deformed to pervasively sheared. The variety of degrees of deformation measured
through the methods described above will be used to test how the intensity of a
rock fabric develops during shear zone movement. Outcomes in both study areas
will include methodologies to establish sub-million year resolution of the
timing of deformation, the spatial-temporal pattern of strain accumulation
within shear zones, and the feedbacks between magmatism and deformation. This
project will more broadly support graduate research training, on-line science
learning modules, and geoinformatics database development. Results of this
research will be widely disseminated through peer-reviewed journals,
professional meetings, data repositories, and websites.