* 1725247
* A Novel and Powerful Way to Measure Coronal Magnetic Fields for the DKIST Era
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Kuhn, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2023
* USD 329,360.00

One of the major unsolved problems in solar physics is the question regarding
how the solar corona is heated to temperatures over a million degrees. This
project will develop and install new instrumentation on the institution's
Scatter-free Observatory for Limb, Active Regions and Coronae (SOLARC)
telescope. This instrumentation will operate in the infrared and will take
advantage of a new approach to observing weak emission lines in the corona.
These measurements will be used to derive the magnetic fields in the corona
which will, in turn, be compared to existing numerical models that predict
coronal heating. This project will support the training of the next generation
of solar scientists. The PI will involve a postdoctoral researcher in the
project and also plans to incorporate summer interns on the graduate and
undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will
construct a new instrument to be installed on the SOLARC telescope. This new
instrument will take advantage of a novel approach that is based on permitted-
forbidden line pairs and the Hanle effect, which has two significant advantages
over previous techniques. First, it only relies on measuring linearly polarized
emission signals which are typically two (or more) orders of magnitude larger
than previously used circularly polarized emission lines. Second, it uses
emission lines at longer infrared (IR) wavelengths where the scattered light
from Earth's atmosphere is greatly reduced. The observed coronal vector magnetic
fields will then be compared to magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models to better
understand the heating mechanisms within the corona. The development effort
should also provide a powerful method that can be applied directly to the high
spatial resolution capabilities of the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope's
(DKIST's) IR instruments.