* 1725235
* Policy as a Private Good: Firm-Lobbyist-Politician Networks in the Legislative Process
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* In Song Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 244,293.00

General Abstract This project investigates a key question in political science,
"Who governs?". It seeks to identify the set of political actors exert who
greater levels of influence over policy-making. Representation is one of the
fundamental pillars of democracy, ensuring citizens the right to petition
elected government officials in order to influence policies. Yet, a vast
literature has demonstrated that the policy-making process in the U.S. is
dominated by individuals with substantial economic resources. Especially
important players include the firms owned by those elites who make campaign
contributions, lobby, and make political endorsements to increase their leverage
in influencing government policies. Despite the significance of this "unequal
representation," empirical studies of political representation have been limited
because it is difficult to observe a direct link between political actors and
politicians, let alone the true underlying preferences that drive their
interactions. The proposed project will investigate the direct representation of
specific firms' interests by politicians in the form of highly complex policy
outputs. The investigator will develop a theoretical framework to identify the
conditions under which firms invest in political networks. To overcome the
empirical challenge in identifying the links between firms and politicians, the
investigator will then construct a large database of records of firms' lobbying
on congressional bills and their political connections to the legislators who
sponsor lobbied bills. The project will not only provide valuable insight into
the influence of interest groups, it will also produce an easily accessible
website that will illustrate the important players and their positions in the
policy process. This will be of great value to scholars, and will serve as a
valuable teaching resource as well.

Technical Abstract This project will develop a set of machine learning tools
used to analyze political connections. Specifically, the project will combine
the methodologies of ideal point estimation widely used in political science
with probabilistic models of latent networks originating in computer science.
The primary goal of the proposed methodology is to identify the location of
firms, lobbyists, and politicians in a common 'ideological' space in which the
relative proximity of various participants implies a closer political connection
or alignment of interests. Groups of firms, lobbyists, and politicians who share
similar political interests will be clustered together. This methodological
framework will allow researchers to identify political networks that are
prevalent in various policy dimensions. The open-source software that implements
the proposed methodology and the entire database with its web-interface will be
made publicly available.