* 1725762
* EAR-PF:  Testing the boundaries of Burgess Shale-Type preservation with literature meta-analysis, decay experimentation, and fossil investigation
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Evan Anderson, Anderson                Evan           P
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Evan Anderson has been granted an EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out
research and education plans at the University of Missouri. The research plan
will focus on studying the Burgess Shale-type (BST) mode of soft-bodied
preservation from multiple approaches to better understand the scope and
operational mechanisms of this paleontologically important preservation mode.
Soft-bodied fossils can provide ecological and evolutionary information
available nowhere else in the fossil record. The education activities will
include developing teaching modules for K12 and undergraduate students. The
materials for these modules will include common softbodied materials (i.e.
graptolites and plant debris), 3-D printed and traditional print-outs of
exceptional soft-bodied materials, and materials collected for this study.  
This investigation will have three components. First, a literature meta-analysis
will study and expand a compendium of exceptional soft-bodied fossil deposits
(or lagerstätten) to isolate BST and BST-like deposits throughout earth history.
Comparing these deposits will both highlight shared characteristics and explore
the variation within the BST mode of fossilization. Second, decay experiments
will test two models of BST preservation for their effectiveness in slowing
soft-bodied degradation. One experiment will test the hypothesis that complex
bioturbation prevents BST preservation by oxygenating sediments and enhancing
decay by simulating different kinds of burrows penetrating the sediment in which
a decay organism is buried. The second experiment will test the hypothesis that
elevated calcium and alkalinity levels allows for the development of calcite
permeability seals in BST deposits, protecting buried organisms from
degradation. Finally, a fossil-based investigation will compare the burial
context and fossil preservation of freshly collected material from the BST-like
Winneshiek and Waukesha lagerstätten to traditional open marine BST deposits
from the Cambrian House Range of Utah. Although the BST-like deposits come from
post-Cambrian deposits with restricted water circulation, if the fossil
preservational mineralogies and qualities are similar between the BST-like and
BST deposits, then their burial environment conditions should be comparable
(i.e. calcite seals).