* 1725149
* Consortium for the Transformation of Undergraduate STEM Education at the University of Washington
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2022
* Jennifer Doherty, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 10/31/2022
* USD 917,337.00

The project will develop an internal Consortium for the Advancement of
Undergraduate STEM Education (CAUSE) to measure changes in faculty practice,
culture, and student learning at the University of Washington. It involves a
detailed plan to implement a theory-based approach to transform the culture of
undergraduate teaching. The goal is to achieve a critical mass of faculty
(25-50%) across seven departments that have the largest undergraduate
enrollments. Six of these departments are within STEM. The project is being
conducted in a university environment that is increasingly conducive to the
mission of this project. There are four elements in place that are critical or
valuable for transforming the culture of undergraduate teaching: 1) committed
senior leadership, 2) major investments in new active-learning classroom spaces,
3) active discipline-based education research groups (four) along with an
interdisciplinary consortium active in education research, and 4) a pilot
faculty development network that has already engaged 36 faculty representing 20
different units. This project will focus on expanding the faculty development
network with extensive training activities and create change groups in each of
the seven core departments that are designed to grow each year. These
departments are: Chemistry, Biology, Physics, Psychology, Mathematics, Computer
Science, and Public Health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merit of this project lies
in several areas. First, it adds another institution to the small but growing
set of others supported by NSF in the last two years that are focused on
creating institutional transformation through departmental change groups
supported by education experts. Second, the basic project goal is
straightforward, namely, adding three new faculty to the core reform group in
each department during each year of this 3-year project. Third, the core group
and the departmental leaders have the faculty status of "Lecturer" because these
faculty are where the teaching expertise for introductory courses is centered.
However, during the expansion period of this project, faculty of other types
will be recruited and added to the core departmental groups. This project is an
applied research project to investigate whether the theory of change underlying
this transformation effort works as expected.