* 1725573
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cyberinstrument for Interdisciplinary Computational Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Amy Apon, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 994,161.00

This project, acquiring, deploying, and maintaining a high performance computing
(HPC) cluster, aims to support a broad range of data-enabled science and
research training activities. Motivated by both fundamental and applied science
agendas, the instrument will be utilized by at least the fourteen collaborative
projects cited below:&lt;br/&gt;- Quality and Scalability of Topic
Models;&lt;br/&gt;- Multigrid and Multiscale Optimization for Machine Learning
and Networks;&lt;br/&gt;- Computational Studies of Multifunctional
Polymers;&lt;br/&gt;- Gene Network Alignment at High-scale;&lt;br/&gt;- Modeling
of Peptide-functionalized Polyethylene-glycol (PEG)-based Hydrogels;&lt;br/&gt;-
Computer Simulations of Highly Thermostable Copolymer-enzyme
Conjugates;&lt;br/&gt;- Enabling Modeling of Large Macromolecular
Assemblages;&lt;br/&gt;- Computational Studies of Biomolecular
Evolution;&lt;br/&gt;- Lattice Boltzmann Simulation of Vascular Blood Flow with
Stents and Flow Diverters;&lt;br/&gt;- Automated Parallel Parameterization
Methods;&lt;br/&gt;- Large-scale Simulations of Rare Events in Biological
Systems;&lt;br/&gt;- Performance Optimization and Load Balancing for Large-scale
Metal Cation Catalysts; &lt;br/&gt;- Fundamental Insights into Alkane Selective
Oxidation in Atomic-scale Metal Cation Catalysts, and&lt;br/&gt;- Computation
Determination of Chemical Stability of Nuclear Materials.&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument is the primary resource for the projects in computer science,
including scalable machine learning and methods for utilization of emerging
memory and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) technologies. Moreover, the cluster
constitutes a much needed platform for collaborative development and execution
of GPU-accelerated scientific applications. The solid-state disks (SSDs) and
memory paths available through Omni-path enable high scalability of research
applications that manage complex operations, Transforming the way scientific
knowledge is attained and implemented to drive new technologies, new
developments in computing, coupled with traditional computational methods,
advance efforts in chemistry, physics, biology, and materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The instrument serves as an
essential tool for advancing inquiry for at least 20 faculty in the
collaborative team from Clemson and Claflin University, an Historically Black
University partner. Three hundred fifty or more graduate and undergraduate
students participate in the research proposed and also in the educational
projects that will use the instrument. Furthermore, configured as part of the
Clemson "Palmetto" supercomputer cluster, the system is accessible to other
faculty, staff, postdocs, and students and provides benefit to world-class
operational user support and offers a path for sustainability for the
instrument. The team includes nine women researchers and faculty participants
who serve as role models. The participation of women, as well as in graduate
programs at this institution, exceeds the national average. Outreach, education,
and training activities will reach dozens of undergraduate participants at
Claflin University. Current and proposed courses and seminars are planned at all
levels.