* 1725789
* EAR-PF Near-real time monitoring and prediction of snowpack drought over Sierra Nevada, California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Laurie Huning, Huning                  Laurie         S
* Fellowship Award
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Laurie Huning has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to work at the University of California, Irvine investigating snowpack droughts
across mountainous terrain. Regions in the western United States such as
California greatly rely on snowmelt from mountainous regions for a significant
fraction of their water resources and drought in California is not uncommon.
Nonetheless, the incorporation of snow information into drought monitoring
frameworks remains largely unexplored. It is expected that the project will
advance the knowledge of drought characteristics across snow-dominated
mountainous terrain and provide insight into water availability and the
probability of drought persistence that would be useful to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a better
understanding of snow water equivalent (SWE) as a critical drought indicator,
which is important for achieving water security in regions that depend on
snowmelt-derived water resources. The PI will characterize and diagnose the
evolution of snow droughts across the hydrologically-significant Sierra Nevada.
Physical and statistical methods, remote sensing, and reanalyses will be used to
address science questions related to the spatial and temporal variability of
hydrological and meteorological processes and states (e.g. SWE/snowfall,
streamflow, temperature, etc.). Such efforts will move toward improved drought
monitoring systems and metrics, near-term forecasts, and long-term climate
analysis in mountainous regions where snow is important. This project will
generate high-resolution, near-real time maps of the snowpack to characterize
snowpack deficits, drought severity, and water storage that can be used for
water resources management and environmental hazard mitigation. The
incorporation of distributed snow information into a drought monitoring system
will further the knowledge of processes related to snow hydrology, mountain
meteorology, and hydrologic extremes and climatology.