* 1725480
* MRI: Acquisition of a Focused Ion Beam Scanning Electron Microscope (FIB-SEM) for Large Volume 3 Dimensional Imaging of Whole Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Derek Toomre, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 698,558.00

An award is made to Yale University to implement a state-of-the-art Focused Ion
Beam Scanning Electron Microscope (FIB-SEM) system. It provides a powerful new
tool to study the 3D structure and function of cells and their organelles -
especially those that require high-resolution, yet large volumetric views. It
will also allow new correlative studies that bridge the gap between light
microscopy (including super-resolution) and electron microscopy. The broader
impacts are multifaceted. The instrument will be integrated into the Yale CCMI
Electron Microscopy Core Facility and infrastructure created precisely for such
multi-user equipment. The instrument will be used to train the next generation
of scientists and bioengineers in quantitative imaging, fostering new
interdisciplinary research between biological, engineering and physical
sciences. Student diversity is a strong focus and will be actively promoted on
multiple fronts through established Yale outreach programs. 3D EM datasets will
be rendered in a stereoscopic virtual reality (VR) platform so that anyone can
voyage into cells. Thus, the large high-resolution volumetric data will not only
propel basic science, but also help educate and inspire a broad and diverse
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new FIB-SEM system will enable new
scientific research into how cell and tissue structure impacts function, with
projects on how neurons communicate, how organelles such as primary cilia, Golgi
complex, phagosomes, and the endoplasmic reticulum form and function. The main
user group comprises leaders in a broad range of scientific disciplines
stretching across the biological sciences, engineering, and computer sciences.
The new system will act as a focal point, with faculty members, postdoctoral
trainees, and students from different departments interacting and helping each
other to reach common imaging and analysis goals. The instrument will be an
extremely valuable tool not only for research on intracellular functions, but
also for projects that address intercellular communications, such as those that
occur in the nervous system and in the immune system.