* 1725534
* MRI: Acquisition of a circular dichroism spectropolarimeter for research and training of undergraduates at Gettysburg College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Shelli Frey, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 112,136.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Shelli Frey from
Gettysburg College and colleagues Kurt Andresen, Katherine Buettner and Lucas
Thompson have acquired a circular dichroism (CD) spectrometer. Many chemical and
biological molecules are chiral (having structures that are not superimposable -
like our hands). Chiral molecules that are prevalent in living organisms can
exist in two forms. These forms can be described as having left-handed or right-
handed conformations. A CD spectrometer can determine which form or whether a
mixture of both forms is present. The spectrometer can follow changes as the
chiral molecule binds to another molecule (ligand), rearranges its structure, or
reacts (perhaps with a drug or an antibody). Therefore, CD spectroscopy is
suitable for probing protein (or other macromolecular) structures or changes to
structures due to environmental conditions. CD spectroscopy has been widely used
for three types of measurements: identifying the structure of proteins, studying
the geometry changes during folding and unfolding of proteins, and determining
the energies involved in binding interactions and protein unfolding. This
spectrometer is used by undergraduates. While being trained to use this
important tool, the research experience prepares the students for future careers
and advanced degrees in medical and scientific fields. The instrument is also
used by the NSF funded STEM Scholars program, which fosters a sense of community
for students of diverse backgrounds with an interest in science fields. The
acquisition of this spectropolarimeter opens new paths of research for students
and faculty, and it helps students see more of the interconnected nature of
science through the interdisciplinary projects. Students have access to this
instrumentation in their courses, ultimately resulting in researchers prepared
to enter graduate school or careers in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award of a circular dichroism spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as:(a) developing titanium and
vanadium binding sites in small proteins to determine secondary structure and
study DNA cleavage, (b) assembling gold nanorods with electrostatically adsorbed
poly-polyl-lysine to understand how molecular structure can translate into
control over chiral nanoparticle assemblies, and (c) studying the folding of the
nucleosome to give insight into how DNA in the nucleosome can interact with
other biological molecules in vivo.