* 1725938
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Cluster for Multi-Disciplinary Research &amp; Education at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Salomon Turgman Cohen, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2021
* USD 395,975.00

In this project, faculty from Kettering University will acquire and operate a
centralized High Performance Computing (HPC) resource called the Kettering
University High Performance Computing cluster (KUHPC). KUHPC will provide
capabilities to Kettering University to facilitate both computation- and data-
intensive research on campus. Kettering is a primarily undergraduate institution
specializing in experiential learning and cooperative education within science,
engineering, math, and business fields. Current computing resources available on
campus are insufficient to support the scope of computational programs faculty
wish to pursue both in research and teaching. Reliable, dedicated computational
and data-storage resources are needed on campus to support and grow existing
faculty research programs, and to train and recruit high-quality students in the
future. The establishment of a centralized computational resource will support
ongoing research projects, allow for the development of new research projects,
and advance the use of computational techniques both in research and in
undergraduate coursework across multiple Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math (STEM) disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KUHPC will enable a growing number
of multi-disciplinary faculty at Kettering University to use computational tools
in their research. The project team represents nine different research groups
across a broad range of STEM disciplines that would immediately benefit from the
acquisition of the HPC resource. From mapping generational differences in DNA
sequences and simulating dynamic protein structures, to modeling the passage of
electromagnetic waves through complex media and optimizing industrial
manufacturing processes - the diverse projects will all directly benefit from a
centralized HPC resource. KUHPC will deliver large-scale parallel computation
that will significantly shorten the modeling, simulation, and analysis time for
all the research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, KUHPC will facilitate
large-scale student exposure to applied computational research projects not
currently possible on campus. Computational research techniques and tools are
essential for state-of-the art work in multiple STEM fields, and future
Kettering students will gain these essential skills through both coursework and
on-campus research experiences. The acquisition of the HPC resource would allow
for the inclusion of computationally intensive projects or modules in coursework
across a wide range of disciplines. Access to an HPC resource would provide
students the opportunity to work with more accurate and complex computational
models than are currently possible. Allowing students to work with a HPC
resource as undergraduates will provide them with strong technical and
computational skills that are transferrable to both industry and graduate
studies across disciplines.