* 1725657
* SPX: Enabling Scalable Synchronizations for General Purpose GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Rami Melhem, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 850,000.00

Today?s GPUs have been successfully used for general purpose processing
including high-performance computing, machine learning, graph analytics, to name
a few applications. However, general purpose computing has different complexity
and characteristics from those of graphics processing. A crucial characteristic
is the need for coordination and synchronization among parallel threads, which
occurs more often in general purpose applications than in graphics rendering.
However, unlike common CPU designs, current GPU designs are missing full-fledged
support for synchronization primitives that are convenient for implementing
transparent scalability and achieving high performance for many parallel
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops truly effective,
efficient, easy-to-use and easy-to-implement synchronization mechanisms for
GPGPU while overcoming major obstacles pertaining to the GPU architecture. The
first thrust will identify GPGPU synchronization primitives that are deemed
sufficient to handle a large set of applications with static and dynamic
dependencies. The second thrust will provide solutions and methodologies on how
to use the new primitives in the most efficient way to suit the characteristics
of applications. The third thrust addresses the main challenges in implementing
those primitives in efficiency, possible context switching overhead, and memory
capacity limitations. The success in this project will help fuel the spread of
accelerator architectures for high-performance computing, cloud and mobile
systems. It will increase efficiency for improved performance and reduced
energy/power consumption, leading to a greener IT industry. Trained students
will become future taskforce to continue the revolution of extending computing
into every realm of science, life, commerce and culture.