* 1725768
* EAR PF:   The Stability of Viscous Lavas: Understanding the Driving Processes and Greatest Hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Brett Carr, Carr                    Brett          B
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Brett B. Carr has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO),
Columbia University. Silicic effusion eruptions are long-lived and present a
persistent hazard to the populations living around them. The primary hazard of
these eruptions is the development and collapse of instabilities in the erupted
lava that form dangerous block-and-ash pyroclastic flows, plumes, and ash
clouds. This investigation will examine instabilities in active silicic lava
flows and identify precursors to their collapse. During field campaigns in
Sinabung Volcoano, Indonesia, the PI will collect aerial and thermal photography
to determine changes in the internal structure of the flow/dome and potential
precursors to collapse. The information from the volcano in Indonesia will be
compared with data from the domes at Colima, Mexico, and Santiaguito, Guatemala.
The results from this investigation will improve hazard assessments and risk
mitigation in regions affected by effusive eruptions. The new methods and
insights stemming from this project will allow volcano observatories to make
more detailed and quantitative assessment of instabilities and to provide more
effective warning to communities at risk. The education plan will focus on
mentoring of an undergraduate student in research related to the investigation.
In addition, Dr. Carr will participate in public outreach and education
activities at LDEO.

This project addresses the processes controlling the stability of high-
viscosity, high-silica lava extruded during an effusive eruption. The
investigation will address the following questions: which processes promote or
suppress the instability and collapse of viscous lava, and how do these vary
over the course of an eruption? what relationships exist between the cause of an
instability, the size, and the frequency of the resulting collapse? and how can
emerging technologies be utilized to mitigate the risk from lava instability?
Dr. Carr will investigate lava instabilities by creating a time-series of
topographic change of currently active silicic effusive eruptions and
identifying precursors to collapse. The principal investigator will reconstruct
or collect digital terrain models (DTMs) of these flows and then analyze them
using a numerical slope stability analysis program to quantify the risk of
collapses for each time period, and to infer the internal structure of the
flow/dome. Dr. Carr will conduct a field campaign at the ongoing eruption of
Sinabung Volcano, Indonesia, and utilize an emerging technology - low-cost
aerial and thermal photography - to generate a sequence of DTMs of the flows. In
addition, the investigator will collaborate with scientists working on domes at
Colima, Mexico and Santiaguito, Guatemala, to exchange topographic data of these
domes. The result will be shared with staff at volcano observatories to be
integrated into monitoring and hazard assessment activities.