* 1725344
* EAR-PF:   Properties of the shallow crust around the San Jacinto Fault Zone characterized by joint geodetic and seismic analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Christopher Johnson, Johnson                 Christopher    W
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Christopher W. Johnson has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and education plans at the University of California San
Diego and the University of Southern California. The objective of this project
is to develop classifiers for earthquakes, microseisms, and ambient noise using
parameters of the waveforms and utilize statistical learning techniques to train
a computer program to identify previously undetected microseismic events in
upper 1 km of the crust. The properties of the near surface require further
exploration to constrain processes that generate earthquakes and characterize
the temporal variations in seismic and geodetic records. The expected results
from this project will advance the understanding of seismic ground motion,
surface deformation, transient deformation signals, and elastic and hydrologic
crustal properties for the community at large. This study provides the framework
for nascent earthquake detection techniques applicable to regional seismic
networks. During the investigation, Dr. Johnson will interact and train
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dominant fault
system along the Pacific-North American plate boundary is the San Andreas Fault
(SAF) that bisects dense urban city centers along the California coast.
Southeast of Los Angeles, CA the SAF bifurcates into the San Jacinto Fault Zone
(SJFZ), where microseismic events occur daily and six M&gt;5 earthquakes have
ruptured in the past 35 years. Fully characterizing the SAF and SJFZ are of
great importance to infrastructure planning and hazard mitigation. A recent
dense array deployment of &gt;1,100 seismometers recorded ground motions at the
SJFZ for 5 weeks. The data set provides a unique opportunity to develop new
techniques that characterize the shallow subsurface from 0-1 km depth and fully
describe the fault zone environment from the surface to the brittle-ductile
transition zone at ~18 km depth. Preliminary results from the deployment
indicate &gt;120 small events in one day of the array data, significantly more
than the 15 earthquakes detected by the regional seismic network. Labeling as
many features of the data as possible will aid in efficiently processing large
volumes of data, thereby reducing the computational expense of microseismic
earthquake detection. The detailed classification of continuous data should also
produce a qualitative description of patterns in the noise and highlight
episodes of coherent energy that may represent previously unexplored failure
processes in the shallowest portions of the crust. This is a novel study
utilizing data from the Earthscope PBO networks to further advance the
understanding of plate boundary fault systems.