* 1725110
* Retrograde Metamorphism in the Greek Cycladic Islands as a Window into Exhumation Mechanisms of High Pressure Terranes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Whitney Behr, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 334,776.00

Subduction zones carry oceanic and continental lithosphere to depths of arc
magma genesis and beyond. However, not all subducted material reaches these
depths and rocks are often returned to Earth's surface and preserved as exhumed
high-pressure and ultra-high-pressure terranes in orogenic belts. The
mechanism(s) by which these rocks return to the surface remains enigmatic.
Knowledge of exhumation mechanisms is fundamental for a complete understanding
of subduction zone dynamics. Although the research focus is on a particular part
of the Aegean, the results will have implications for the general tectonic and
geochemical processes operative in other exhumed subduction complexes as well as
modern and ancient subduction zones. For example, modern observations of
subduction zones reveal a spectrum of deformational and seismic behaviors along
the subduction interface that are a function of interface effective width,
rheological and metamorphic heterogeneities, and fluid distribution. The exhumed
rock record on Syros and Tinos samples this subduction interface allowing us to
better understand the linkage among mass transport, fluids, deformation and
seismic behavior during the return-flow of material. In addition to the
intellectual impacts of improved understanding of material transfer in
subductions zone, the broader impacts consist of two key components: 1)
international collaboration with colleagues at the University of Athens and 2)
minority student support/outreach via training of two Ph.D. students (one
minority and one female) and support for a minority undergraduate summer
internship program for students from the University of Puerto
Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is commonly accepted that metamorphic rocks on
Syros and Tinos record prograde metamorphism due to subduction during the Eocene
(~ 50 Ma), followed by exhumation from mid-crustal levels during Miocene (~25
Ma) extensional detachment faulting. However, the processes responsible for
exhuming these rocks from mantle depths to the middle crust during substantial
window of time (~25 m.y.) between subduction and core-complex-capture remain
enigmatic and the pressure and temperature conditions are poorly constrained. In
addition, there are several cryptic phases of retrograde metamorphism that are
likely associated with this time gap, and that record different mineral
assemblages, deformation fabrics, and degrees of fluid infiltration and fluid
sources. THe researchers will determine the pressure-temperature-time-
deformation-fluid-source paths for several outcrops on Syros and Tinos, in order
to decipher the exhumation mechanisms responsible for the early retrograde
history and provide a high resolution snapshot of the Eo-Oligocene exhumation
history of the Cycladic Blueschist Unit. The researchers will use a multi-
disciplinary suite of approaches, including field structural geology, petrology,
geochronology, and geochemistry, to decipher the early exhumation mechanisms of
high pressure metamorphic rocks on Syros and Tinos. Field structural geology
will focus on establishing deformation stages, strain distributions and
kinematics; petrology, thermobarometry and microstructural analysis will be used
to link particular fabrics identified in outcrop to their pressure-temperature
conditions of deformation; in-situ and multi-mineral-isochron geochronology will
provide constraints on the timing of development of particular retrograde
fabrics; and stable isotope geochemistry will allow us to decipher the fluid
sources that facilitated the retrogression process.