* 1725798
* EAR-PF:  Mesozoic Geomagnetic  Field Behavior: Exploring Mesozoic core dynamics by tuning numerical geodynamo simulations to paleomagnetic observations
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Margaret Avery, Avery                   Margaret       S
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2020
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Margaret S. Avery has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education activities at the University of California -
Berkeley. The investigation focuses on building an updated compilation of
paleomagnetic datasets for rocks from the Mesozoic area (251 - 65.5 million
years ago) and running numerical geodynamo simulations. Using the geomagnetic
field strength data measured from igneous rocks, Dr. Avery explores the
relationship between polarity reversal rate and paleomagnetic field strength.
This research links advanced geodynamo simulations with expanded paleomagnetic
observations to enable better understanding of core dynamics and core-mantle
boundary conditions during an important period of Earth evolution. For the
education activities, Dr. Avery is developing and teaching a "Data Science
Connector" course focused on geophysical data, specifically geomagnetism. In
addition, she mentors an undergraduate student through the UC Berkeley's Society
of Women in the Physical Sciences, and participates outreach activities, like
the Expanding Your Horizons conference that introduces 5th-8th grade girls to
careers in STEM fields.

The Earth's magnetic field varies on a broad range of timescales. It is to first
order dipolar in structure, but the dipole varies is strength and polarity. The
rate of polarity reversals varies on time-scales of tens of millions of years.
For example, the magnetic field has reversed ~4 times per million years over the
past 20 Myr, whereas no polarity reversals occurred for 38 Myr during the
Cretaceous normal-polarity superchron. During the Jurassic, the reversal rate
was much higher than the present rate (up to 14 reversals per million years).
These drastic changes in reversal rate occur on such long periods that they
likely are related to slow changes in the mantle that modulate the outer-core
flow, providing information about Earth's thermal evolution. During times when
the field strength was higher on average the reversal rate was low; in contrast,
during times when the field strength was lower on average there was a high rate
of reversals. Dr. Avery uses improved observational constraints and a new suite
of numerical geodynamo numerical simulations. The geodynamo software Calypso is
used to explore core dynamics and core-mantle interactions that could cause
these differing geomagnetic field behaviors, and to test the hypothetical
positive correlation between polarity reversal rate and paleointensity.