* 1725672
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Eat your Wheaties: Multi-Grain Compilers for Parallel Builds at Every Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Milind Kulkarni, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Title: SPX: Collaborative Research: Multi-Grain Compilers for Parallel Builds at
Every Scale

Modern software development practices at companies such as Google and Facebook
have led to compilation -- the process of transforming source programs into
executable programs -- becoming a significant, time-consuming, resource-
intensive process. Unfortunately, even state of the art compilers and build
systems do not do a good job of exploiting emerging, high-performance, highly-
parallel hardware, so software development is hampered by the still-slow process
of compilation. This project aims to develop new techniques to speed up the
process of compilation. The intellectual merits are designing new compiler
internals, algorithms, and schedulers to enable compilers to take advantage of
modern hardware capabilities. The project's broader significance and importance
are that the process of compilation undergirds virtually every aspect of modern
software, and hence modern life: speeding up compilation enables any type of
software to be developed more quickly, providing new features to users and more
quickly squashing potentially catastrophic bugs.

The project revolves around three main thrusts. First, the PIs are developing
new representations for compiler internals that better fit the memory hierarchy
of modern machines, eschewing pointer-based representations for dense
representations. We are designing techniques to allow programmers to write their
compiler passes at a high level while automatically converting them to use the
dense representation. Second, the PIs are designing new algorithms to optimize
compiler passes. These are transformations of internal compiler algorithms to
promote locality (by combining passes that operate on similar portions of a
program) and to enhance parallelism (by eliminating unnecessary synchronization
between passes). Finally, the PIs are creating new scheduling techniques to
allow the new highly-parallel compiler algorithms to be effectively mapped to
the parallel and distributed hardware on which modern build systems execute.