* 1725238
* I-Corps: Centrifugal Adhesion Balance
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Rafael Tadmor, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will derive from
an adhesion measuring instrument that accurately quantifies adhesion
measurements. Currently, adhesion forces are largely measured qualitatively. The
potential introduction of the instrument into the market will make changes in
products quality and the time it takes to develop new products that rely on
precise adhesion forces. There are a multitude of potential application areas in
the automotive, aerospace, chemical, petroleum, environmental, and medical
fields. The irritation of eyes due to the usage of contact lens happens mainly
because of the poor adhesion between the lens and the tear drop. The instrument
can help the contact lens industry develop contact lenses with better adhesion
to the tear drop and therefore reduce the irritation to the eye and prolongs
comfortable wear time. Successful implementation of the instrument will enable
the industry speed up the development of new products, and build more reliable
processes by reducing or eliminating development errors.

This I-Corps project will identify the key value propositions of a novel
adhesion measuring technology for customer segments across several application
areas. Key strategic partners and major competitors within the general areas
that align with this technology will be investigated. The intellectual merit of
this project lies in the new knowledge that will be obtained regarding product
development needs for adhesion measurements that will enable development of more
sophisticated products that rely on precise adhesion forces. The centrifugal
adhesion balance (CAB) instrument will potentially upgrade the adhesion
measuring approaches from qualitative estimates to exact quantifiable values.
This direct measurement of the adhesion is achieved by using a combination of
centrifugal and gravitational forces. This combination allows the CAB to produce
and measure forces needed for the liquid to detach from the solid. The ability
to manipulate forces acting on a liquid drop to obtain accurate measurements of
adhesion forces makes CAB a potentially desirable tool for industrial research
and product development.