* 1725272
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Computationally-driven Design of Advanced Block Polymer Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Marc Hillmyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 962,500.00

Non-technical Description: Block polymers are macromolecules that contain
segments or 'blocks' of repeated polymerized monomers of at least two types.
Much as proteins have tremendous variation in property and function in
biological systems by virtue of the choice and placement of amino acid residues
along the polymer backbone, the properties of block polymers can be widely tuned
by varying the length, placement, and chemical identity of their constituent
blocks. Block polymers are the basis for many important types of soft materials
such as elastomers and adhesives, but are increasingly important in applications
such as advanced membranes for batteries and fuel cells, medical devices, and
soft templates for patterning microelectronic devices. A current challenge in
deploying block polymers in such applications is that the chemical design space
is vast and there is very limited data and predictive ability connecting the
chemical structure to the derivative properties in a given material. This
project aims to dramatically accelerate block polymer materials discovery by
closely coupling modern theory and simulation approaches with state-of-the-art
synthesis and characterization. Through extensive experimental feedback to
validate and continuously improve models and simulation methods, the project
will build the foundations for a future in which in silico design of block
polymers is routine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Block polymers
are attractive for creating advanced materials with novel functionality by
embedding multiple physical or chemical properties within a single compound.
Such polymers are also attractive for manufacturing as their synthesis is
scalable and they embed nanostructures spontaneously by thermodynamic driving
forces arising from the incompatibility of the different blocks. However, as the
demand for distinct desirable properties exhibited by a single material
increases, so must the number of blocks. The corresponding design space
increases geometrically with the number of blocks and block chemistries, making
an intuition-based, trial-and-error approach infeasible. Instead, the project
adopts a computationally-driven materials discovery approach, building on recent
game-changing advances in self-consistent field theory and global optimization
strategies for materials design and discovery. These computational strategies
are coupled to an ambitious, advanced synthesis and characterization program
capable of realizing the desired materials in practice. Through experimental
feedback to validate and continuously improve models and simulation methods, the
project will build the foundations for a future in which in silico design of
block polymers is routine.