* 1725707
* Interactive STEM Education Competence in Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Daniel Dickerson, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 599,939.00

Mathematics and science concepts and skills acquired in elementary school form
the foundation for future success in STEM fields and yet students in eastern
North Carolina and across the nation struggle to demonstrate proficiency on
state and national tests. This project seeks to address one area affecting
student outcomes, the nature and role of discipline-specific discourse and
argumentation. The goal of the project is an empirical exploration of immersive
classroom simulation activities (ICSAs) on pre-service mathematics and science
teachers' competence and confidence in discourse use. Student-to-student and
student-to-teacher discourse are critical components of standards-based
practices shown to improve learning outcomes and are also foundational tenets of
mathematical and scientific pedagogical practices in standards documents.
Teachers promote explanation and justification, critical for students to develop
understanding, through questioning. Discourse is a key factor in making content
meaningful and relevant for learners, an important construct for engagement,
short- and long-term learning outcomes, and persistence. Traditional teaching
simulation activities such as peer-to-peer role-play are limited, brief, and
challenging to replicate to provide sufficient practice for discourse skill
development. Virtual simulation provides immersive, interactive learning and
gives candidates an opportunity to practice complex skills, which cannot be
replicated with typical fieldwork, and thus, enables practice-based teacher
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This longitudinal, mixed methods study will
measure the impact in methods courses, practica, and internship placements of
the use of ICSAs on facility with discourse skills to promote learning and
engagement of all students in mathematics and science. The sample sizes of 120
achieve 80% power to reject the null hypothesis of equal means when the
population mean difference is 8.1 with standard deviations of 15.8, and with a
significance level (alpha) of 0.050 using a two-sided two-sample t-test where
the variances are not assumed equal. The Analyzing Teacher Moves (ATM)
instrument will be used to examine discourse practices speech acts using
(Correnti, et al., 2015). ATM outcomes will be determined with the Weighted-
Discussion-Scoring (WDS) guide (Scherrer, 2013) and the Weighted-Positive-
Scoring (WPS) adapted by Lee (2016). Along with the opportunity to develop
teacher practice without placing "real students" at risk during the learning
process, another benefit of ICSAs is improved access to teacher learning-in-
action for analytical purposes. The project adds to a growing pool of research
leveraging digital media to improve design for learning and develops a framework
to better prepare pre-service researchers to develop and use discourse in their
college classrooms. This project responds to the National Science Foundation's
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) request for proposals addressing
"immediate challenges and opportunities facing undergraduate STEM education," as
it relates to the preparation of teachers of STEM disciplinary content and
practices. Should ICSAs prove effective, this project will provide ICSA
scenarios, guidelines, and approaches to teacher preparation programs across the
country. This important work is supported with funding from the IUSE program and
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program.