* 1725941
* Broadening Participation in Experiential Learning Opportunities to Enhance Learner Engagement and Develop In-Demand Professional Skills
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kemi Jona, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 597,631.00

The mismatch between graduates' skills and the needs of STEM employers has
economic and societal costs. Students can gain the needed skills by
participating in traditional cooperative education (co-op) placements or
internships, thus increasing their workplace readiness. However, co-
op/internship opportunities are impractical for adult, non-traditional students
who are working full- or part-time while in school. This project will serve the
national interest by exploring a potential solution to this challenge:
integrating employer-provided projects into college curricula. These projects
are designed to be flexible, so that they can be used in different kinds of
courses and at different institutions. They are also designed to be accessible
to students for whom traditional co-op placements and internships are not
feasible. The integrated experiential learning opportunities will include both
individual and team experiences.

The goal of this project is to provide opportunities for non-traditional, adult
students to gain professional skills. Many of the targeted students are from
low-income or underrepresented minority populations. Students will gain
professional skills by working on projects submitted by employers to the
Experiential Network. This online platform contains over 500 employer-provided
projects designed to provide flexible, accessible experiential learning
opportunities that can be implemented in courses. This project will support
faculty integrating Experiential Network projects into their courses. It will
study the impacts of this integration on students and faculty across multiple
institutions, including university bachelor completion programs and five
community colleges. The Experiential Network platform will be enhanced to
connect students, employers, and faculty, to support project work, team
collaboration, feedback from both faculty and employer sponsors, and reflection.
The design-based research study will document the benefits and challenges of
integrating experiential learning opportunities into undergraduate STEM
instruction, from both faculty and student points of view. The research will
also contribute to understanding student self-directed learning and skill
development. It will encourage the adoption and adaptation of innovative tools
and practices for STEM learning. Sustainability of this approach will be
supported through enactment of strategies for successful cross-institutional
partnerships. Active partnerships will facilitate broad dissemination both
statewide and nationally.