* 1725566
* SPX: Collaborative Research: SANDY: Sparsification-Based Approach for Analyzing Network Dynamics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Sanjukta Bhowmick, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 07/31/2019
* USD 144,180.00

The goal of this three-year project, Sparsification-based Approach for Analyzing
Network Dynamics (SANDY), is to develop a suite of scalable parallel algorithms
for updating dynamic networks for different problems that can be executed on a
wide range of HPC platforms. Dynamic network analysis will enable researchers to
study the evolution of complex systems in diverse disciplines, such as
bioinformatics, social sciences, and epidemiology. The SANDY project is expected
to initiate a new direction of research in developing parallel dynamic network
algorithms that will benefit multiple analysis objectives (e.g., motif finding
and network alignment) and application domains (e.g., epidemiology, health
care). Research findings will be integrated into courses on network analysis,
parallel algorithms, and bioinformatics offered at the three collaborating
institutions. The PIs will collaborate with high schools to deliver talks on
network theory, and encourage women and minority students to pursue IT-related
careers.

To develop efficient and scalable parallel algorithms, the PIs propose to use
an elegant technique, called graph sparsification, that expresses graph
algorithms in a reduction-like fashion. The formal steps to parallelization, as
guided by the graph sparsification framework, provide a template for creating
provably correct parallel algorithms for dynamic networks. The proposed
algorithms will address the dual needs of portability and performance
optimization. The framework will further provide a mechanism for combining high
level (e.g., static and dynamic graph partitioning) and low level (e.g.,
dataflow algorithms) tuning strategies to ensure high performance and
scalability for various parallel architectures by considering such factors as
scalability, time, memory, and energy efficiency.