* 1725883
* MRI:  Upgrade of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Kerney Glover, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 470,548.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Kerney Glover from Lehigh
University and colleagues Bryan Berger and Damien Thevenin are upgrading a
console for a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer and also
have equipped the spectrometer with a cryoprobe. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as studies of biologically-relevant
species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is a powerful tools available to chemists
for the structural study of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the changing interactions between molecules in solution. The results
from these NMR studies may have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry, and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research performed by graduate and undergraduate
students via independent student research and traditional academic coursework.
The spectrometer is used to support academic institutions members of the Lehigh
Valley Association of Independent Colleges such as Lafayette College, Kutztown
University, Cedar Crest College, DeSales University, Moravian College and
Muhlenberg College. Students from these institutions can enroll in an advanced
laboratory class that utilizes the instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NMR
spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. It aids researchers
studying the molecular determinants for the homodimerization of the receptor
protein-tyrosine phosphatase J and the structure and topology of the protein
caveolin-1 (as well as mutants of caveolin-1.) The spectrometer is also used for
the determination of the structure of the RAMP1 transmembrane domain.