* 1725530
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  Donation appeals for conservation - the influence of moral worldviews and moral foundations
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Michael Nelson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2019
* USD 26,009.00

Past research has shown that outreach messages matching people's moral values
and beliefs can be highly effective in producing desirable pro-social or pro-
environmental behaviors, including charitable donations. This project
contributes to extant research by investigating the effectiveness of two
specific types of moral messages. The research is directly relevant to the fund-
raising efforts of conservation non-governmental organizations by producing new
knowledge about effective messaging.

The primary objective of this research is to understand the effects of and
interactions between two morality variables, "moral foundation" and "moral
worldview," as they pertain to donation behavior. Moral foundation describes the
types of issues and basic values an individual perceives to be moral (i.e., the
"what" of moral concern), while moral worldview describes which sorts of
entities an individual perceives to be of moral concern (i.e., the "who" of
moral concern). The research teams manipulates these two variables
experimentally across six treatment flyers in a three-by-two factorial research
design. Two of the six flyers feature outreach messages invoking each of three
different moral worldviews: anthropocentric (expressing concern only for
humans), non-anthropocentric (expressing concern for humans and nonhumans), and
false non-anthropocentric (expressing concern only for non-humans). Three of the
six flyers feature messages invoking each of two different moral foundations:
binding, emphasizing issues of authority, loyalty, and purity; and
individualizing, emphasizing issues of harm and fairness. The experiment is
embedded in an online survey of the American public, with actual donation
behavior measured as the key response variable. Combining theoretical frameworks
from environmental ethics and moral and social psychology, this project
represents an interdisciplinary integration of research and scholarship from
multiple branches of the social sciences and the humanities. This work not only
stands to enhance our understanding of charitable giving, but it also
contributes to an established and growing body of research on moral foundations
theory, particularly in the context of persuasive messaging.