* 1725188
* MRI: Acquisition of a Positron Annihilation Lifetime Spectrometer for Enhanced Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Roman Holovchak, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2019
* USD 76,082.00

The instrument acquisition provides state-of-the-art capability of positron
annihilation lifetime spectroscopy for advanced undergraduate research and
characterization of the materials' void structure at (sub)nanoscale. The
equipment will fill in a critical gap in the materials characterization
infrastructure at Austin Peay State University, providing a vital information on
the electron density-free sites (e.g. pores, voids, vacancies and other defects)
in organic, inorganic, and biological substances. It will significantly boost
interdisciplinary faculty activity in such emerging areas as materials for
biomedical applications, telecommunication, energy storage and conversion,
information processing and storage, sensors, photonics, and optoelectronics. The
instrument will be designated as a shared facility, serving not only the
internal research needs, but also the needs of other academic institutions and
regional small businesses working in materials science disciplines. Being a rare
facility in USA (compare to Europe, China or Japan, where it is used on a
regular basis), it has a potential for international and domestic industry-
university partnership to develop new advanced materials, promoting the progress
of materials science in Tennessee and across the nation. Undergraduate students
participating in the research projects will be exposed to cutting-edge knowledge
in materials science and particle physics, which will increase their
competitiveness on the labor market and future endeavors. They will also gain an
experience of using the modern experimental techniques and worldwide approaches
in radiation physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to
acquire a picosecond timing system for positron annihilation lifetime
spectroscopy (PALS) with 200 ps (or better) time resolution, adjustable
detectors assembly, and quick and convenient data acquisition system. PALS will
be used for studying the spatial heterogeneities in crystals, glasses, liquids,
polymers, and composites. It serves as a complementary technique to structural
characterization methods, capable of probing both open and closed pores of sizes
ranging from atomic scale to several tens of nanometers, as well as the electric
charge distribution. Especially, this technique is valuable for the
investigations of disordered materials (e.g. glasses, ceramics), which physical
properties are known to be determined not only by their atomic sub-system, but
also by voids which inevitably appear as a result of non-equilibrium conditions
of their synthesis/preparation. PALS capability will significantly improve the
ongoing research activity at Austin Peay State University (APSU), enhance the
nature and quality, as well as enable new science and directions. As a cutting-
edge instrument, it will be used to educate and train undergraduate students in
physics, as well as chemistry and biology, which will increase the APSU ability
to satisfy its educational mission. The researchers plan to incorporate
scientific breakthroughs made possible by PALS into undergraduate curriculum,
and will strengthen their outreach to K-12 students, industry, national labs and
academia, in Tennessee and across the nation. Having this instrument will make
APSU a more attractive institution for domestic and international collaboration,
which will enable students exchange and REU programs, as well as joint research
projects. The PALS instrument, as shared facility, will also enhance the
capabilities of research in TN area towards void structure characterization.