* 1725729
* MRI: Development of an Instrument for Deep Learning Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* William Gropp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,721,983.00

This project will develop and deploy a novel instrument for accelerating deep
learning research at the University of Illinois (UI). The instrument will
integrate the latest computing, storage, and interconnect technologies in a
purpose-built shared-use system. This Instrument will deliver unprecedented
performance levels for extreme data intensive emerging fields of research with
far-reaching impacts in many areas, such as computer vision, natural language
processing, artificial intelligence, healthcare and education. The instrument
development will be driven by the UI deep learning (DL) community needs and will
be carried out in collaboration with IBM and Nvidia. The instrument will serve
as a focal point for the rapidly growing DL research community at UI, enable
expansion of several research programs at UI, and contribute to STEM education
and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed instrument is a
far-reaching cyberinfrastructure development for the research community and
industry engaged with deep learning. The work will result in an advanced high-
performing scalable instrument with capabilities far beyond those currently
deployed in academia or industry to tackle large-scale deep learning projects.
This instrument will serve as a focal point for a community-driven effort to
advance the field of DL, integrating the work of computer scientists, systems
engineers, and software developers. This project is transformative both in the
systems architecture and domain science fields it will imbue, with new knowledge
to be developed via new interactions and synergies that will emerge as part of
this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed development of this well-
integrated instrument will improve the quality and expand the scope of research
and training, provide inter- and intra-organizational use amongst many
disciplines, and engage private sector partners. The work will have deep and
long-lasting effects on future computer architectures for compute- and data-
intensive applications by making the blueprints of the novel system architecture
of the instrument publically available. Access to the high-performance software
developed through this project will aid numerous science domains that utilize DL
frameworks. The unprecedented computational capabilities of many applications
will make it possible to tackle complex science, engineering and societal
problems in many important fields ranging from education, to healthcare, to
artificial intelligence (AI). This project will strive to include participants
from under-represented minority and female students, to make new discoveries,
train, and educate a new generation of users fluent with DL tools and
methodologies, contributing to the development of a highly educated, and diverse
workforce with specialized skillsets. Finally, the work will enable new
industry-academic collaborations benefiting both the scientific community and
industry nationwide.