* 1725386
* EAR-PF:   A Spatially Explicit, Process-Based Model of Regional Lake Carbon Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jacob Zwart, Zwart                   Jacob          A
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Jacob A. Zwart has been granted an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the United States
Geological Survey Office of Water Information. Lakes contribute significantly to
the global carbon cycle; however, quantification of regional and global process
rates is based upon crude scaling of site-specific rates to regional and global
lake area coverage. These types of scaling processes disregard the complex
interactions of hydrologic setting, climate, land cover, and geomorphology and
are incapable of prognostication. To fill this knowledge gap, the postdoctoral
fellow will develop spatially-explicit models to predict emergent properties of
regional lake carbon cycling. This interdisciplinary research will enhance our
understanding of the carbon cycle through more accurate incorporation of lakes
into regional carbon cycles and enable further work that directly evaluates the
sensitivity of lake carbon cycling to climate and land cover change. The
postdoctoral fellow will enhance graduate and undergraduate education through
design and implementation of an ecosystem modeling short-course at annual
meetings of the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network. Furthermore, the
postdoctoral fellow will develop an interactive data visualization of spatially-
explicit regional modeling results accompanying peer-reviewed publications to
enhance project exposure and public understanding of complex interactions
combining to produce emergent properties of lake ecosystems.

The postdoctoral fellow will use existing models to develop a process-based
modeling framework rooted in first-principles of hydrology, physics, and ecology
capable of being 1) applied over large geographic regions, 2) assimilating large
and diverse datasets, 3) being reproducible, efficient, and open-source, and 4)
forecasting lake carbon fluxes in response to global change scenarios. The
project will create three research products with accompanying models of broad
interest to hydrologists, limnologists, ecologists, and biogeochemists: 1) lake
water and energy budgets, 2) watershed constituent loads, and 3) lake carbon
fluxes for each lake in the model domain. At the United States Geological Survey
Office of Water Information, the postdoctoral fellow will leverage their
expertise in web-based processing of large gridded datasets, high-throughput
computing, coupling of surface water and groundwater models, and lake
hydrodynamic modeling to achieve the project aims. Using the modeling framework,
the postdoctoral fellow will test the hypothesis that contemporary climate
change resulting in increased temperatures and intensification of precipitation
has increased greenhouse gas emissions from lakes.