* 1725588
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope to Enhance Undergraduate Research Training in the Engineering and Science
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Kristina Hillesland, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 460,323.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
grant co funded by ECCS and CMMI of the Engineering directorate awarded to the
University of Washington at Bothell provides funding for the acquisition of a
variable-pressure scanning electron microscope with an Energy Dispersive X-Ray
analysis. This high resolution imaging microscope fosters innovative research
and facilitates multidisciplinary research collaborations at UW Bothell, a
primarily undergraduate institution, with a large pool of talented students who
have been traditionally underrepresented in the fields of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). While the primary use of the SEM and EDX
will be in support of research, it will also be integrated into research
training and course curricula. The SEM will provide undergraduate students and
graduate students with valuable hands-on experience in operating state-of-the-
art instrumentation, an essential skill for students interested in future
graduate studies and careers in STEM fields. Moreover, the instrument's impact
on students with diverse background will be substantial, as forty nine percent
of incoming first year students at UW Bothell are the first in their families to
earn a four-year degree and seventy percent of first year students are from
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The enhanced
nanometer scale imaging resolution and elemental analysis capabilities will
significantly enhance a large number of ongoing projects in science and
engineering, including: (1) Development of highly efficient light trapping
structures for organic solar cells; (2) Investigation of neural probes for
neurotransmitter sensing; (3) Examining the impact of mutualistic coevolution on
microbial phenotypes; (4) Characterization of novel bearing surfaces for total
joint replacements as well as for the microstructure of electrically conducting
polymer hydrogels; and, (5) Investigation of failure in polyurethane transformer
structures. In addition, the instrument provides other capabilities such as
energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy microanalysis system, which can be used to
determine the elemental composition of a specimen.