* 1725531
* How effective is effective stress? The evolution of the effective stress law through the brittle-ductile transition
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Hannah Rabinowitz, Rabinowitz              Hannah         S
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Hannah Rabinowitz has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education activities at Brown University. The research
project focuses on carrying out deformation experiments to characterize the
stress regime in the zone where large earthquakes originate. Earthquakes occur
in the Earth's crust where deformation is controlled by brittle fracture and
frictional sliding. This brittle portion of the crust is underlain by ductilely
flowing material, and the depth to the ductile transition controls how large an
earthquake can become. Describing deformation at brittle-ductile transition is
essential to the understanding of the nucleation processes that initiate large,
societally damaging earthquakes. For the education plan, Dr. Rabinowitz teaches
at multiple levels conducting hands-on labs with elementary school children in
Providence, RI; leading a seminar course at Brown University; and mentoring an
undergraduate student to conduct microstructural analyses as part of a senior
thesis.

This project addresses the evolution of crustal strength through the brittle-
ductile transition (BDT). The combination of the mechanical and detailed
microstructural analyses provides new insight into the evolution of the
effective stress law through the BDT and the microstructural mechanisms that
control the transition in deformation style at the base of the seismogenic zone.
Deformation experiments will be conducted to characterize the BDT in the context
of a changing effective stress. Experiments on quartz with water pore fluid at
pressure and temperature conditions spanning the BDT will allow for the
assessment of the conditions at which the effective stress law controls rock
strength. Furthermore, experiments on copper with argon gas pore fluid will
allow for the isolation of the mechanical effects of pore fluid pressure without
the weakening that is expected in quartz in the presence of water. Both 2D and
3D microstructures will be analyzed to determine how the mechanical evolution
through the BDT is related to an evolving porosity structure. 2D imaging will be
accomplished using traditional techniques such as optical microscopy and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). 3D imaging will be conducted using X-ray
microtomography at the University of Maryland.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.