* 1725673
* EAR-PF:  Hydrogen in the Earth's transition zone:  Merging experimental and theoretical approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Elizabeth Thompson, Thompson                Elizabeth      C
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Elizabeth C. Thompson has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at Northwestern University. The
investigation will determine the pressure and temperature stability field for
aluminum-bearing super hydrous magnesium silicates minerals. The results of this
study will help constrain the quantity and location of water in the Earth's
transition zone and mantle (410-660 Km depth), a region of the Earth ~100 times
more massive than the Earth's crust. The education plan will focus on mentoring,
developing teaching materials and lectures, and outreach. Dr. Thompson will also
collaborate with scientists at Ehime University in
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates aluminum substitution in
high-pressure superhydrous phase B, using several complementary techniques,
including: (1) first-principles calculations, (2)synchrotron-based infrared
spectroscopy, (3) Raman spectroscopy and (4) single crystal diffraction. These
findings will impact deep Earth geochemistry in a wide-ranging sense, as Al-rich
superhydrous phase B either ushers hydrogen through the transition zone and into
the lower mantle or decomposes, releasing H2O depending on its P-T stability.
Fluxed melts resulting from the decomposition of superhydrous phase B would
produce chemical heterogeneities in the mantle. Additionally, dehydration melts
may potentially influence plate tectonics due to the effect of hydrogen on
melting temperatures and viscosity. This study will also explore the effect of
Al-substitution on pressure-induced hydrogen bond symmetrization in superhydrous
phase B, a phenomenon previously reported to have a significant influence on a
mineral's bulk material properties including bulk modulus and its pressure
derivative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.