* 1725426
* MRI: Acquisition of FACS Cell Sorter for Research on Antibiotic Resistance and Environmental Toxicant Receptors
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Joan Slonczewski, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,246.00

An award is made to Kenyon College to obtain a fluorescence-activated cell
sorter (FACS). The cell sorter will enable separation and quantitation of cell
types for experimental evolution of bacteria to study antibiotic resistance and
survival in acid. This project may reveal chemical agents important in the
fitness of bacterial populations. The instrument will also enable measurement of
DNA content in animal cells, revealing how cells divide and respond to
environmental toxicants. Both these aims have potential benefits for
environmental quality. The FACS will enhance two undergraduate research programs
serving approximately 25 undergraduates who publish transformative research at
Kenyon College; many of them subsequently enter the nation?s science research
pipeline. First-year students will participate in research, an important high-
impact practice (HIP) that enhances STEM retention. The undergraduate research
population includes economically disadvantaged students in Kenyon's NSF-funded
S-STEM program. In subsequent years, the instrument will serve additional
undergraduate research projects in environmental microbiology and immunology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FACS will be employed to test chemical agents that may
reverse antibiotic resistance in bacterial populations. This instrument enables
rapid screening of resistance-reversal agents by cell analysis for fitness
competition assays. It will also facilitate a novel means of isolating bacterial
mutants that have altered cytoplasmic pH, using a fluorophore with pH-dependent
excitation peaks. Another undergraduate research program addresses the mechanism
of amphibian receptors for dioxins and other important environmental pollutants
called aryl hydrocarbons. The FACS will enable testing of an exciting hypothesis
that aryl hydrocarbon receptors play distinct roles in regulating the cell
cycle, a key process for development and carcinogenesis. Beyond the grant
period, the FACS will enable development of new research on the microbial
community structure of aquatic systems subject to human disturbance. An
immunology program will investigate the role of macrophage activation in stress
induction of asthma.