* 1725557
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Back Scattering Diffraction System to Advance Materials Research and Education at Clarion University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2020
* USD 151,940.00

This instrument acquisition grant funds an electron back scattering diffraction
(EBSD) system to update an existing scanning electron microscope at Clarion
University. EBSD is a powerful instrument for crystal structure analysis,
especially at and near the micrometer scale. With the addition of this
instrument, researchers carry out in-house basic materials characterization
research, ranging from morphology observation, elemental analysis, to crystal
structure characterization. The instrument impacts the research activities in
areas of physics, biology, chemistry, anthropology, and geology. Located in
rural western Pennsylvania, Clarion University is roughly a two-hour drive from
any major cities or other academic centers. Consequently, in addition to its
mission in undergraduate education, Clarion University also assumes the
responsibility of spreading knowledge to surrounding communities, sharing
resources with local school districts, and supporting businesses. Along this
line, the microscope is used in undergraduate research, course teaching, and
high school outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty members at Clarion
University strive to develop research activities that are valuable and plausible
at a teaching university setting. Topics related to material science fit this
goal and are popular on campus. The EBSD function added to the existing scanning
electron microscope makes the instrument possible to identify crystal phases and
study their variations in different locations of microscopic materials. Sample
research projects enabled by the enhanced capabilities of the microscope include
orientation analysis of icosahedral quasicrystalline thin films and novel
concentric rings found in aluminum-copper-iron alloys, crystal structure
analysis of boron nitride nanosheets, identification of Native American pottery,
phase identification of nanodiamond, and structure analysis of organic crystals.