* 1725302
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Triggered Aftershocks and Tremors following the Kaikoura Earthquake recorded with Arrays (KEA)
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Abhijit Ghosh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 01/31/2019
* USD 10,080.00

This project supports the deployment a dense array of seismic arrays around the
Cook Strait in New Zealand to record deep tectonic tremor and aftershocks
following the M7.8 Kaikoura earthquake. This was the second largest seismic
event since the European settlement in New Zealand, and it triggered deep and
shallow slow-slip events along the Hikurangi subduction zone. The ongoing slow-
slip events have apparently increased the probability of an M~8 megathrust
earthquake in this region. Hence, this network can provide useful information on
how slow-slip and tremor evolves on the megathrust following a large earthquake.
This project involves international collaborations among United States, New
Zealand and China, and will support a junior faculty at UC
Riverside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four mini-arrays (each has 12 5-s flex-nodes)
together with 17 short-period and broadband seismometers, will be deployed
around the Cook Strait for up to one year. This hybrid network is strategically
planned to complement and take advantage of the existing and planned deployment
in the area to be able to have high-resolution locations of seismic events in
the region. Seismic data collected during this experiment will be made available
to IRIS DMC as soon as the experiment is finished. The collected seismic data
can be used to understand the relationship among the M7.8 Kaikoura mainshock,
ongoing afterslip, triggered slow-slip events and the accompanying tremor
activities, and quantify the physical mechanisms for tremor and microseismicity.