* 1725016
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multipurpose X-ray Diffractometer for Interdisciplinary Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Renato Camata, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2019
* USD 266,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the University of Alabama at
Birmingham to acquire a multipurpose x-ray diffractometer for interdisciplinary
materials research and education. X-ray characterization of crystal structures,
crystal orientations, and nanometer-sized materials plays a key role in
development of new materials. The faculty members associated with this project
are involved in a variety of research fields including super-hard materials for
industrial applications, semiconductors, novel materials for lasers, materials
for energy applications, and biomaterials used in implants and regenerative
medicine research. This instrument also plays a significant role in the
education of graduate and undergraduate students in a wide range of disciplines
including biology, biomedical engineering, chemistry, materials science and
engineering, and physics. A significant fraction of graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this project belongs to groups that are underrepresented in
the science and engineering disciplines. The acquisition of multipurpose
diffractometer allows for development of new courses and enhancement of existing
courses in the area of thin-film devices and nanostructures. Such courses at
graduate and undergraduate levels enhance training for much needed advanced
manufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent innovations in x-ray
detector technologies, x-ray mirrors, and x-ray monochromators have made it
possible for a new class of diffractometers that can provide all the desired
x-ray measurements in one instrument with minimal switching time between various
applications. This acquisition of a multipurpose x-ray diffractometer allows
studies on bulk and thin-film materials, preferred orientation or texture in
materials, and particle/pore size, homogeneity of the nanostructured samples by
small-angle x-ray scattering. It enables transformative research in
nanostructured diamond thin-film deposition on metals, doped chalcogenide
crystals for mid-infrared lasers, oxide materials for fuel cells, epitaxial
semiconductors for high-power electronic devices, catalysts, nanocomposites, and
materials for biomedical implants and tissue engineering applications. These
studies are led by an interdisciplinary team of faculty and result in a
fundamental understanding of structural phase transformations and interfaces,
mechanical wear behavior in extreme environments, efficiency of mid infrared
lasers, texture and strain in crystalline materials, and biocompatibility of
materials.