* 1725714
* Transitioning Students to Teacher-Researchers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Donald French, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 599,652.00

This project will address the immediate challenge of providing undergraduate
research experiences for all students pursuing an undergraduate science degree
with teacher certification at the secondary level, commonly referred to as
preservice science teachers (PSTs). A well-prepared STEM workforce is essential
to the Nation's health and economy and preparing this scientifically literate
population starts with producing teachers with strong knowledge of content and
instructional strategies. The goal of this project is to improve STEM learning
and learning environments for undergraduate college students preparing to become
science teachers. This project will provide PSTs with multiple opportunities to
conduct scientific research during their science methods courses. These new or
modified science methods courses will be designed to enhance PSTs' skills in
conducting research and teaching others to conduct scientific research. These
research skills will empower PSTs to improve their future students' scientific
and analytic skills. Additionally, PSTs will be better equipped to develop
standards-based inquiry science lessons that will in turn, better prepare their
students to enter post-secondary education and a globally competitive workforce.
This project will advance knowledge in how to better prepare PSTs to teach
middle/high school science. It will also provide data on how research
experiences contribute to teacher development and determine the transferability
of the TSTR model to other teacher preparation institutions. This is an
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project - Engaged Student Learning
track, Development and Implementation project under the Division of
Undergraduate Education, and is supported by both IUSE and Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship funds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An expectation for science teachers is
for them to produce a scientifically literate populace, knowledgeable in science
content, the methods/practices of science, and the nature of science. The
project's fundamental premise is that by learning the nature of science through
authentic research experiences, PSTs will strengthen their science literacy
skills and be better equipped to engage their future students in the science and
engineering practices identified in the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS). The core of this Transitioning Students to Teacher-Researchers (TSTR)
model encompassed in this project is the evidence-based, instructional practice
of providing students with Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences
(CUREs). This project will adapt this practice for PSTs by transforming the
science methods curriculum to include two Science Methods courses - Course-Based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (SM-CUREs), with an optional Science Methods-
Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (SM-SURE), followed by Science Methods-
Course-Based Undergraduate Teaching Experiences (SM-CUTEs). Multiple forms of
assessment (surveys, lesson plans, reflective writings, observations, and
interviews) will be used to determine changes in PSTs' research skills,
pedagogical content knowledge, and understanding about the nature of science.
The TSTR model provides PSTs with extensive mentoring by faculty and graduate
students from multiple science and engineering disciplines and colleges across
the university. To strengthen the quality of mentoring, this project will
provide research mentors with professional development designed to deepen
mentors' understanding of the K-12 science classroom and skills in transitioning
their STEM research to that environment. Knowledge gained from this project will
further our understanding of the role that participation in scientific research
plays in developing teachers' proficiency in teaching the science and
engineering practices outlined in NGSS.