* 1725130
* Collaborative Research: CourseSource: Developing, Disseminating, and Understanding the Usefulness of Resources for Evidence-based Undergraduate Biology Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Brian Olsen, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 274,708.00

Although many STEM courses have implemented evidence-based pedagogies, didactic
lectures remain the predominant feature of most college classes. In fact, many
STEM instructors hesitate to implement effective pedagogies, such as active
learning and inclusive teaching practices, even when they know that these
practices can improve student learning. However, improvements in undergraduate
teaching effectiveness may not require full-scale revision of courses, but
instead can result from small changes, and research supports the hypothesis that
incremental changes can be enabled by the right kind of teaching resources. This
project will support and expand the journal, CourseSource that was created in
response to recommendations from the NSF/AAAS Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education initiative. CourseSource is a journal of evidence-based,
field-tested lessons in undergraduate biology that publishes rigorously peer-
reviewed Lessons in a common format. This project will support the development
and publication of additional Lessons. In addition, it will support development
of critical automation and functionality needed to make CourseSource a
sustainable journal with high levels of usability and user responsiveness.
Finally, development of a broad suite of web analytics will enable the
identification of teaching materials characteristics that lead to adoption or
adaptation by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing CourseSource will provide
an important avenue for publishing evidence-based teaching materials, and
project outcomes will contribute to an understanding of the relationship between
implementation of evidence-based teaching by higher education instructors and
the design/dissemination of effective teaching materials. Publication of
evidence-based teaching materials in a peer-reviewed, high-quality journal is
expected to increase the value of evidence-based teaching for promotion and
tenure, helping to support these practices by tenure-track, research faculty in
colleges and universities. In addition, the information learned through the
project activities will be used iteratively and directly to improve CourseSource
Lessons, thus strengthening the impact of the journal on implementation of
evidence-based teaching. The design principles uncovered as a result of this
project will be relevant for other educational reform efforts and digital
repositories of teaching resources.