* 1725937
* MRI: Development of a high-speed, hyperspectral imaging spinning disk confocal microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Thomas Rich, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 700,401.00

An award is made to the University of South Alabama to develop a novel high-
speed spectral imaging microscope, called the 5-Dimensional Rapid Hyperspectral
Imaging Platform (RHIP-5D). The RHIP-5D system will provide a novel capability
for rapid hyperspectral imaging. The RHIP-5D will be implemented on a confocal
microscope and will allow imaging of organelles and sub-cellular structures with
high molecular sensitivity, as well as the ability to detect many different
molecules simultaneously. This approach will advance new molecular imaging
studies aimed at measuring crucial functional information in cells and tissues
that was previously inaccessible. Once complete, the microscope system will
enable breakthrough studies of high-speed events at the biosystems level,
including processes controlling cell signaling cascades, seagrass infection,
microparticle dynamics, and cellular biomechanics. The University of South
Alabama will host training sessions for scientific researchers outside the
University on the use of this novel microscope system, further establishing the
University as a center for imaging and biotechnology development. In addition,
this system will provide unique BioImaging capabilities to lower Alabama and the
Gulf Coast region, and will serve as a catalyst for interdisciplinary
collaborations within the State of Alabama and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RHIP-5D system is made possible by a novel form
of imaging that scans the fluorescence excitation spectrum. Previous
hyperspectral imaging approaches have provided increased sensitivity and
specificity by acquiring spectroscopic data for every pixel in the image, but it
has been difficult to implement hyperspectral imaging on fluorescence microscope
systems at high speeds. This is because previous hyperspectral approaches that
scan the fluorescence emission spectrum can result in significant (&gt;90%)
signal loss. By contrast, the excitation-scanning approach employed by the
RHIP-5D system will allow the entire fluorescence emission signal to be
detected, providing a 30-100X increase in signal strength. This novel approach
has the potential to transform biological microscopy studies.