* 1725766
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High Mass Resolution/High Sensitivity Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer For Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Russell Dickerson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,050,000.00

The use of stable isotope tracers in Earth Science research has provided
particularly valuable information about processes that operate in nature, both
today and in the ancient past. Studies using these tracers have seen a wide
array of applications develop with many that bridge Earth science with
disciplines such as chemistry, biology, and physics as well as applied science
in industry and medicine. The applications have followed questions raised by
stable isotope researchers as new ideas and technology have been developed where
more precise and more finely focused measurements open up new types of studies,
sometimes new fields. A recent example of such a development relates to the
study isotopic of species with multiple substitutions of rare isotopes. These
isotopic molecules or isotopologues can be used to interrogate questions well
beyond those that can be studied with existing stable isotope techniques, and
these new approaches promise to provide novel information relevant to study of
geological, atmospheric, and biologic processes, and as in the past, to have
implications within as well as beyond the traditional limits of Earth science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of a recently developed
state-of-the-art High Mass Resolution/High Sensitivity Isotope Ratio Mass
Spectrometer (HR/HS-IRMS) designed for measurements of isotopologues by a cross
disciplinary team of University of Maryland scientists. The requested instrument
will support three, first-order scientific objectives: (1) identification of the
sources, fluxes, and composition of mid-Atlantic States methane for implementing
local controls and improved definition of the global budget and increasing
atmospheric burden; (2) use of the doubly substituted isotopologues of molecular
oxygen in combination with more traditional isotopic and concentration data for
constraint of photosynthetic production and respiration consumption of oxygen at
the time of ice breakup in the arctic oceans; and (3) development of a new
isotopic system for sulfur (36S) that will provide new ways to study the ecology
of the S metabolisms and the role of reoxidative S-cycling, including its
connections to the global oceanic cycles of carbon and oxygen. The first
objective will provide key information needed to understand the biogenic vs.
fossil sources of methane on a regional and global scale; the second objective
will contribute to understanding of the response of seasonally ice free marine
systems in the Arctic, and the third objective will contribute to understanding
the processes of S-cycling and their linkages to other element cycles in modern
and ancient systems. The instrumentation will be the first of its kind on the
east coast of the United States, supporting new mid-Atlantic research that will
provide policy relevant science for the Maryland Climate Change Plan and the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI involves nine states), as well as wider
implications for methane cycling on the global scale. The instrumentation will
support a wide range of research activities across the university system with a
long-term goal of 30% external Earth Science users who will draw on its
capabilities to extend its scientific and societally-relevant work. The
instrumentation will promote teaching and learning with a central role in
laboratory research that include mentoring of students from local high schools,
undergraduate students, and visitors from other institutions. At the University
of Maryland in particular, these activities will broaden the participation of
under-represented groups, (women, African American, Hispanic) in Earth Science
research. From the standpoint of activities that engage the public, the
instrumentation will be incorporated into existing programs, including the
Smithsonian Institution National Air and Space Museum Youth Program, the
University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) Choice Program, the UMD Freshman
Innovation and Research Experience (FIRE) Program, as well as the Maryland Day
open house when ~75,000 visitors come to campus.