* 1725788
* EAR-PF:  Mapping Belowground Processes Using Remotely Measured Foliar Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Katherine Chadwick, Chadwick                Katherine      D
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2019
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Katherine D. Chadwick has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at Stanford University and Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory. Building on recent developments of airborne-based
measurements of the chemistry of leaves (foliar chemistry), Dr. Chadwick will
develop the methodology to remotely map soil organic carbon and nutrient
profiles. This methodology will be of interest to those that need to determine
inventories of subsurface carbon and nutrient stocks for scientific or
management questions. The datasets derived from this project could be used to
test models of soil carbon stocks and turnover and help to develop methodology
for large-scale land surface models. The education activities will focus on
mentoring two undergraduate students in research projects related to the
investigation.

No geophysical, geochemical, or remote sensing approaches currently exist that
can map below ground soil carbon or nutrient composition over large spatial
scales, requiring most studies to rely on point sampling and intensive
characterization methods combined with uncertain spatial extrapolations. The
ability to remotely assess soil carbon and key nutrient stocks using above
ground measures will allow for spatially explicit estimates of soil carbon
inventories and their relationship to landscape position, lithology, soil
moisture, aspect, and other remotely measurable parameters. In addition,
building a link between remotely detectable characteristics of vegetation and
subsurface properties will open a window into the spatial distribution of
critical zone processes and how they interact over spatial scales currently not
feasible to study.