* 1725500
* Computer-Based Social Interactions to Facilitate Language Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Yolanda Rankin, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 10/31/2017
* USD 259,436.00

The ability to effectively communicate in more than one language is not only an
educational goal, but a required life skill for this generation of students who
must be able to compete and function in a global workforce. Communicative
competence---knowing what to say, when to say it and how to say it--- is one of
the primary challenges that foreign language students struggle to achieve.
Second language research reveals that foreign language students are less likely
to communicate verbally in the classroom setting when they lack confidence in
their ability to carry a conversation with native speakers. This project
develops language learning technology that provides scaffolded opportunities for
second language students to acquire vocabulary words and conversational phrases
while simultaneously developing listening comprehension skills and speaking
capabilities in the targeted language. The goal of this research is to explore
the progression of second language students' communicative competence through
iteratively designing, developing and evaluating a mobile game that features
intelligent, conversational computer generated game characters. Speech-based
interactions with game characters will enable second language students to
increase their vocabulary acquisition, listening comprehension skills and
speaking capabilities in the targeted language, Spanish. Results of this
research will inform the design of more sophisticated language learning
technology that facilitates communicative competence in any foreign
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program seeks to iteratively design
computer generated conversational game characters known as Non Player Characters
(NPCs) that engage foreign language students in social interactions that
facilitate second language acquisition in Spanish. Research questions include:
How do we strategically design conversational NPCs to scaffold novices'
proficiency in the targeted language? How do novices' proficiency change over
time as a result of social interactions with conversational NPCs during
gameplay? What do these in-game social interactions suggest about creating
meaningful gameplay experiences that improve novices' proficiency in the
targeted language? The results of this exploratory research will inform a new
genre of language learning technology specifically designed to increase foreign
language students' proficiency in the targeted language as a supplement to
traditional classroom instruction. The project will involve developing and
evaluating the efficacy of the Game-based Social Interaction Model (GSIM), a
conceptual framework that links in-game social interactions between native and
non-native speakers to successful vocabulary acquisition in the targeted
language. The GSIM will motivate the NPCs' verbal behaviors during gameplay,
enabling the NPCs to emulate human-like interactions that facilitate novices'
proficiency in the targeted language. In the context of a mobile game, the
project will iteratively design conversational NPCs to provide scaffolded
opportunities for second language students to increase their vocabulary
acquisition, listening comprehension and speaking capabilities in the targeted
language. This research will also examine how African American women perceive
and interact with conversational NPCs in the targeted language during gameplay,
thus identifying crucial design elements that positively influence learning
outcomes specific to this particularly understudied population.