* 1725692
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Cross-layer Application-Aware Resilience at Extreme Scale (CAARES)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* George Bosilca, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2020
* USD 266,079.00

The increasing demands of science and engineering applications push the limits
of current large-scale systems, and is expected to achieve exascale (10^18
FLOPS) performance early in the next decade. One of the lesser studied challenge
at extreme scales is the reliability of the computing system itself, primarily
due to the very large number of cores and components utilized and to the sharp
decrease of the Mean Time Between Failures on such systems (in the order of tens
of minutes). This project departs from the traditional single component fault
management model, and explores how multiple software libraries (and application
components) used in the context of a single parallel application can interact to
provide the holistic fault management support necessary for parallel
applications targeting capability computing. This exploration will not be
limited to software developed using a single parallel programming paradigm, but
will be extended to encompass the more challenging case where multiple
programming paradigms can be combined to achieve a common goal, to simulate a
set of large scale scientific applications in use today.  The goal of this
project is to depart from the current siloed resilience mechanisms, and propose
cross-layer composition solutions that can fundamentally address these
resilience challenges at extreme scales. This exploration will not be limited to
software developed using a single parallel programming paradigm, but will be
extended to encompass the more challenging case where multiple programming
paradigms can be combined to achieve a common goal, to simulate a set of large
scale scientific applications in use today. More specifically, this proposal
will address the following research challenges: (1) development of a theoretical
foundation for a deeper understanding of the challenges and opportunities
arising from combining different resilience models and methodologies; (2) design
of a flexible programming abstraction to allow different resilience models and
mechanisms to be combined to cooperate and address resilience in a more holistic
manner; and (3) development of basic, programming paradigm independent,
constructs necessary to implement cross-layer and domain-specific approaches to
support resilience and to understand related performance / quality trade-offs.
The proposed approach will be validated by exposing these generic abstractions
in two different programming paradigms (MPI and OpenSHMEM), by creating and
developing specialized concepts for each of these paradigms. This will enable
the assessment of the validity of the concepts and the corresponding overheads
imposed by the different software layers, using few software frameworks and
applications.