* 1725451
* MRI: Acquisition of an Acoustic Camera for Multidisciplinary Research and Teaching at Dartmouth College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Casey, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 115,199.00

An award is made to Dartmouth College to acquire an acoustic camera for tracking
sources of sound in video. The acoustic camera will contribute to
multidisciplinary research, teaching and outreach. A teaching module will be
developed on the acoustics of natural landscapes using the acoustic camera that
can be customized and incorporated into graduate courses, undergraduate courses
and teacher training for professional development days. Dartmouth's Science
&amp; Technology Outreach team will assist with delivering products from the
acoustic camera to the broader community, such as interactive audiovisual
depictions of songbird choruses for the Hubbard Brook LTER web portal, movies
from research on the acoustics of bats, frogs and primates to present at a local
science pub, and audiovisual displays for the website of a National Public Radio
special series on sounds in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sound recordings
provide rich information about natural systems and human environments. A major
limitation of acoustic recordings, however, is that they do not provide
information about the direction or location of the sound source. An acoustic
camera is a cutting-edge instrument that integrates both visual and acoustic
information to generate video images that identify the direction and source of
sounds using a video camera, microphone array, data acquisition board and
processing computer. At Dartmouth, there is an unusually large and
interdisciplinary community of people united by an interest in acoustics and
natural sounds. The acquisition of an acoustic camera will elevate the
individual research and teaching programs of multiple faculty in multiple
disciplines who study the transmission and identity of sounds in the
environment. Furthermore, the acoustic camera will foster cross-disciplinary
collaborations among faculty in Biology, Anthropology, Music, and other
disciplines. Current projects across the university address the role of sounds
in evolutionary processes. These projects range from the dynamics and
evolutionary drivers of social interactions in acoustically signaling animals,
to the role of soundscapes in the evolution of human hearing, language and
music. The ability to assign sounds to individuals within aggregations or
pairwise interactions in field conditions will enable researchers to answer
unresolved questions for a variety of projects across disciplines.