* 1725554
* Simulated Practice: Using Socially-Responsive Avatars to Prepare STEM Graduate Teaching Assistants for Student-Centered Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2023
* Charles Hughes, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 10/31/2023
* USD 700,009.00

"TeachLive" is a mixed-reality classroom simulator through which teacher
trainees practice interacting with small groups of virtual students who take on
different, realistic roles as learners. The teacher trainees in this project are
Graduate Teaching Assistants (GTAs), who increasingly provide the instruction
for introductory undergraduate courses in large enrollment institutions. The
extent of current GTA training varies by institution and most typically entails
learning about generalized pedagogical best practices with little or no actual
practice with feedback from a master teacher. GTAs are often hired to teach
students while they themselves are still learning to teach. Most STEM GTAs and
their undergraduate students would benefit from more intentional instruction on
how to engage students using high-impact practices and pedagogical content
knowledge within their disciplines. The TeachLive simulator provides a promising
technology-based solution to the problem of providing GTAs with high quality
training. TeachLive training provides a real-time response mechanism to practice
teaching and has the promise of being more effective than other TA training
strategies (workshops, short-courses, etc.), which do not provide enough
feedback (real-time or otherwise) to be effective. The curricular materials for
which GTAs will safely practice evidence-based teaching will utilize concept
inventories that have been developed in four different STEM fields, Chemistry,
Math, Physics, and Computer Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past the
TeachLive platform has been developed and used successfully to train K-12
teachers to describe and explain problems more effectively and to better
recognize students' misconceptions. This project is motivated by two
deficiencies in current practice. First, most GTAs get basic training in
pedagogy, but not specific training in their discipline. Second, GTAs' fidelity
of utilization of pedagogical training is highly variable, and many of them
don't succeed in providing strong engaged student learning experiences. The
TeachLive Simulator has the promise of tailoring practice to each specific GTA
depending on their needs.