* 1725482
* MRI: Acquisition of New Pump Lasers for Upgrade of Hercules Laser System to 500 TW
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Karl Krushelnick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,312,994.00

This grant provides funding to increase the power of the HERCULES laser facility
at the University of Michigan to enable fundamental research in frontier areas
of plasma, laser and optical physics. This research will foster new technologies
that impact medicine, energy and national security in addition to scientific
applications across a very broad range of other fields: from biology to
materials science. Particular applications of this research include the
development of compact laser generated sources of energetic ion and gamma-ray
beams for cancer treatment, high resolution imaging, and detection of nuclear
materials for Homeland Security purposes. Another potential major application
for this laser system is as a "table-top" electron accelerator and x-ray source.
The development of such table-top systems will be transformative, since they
would be very compact and relatively inexpensive. Over the past decade the high
power laser systems at Michigan have become important facilities for graduate
student training. US and international researchers and students will continue to
take part in the research projects using the extreme laser intensities available
with the upgraded HERCULES facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will enable
acquisition of two new pump lasers and associated equipment for the final two
amplification stages of the HERCULES laser system at the Center for Ultrafast
Optical Science at the University of Michigan. HERCULES will then operate either
at a peak power of 500 TW (five times its present capability) or at 50 TW with
an increased repetition rate of 5 Hz. These upgraded amplifiers will replace two
existing "home-built" pump laser systems which have recently degraded in
performance and reliability. The HERCULES laser system has previously achieved
the world's highest focused laser intensities, however one of the most exciting
frontiers for these lasers is to go beyond this -- to explore the dynamics of
plasma in ultra-relativistic fields and observe the effects of radiation
reaction and the effects of nonlinear Quantum Electrodynamics on laser plasma
interactions. Research in this unexplored regime will be made possible by the
upgraded system.