* 1725980
* GOALI:  Laser Forming of Metal Foam with Controlled Dimensional and Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Y Lawrence Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 485,446.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
project investigates a novel process for laser forming of metal foam. Metal foam
has shown great potential in industrial applications by virtue of its excellent
shock absorption properties and light weight. Metal foam is most economically
manufactured in flat panel format and then bent as required in particular
applications. The high structural rigidity due to its cellular geometry,
however, makes metal foam prone to cell wall crushing and cracking when
mechanically bent. Laser forming, on the other hand, has shown the capability of
shaping solid metal plates without applying mechanical forces nor requiring
dies. Knowledge developed for laser forming of solid metal plates, however, is
not directly applicable to foams due to fundamental differences between solids
and foam metals in their response to laser irradiation and deformation. The
success of this project is expected to enable the design and fabrication of
innovative engineering components that incorporate low-density metal foam to
significantly enhance component performance or introduce groundbreaking
functionalities. The PI's strong support from a key industrial partner could
lead to a rapid development of industry applications of these components with
broad societal impact including enhanced safety, reduced weight and fuel
consumption for a wide range of industries including automotive, aerospace, and
defense. Underrepresented students will be recruited, and high school students
and STEM teachers from neighborhood schools will be engaged in an innovative
combination of "reach out" and "let in" activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to develop a fundamental understanding of the thermo-mechanical
mechanisms that govern laser forming of low-density metal foam, determine how
the forming mechanisms contribute to the formation of defects such as buckled
cells and micro-cracks at large bending angles. The fundamental understanding
will allow mitigation of the defects, control of dimensional accuracy and
improvement mechanical properties in bent products, and quantify the above
phenomena by establishing predictive capabilities. Laser forming experiments
will be performed and results quantified. The formation of micro-cracks, buckled
cells and melted material at large bending angles will be analyzed. The
experimental results will validate thermal-mechanical numerical models. This
project is expected to considerably advance the understanding of interactions
between laser irradiation and low-density metal foam using a fundamental
approach to both simulation and experimental analysis.