* 1725925
* MRI: Acquisition of a micro-computed tomography system for advanced imaging and inter-disciplinary multi-user access for the University of Arkansas and the US Interior Highlands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* George Sabo, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 687,161.00

This award provides support for a high-resolution, X-ray micro-computed
tomography (microCT) scanner that will enable cutting-edge research in the US
Interior Highlands, including Northwest Arkansas, central and eastern Oklahoma,
southern Missouri, and southeastern Kansas. Acquisition of this advanced Nikon
imaging system will allow three-dimensional (3D), non-destructive study of
biological and geological specimens, historical artifacts, and engineering
materials that will permit researchers to document the internal structures of a
wide range of natural and engineered materials and examine these structures in
3D down to the micro (¡Ü 0.1 mm) and nano-scales (&lt; 0.001 mm). Documenting
the microstructural organization of materials at these levels is critical for
determining their function. This ability to peer inside the microstructure of
materials applies to a wide range of disciplines including mechanical
engineering, biology, anthropology, anatomy, paleontology, geology,
neuroscience, chemistry and biochemistry, human health, biomedical engineering,
and beyond. Via collaborations with numerous programs across Northwest Arkansas
and eastern Oklahoma, the microCT equipment will also provide support and
training for communities that typically do not have access to advanced imaging
technologies, engage students in learning about the microstructural properties
of everyday materials, and stimulate the interest and participation of women and
underrepresented groups in STEM fields across the region.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The microstructure of natural and synthetic materials play critical
roles in determining their functions and strengths. Yet, documenting these
minute relationships non-destructively is often challenging. Among the most
effective technologies for capturing such data accurately, quickly, and at a
reasonable user expense are modern microCT scanners. These technologies have
enabled 3D documentation of an increasing range of materials and the systematic
evaluation of their composition, form, and functional properties¡ªleading to
major breakthroughs in the biological, geological, and engineering sciences,
among others. This microCT system will be operated and managed by the newly
formed MicroCT Imaging Center for Research and Outreach (MICRO) and housed in
the Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST) at the University of
Arkansas. Regional biomedical and cognitive scientists, biologists,
paleontologists, anthropologists, archeologists, aerospace and biomedical
engineers, and researchers perfecting new approaches to 3D printing will benefit
from this award by using the microCT system to conduct transformative and
interdisciplinary research that will drive 21st century technologies and
innovations. This award is jointly supported by the Social Behavioral and
Economic, the Biology and the Engineering Directorates.