* 1725315
* Nitrogen Transiting the Subduction and Redox Barrier
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Elizabeth Cottrell, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 153,363.00

Earth's habitability depends on maintaining a high abundance of nitrogen in the
atmosphere. Nitrogen is added to the atmosphere during volcanic eruptions and is
removed from the atmosphere when it is incorporated into the crust. Crust is
subducted into Earth's interior over geological time. During the subduction
process some nitrogen is retained in crust and some is liberated into fluids and
magmas that ultimately return nitrogen to the atmosphere. The proportions of
nitrogen retained in and liberated from crust are expected to depend on the
redox state of crust. A critical observation in geochemistry is that the ratio
of nitrogen to potassium is constant between Earth's exterior (crust+atmosphere)
and interior (mantle). Geochemical coupling of nitrogen and potassium is
expected under reducing conditions. Therefore, the constancy of
nitrogen/potassium ratios between Earth's exterior and interior suggests that
reduced environments within crust are largely responsible for transporting
nitrogen into Earth's interior. The specific redox boundary where nitrogen and
potassium become geochemically coupled, however, remains poorly defined.
Defining this boundary is the goal of this project. By defining this boundary, a
constraint on the redox state of subducted materials will be derived that will
yield further insight into how a nitrogen-rich atmosphere has been maintained on
Earth and into redox-sensitive processes occurring in subduction zones,
including volcanic outgassing, continental crust formation, and ore genesis.
This project advances STEM fields by providing research opportunities for
undergraduate students and by providing training to a young scientist.Â 
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of experiments will be conducted that simulate
the conditions that nitrogen and potassium are subjected to during subduction to
define the redox boundary of nitrogen-potassium coupling. The redox state of
each experiment will be controlled by metal-oxide buffers and will be
independently verified by XANES and/or Pt-in-Fe oxybarometers. Nitrogen
speciation will be determined within the glasses and trapped fluids of each
experiment. Experiments will also be chemically analyzed to determine how the
relative affinity of nitrogen and potassium for minerals and magma/fluids
changes as a function of pressure, temperature, and redox potential. These data
will then be applied to geochemical models of slab melting/dehydration to
constrain the pressure, temperature, and redox conditions that crust can be
subjected to while maintaining nitrogen-potassium coupling.