* 1725065
* Theory of dynamic cytoskeletal length regulation and stabilization
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Meredith Betterton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2022
* USD 413,427.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on the fundamental mechanisms that determine size of
living organisms and biomaterials. When biological organisms grow, they regulate
the size that they reach: for example, people grow to their adult height and
then remain that tall. Therefore, sensing and regulating size is an essential
physics problem that biological organisms solve. Living systems control the size
not just of whole organisms, but also of smaller internal structures (organs,
cells, and structures inside cells). The physical principles and mechanisms
underlying the sensing and control of size in biology are not well understood.
This project will develop new physics-based models to understand and predict how
length of one class of subcellular structures are regulated in organisms.
Related mechanisms may be useful in regulating the growth of polymers and
biomaterials. This project will develop interdisciplinary research and
education, and work to improve diversity in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research, and education on the fundamental
mechanisms that determine size of living organisms and biomimetic biomaterials.
Regulating physical size is an essential problem that biological organisms must
solve, but the physical principles and mechanisms underlying the sensing and
control of size in biology are not well understood. The regulation of polymer
length is important for the organization of the cellular cytoskeleton, which
affects the size of subcellular organelles such as the mitotic spindle and the
structure of cells themselves. An important general question is how to use
molecular-level information to understand and predict higher-order aspects of
assembly and organization. Remarkably, many cytoskeletal assemblies can maintain
a constant, self-organized length, even though they are nonequilibrium
structures with constant molecular turnover. While significant previous work has
focused on steady-state spindle length, the PI aims to advance understanding of
dynamic spindle length regulation. Results from this work will provide a basis
for developing predictive understanding of dynamic length regulation and
cytoskeletal self-assembly. &lt;br/&gt;The work is built on theoretical and
modeling tools, including tractable analytic models, semi-analytic and numerical
analysis, simplified simulation models, and detailed three-dimensional
simulations. This project will address how length regulation and its dynamic
stabilization can emerge as a collective property as the level of cytoskeletal
assembly changes from single filaments, filament bundles, and the mitotic
spindle. The work will focus on two scientific questions. First, what are the
general mechanisms of length sensing of single cytoskeletal filaments, bundles,
and higher-order assemblies? While previous length-sensing work has assumed
monotonically length-dependent processes, this work will conduct a wide-ranging
theoretical investigation into classes of length sensing, inspired by currently
known biological processes. Second, what types of feedback and amplification
lead to dynamically stable or unstable length regulation? Recent work
demonstrates that mitotic spindle length is dynamically stabilized at a steady
state value, and that this stabilization can be perturbed, causing large length
fluctuations. The work will perform a general investigation of classes of
feedback and amplification that lead to dynamically stable or unstable length of
cytoskeletal assemblies. Mechanisms explored in the research may be applicable
to regulating the growth of polymers and biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;The work will
provide insight into biologically relevant general mechanisms of length sensing
and regulation, by determining how bundling, spatially non-monotonic activity,
and force-dependent regulation can effect length sensing. The work will develop
understanding of the dynamic stabilization, and investigate whether there are
different characteristic modes of dynamic destabilization. Research advances may
have applicability to growth of biomaterials and soft materials more generally.
This project will also test mechanical contributions to spindle length
stabilization, by considering how spindle components contribute forces and
feedback that enable constant, stable spindle length. This will improve
understanding of collective self-assembly in cells. The project is an integrated
interdisciplinary program of theoretical biophysics and statistical mechanics
informed by cell biology and genetics to gain insight into cytoskeletal length
regulation and stabilization. The PI works to increase gender and racial
diversity in science through multiple activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.