* 1725264
* Collaborative Research: Mathematics Graduate Student Peer-Mentorship Program: Impact and Adaptability
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kimberly Rogers, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2021
* USD 309,198.00

A critical challenge facing the United States over the next several years is to
recruit and prepare a competitive workforce in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) fields. Because mathematics plays a crucial role in the
STEM disciplines, student success in undergraduate mathematics courses is vital
to this STEM workforce preparation. Yet, students' difficulties in obtaining a
STEM degree often are attributed to their lack of being able to navigate through
early undergraduate mathematics courses. This collaborative project with Bowling
Green State University, the University of South Carolina at Columbia, and West
Virginia University will address this important national issue by focusing on
mathematical sciences graduate student instructor (GSI) training in teaching and
mentoring undergraduates. Despite evidence-based results indicating that
improved student learning outcomes in STEM courses often are correlated to
instructors' use of student-centered techniques, GSIs typically teach
introductory mathematics courses with traditional, exposition-centered methods
and receive negligible training in how to use student-centered strategies to
improve their overall quality of instruction. To counter this, the project will
explore how a comprehensive peer mentoring approach to training mathematical
sciences GSIs can impact their student-centered classroom practice and increase
their students' success, particularly in early undergraduate mathematics
courses. This collaborative effort will result in a comprehensive expansion of a
piloted project through NSF grants 1544342/1544346. This project will have
sustaining impact since a large percentage of mathematicals graduate students
not only have instructional responsibilities while they are still graduate
students, but also will devote a substantial portion of their workforce
professional responsibilities instructing undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An underlying goal of the project is to investigate and
support development of mathematical sciences GSIs as educators who can engage
and retain their undergraduate students through employment of student-centered
techniques in the classroom. To address this goal, the project team will expand
and study efforts on the aforementioned piloted project by developing and
vetting a mentoring curriculum and observation protocol focused on evidence-
based student-centered instructional practices. In turn, the project will
generate a community of practice through peer mentoring support. An additional
goal of the project is to determine the logistical and cultural issues
surrounding adapting this peer-mentoring program at the three collaborating
institutions. The researchers will employ a mixed methods approach to examine
the efficacy, impact, and adaptability of their peer-mentoring program wherein
experienced GSIs receive training to guide, facilitate, and support first- and
second-year GSIs' teaching of foundational mathematics courses. This will
involve formative evaluation and multiple cycles implementing and refining the
program at the collaborating institutions. Analysis of these implementation
cycles will provide evidence for the impact of this training structure on GSIs'
teaching practices and will identify core features and necessary criteria
associated with successfully implementing this program at different types of
institutions. An overall impact will be the development and investigation of
strategies and communities of practice to help develop a mathematics educator
workforce that is prepared to enhance undergraduate learning and degree pursuit
in STEM fields.