* 1725142
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR for Undergraduate Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Adam Johnson, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 331,285.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor David Vosburg from
Harvey Mudd College and colleagues Adam Johnson and Katherine Van Heuvelen have
acquired a console and probes to upgrade a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful
tools available to chemists for the study of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The results from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate students via
independent student research and traditional academic coursework. Students work
on these projects year long and especially during the summer months. The
spectrometer is also used by chemistry faculty and students at Mount San Antonio
College as well as researchers at the local biotech company Synedgen which is a
regular sponsor of undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of an
NMR console and probes is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels, especially in areas such as: (a) synthesizing natural products
biomimetically, (b) preparing molecular cages via self-assembly, (c) exploring
catalytic asymmetric hydroamination, (d) studying bio-inspired catalysts for
dechlorination reactions, (e) using sensitizer-dependent injection into zinc
oxide nanotube photoanodes for solar cells, (f) characterizing atmospheric
secondary organic aerosols, (g) studying Claisen rearrangements of amide-acetals
of substituted gamma- and delta-lactams, (h) preparing tunable nanocomposite gas
separation membranes and (i) synthesizing natural polymer derivatives.