* 1725131
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Study of Silicic Lava Emplacement
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Graham Andrews, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 126,515.00

Understanding the duration and speed of lava flows is central to volcanic hazard
management and risk assessment. Years of observations at persistently erupting
volcanoes like Kilauea (Hawaii) and Etna (Sicily) have produced a sophisticated
understanding of basaltic lava flows; however, a similar level of understanding
is absent for other types of lava. Eruptions of viscous, silicic lavas are
common in the geological record but are infrequent at human timescales.
Observations of active silicic lavas and their behavior are thus very limited.
Two eruptions of a particularly viscous lava called rhyolite in the 2000s in
Chile, allowed the first real-time observations of rhyolite lava eruptions.
Those observations have led to the need for volcano scientists to re-examine the
ways that silicic lavas flow because they were seen to be faster and flow for
longer durations than anticipated. In this study, two very young rhyolite lava
flows in California will be the focus of a detailed study in which their
internal and external structures and cooling history will be examined in order
to better understand how they flowed, for how long, and how fast. The results
will be applicable to future eruptions of rhyolite lava in eastern California,
Oregon, at Yellowstone National Park, and elsewhere around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obsidian Dome and South Coulee lavas will be the
focus for exogenous and endogenous growth patterns using structural architecture
and strain, thermal, and rheological gradient patterns. The researchers will
compile a detailed morphological map using LiDAR data and three-dimensional
structural analyses using macroscopic features in the field and microscopic
strain studies. The analyses will characterize and quantify the types and
magnitudes of strain active in different parts of the lavas throughout stages of
their eruption and emplacement. Strain datasets will then be integrated with the
results of cooling rate analyses from spherulites and differential scanning
calorimetry to constrain the emplacement timescales. Rheological experiments
will quantify the variations in effective viscosity due to variations in
crystal, bubble, and dissolved water contents. Together these data will produce
a comprehensive structural and thermo-rheological model that describes the
evolving flow of silicic lava from eruption to cessation, and from the vent to
the margins.