* 1725323
* The Systematics of Helium in Diamond-forming Metasomatic Mantle Fluids
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Cornelia Class, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 365,837.00

Our understanding of how the Earth operates through plate tectonics is to a
large extent due to research on processes that occur in the deep Earth. However,
almost all studies of the deep Earth are indirect. For example, deep Earth
processes are inferred from magmas erupting in volcanoes, which are not direct
deep earth samples but rather reflect the most easily melted fraction of mantle
rocks, and physical properties of the deep earth are inferred from the behavior
of seismic waves triggered by earthquakes. Diamonds, on the other hand are very
special in that they offer unique "windows" to look directly at deep parts of
the Earth. They form at depths &gt;140 km beneath the Earth's surface, from
circulating hot carbon- and water-rich (C-O-H) fluids, which are often captured
as "fluid inclusions". These inclusions represent our only direct samples of
deep Earth fluids, reflecting the physical strength and the chemically inert
nature of diamonds. The few published studies on deep C-O-H fluids conclude they
are cycled between the Earth's surface and interior. This study will measure the
chemistry and isotopic compositions of fluid inclusions in diamonds from
different continents. The results will document their origin, the ages of the
diamonds, and the relationships between the history observed at the surface and
the processes occurring in the deep earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon- and
water-rich (C-O-H) fluids, that form diamonds in the deep earth and are trapped
in the diamonds, offer unique opportunities to investigate deep Earth possesses.
But until now no technique has been able to provide reliable age constraints on
such deep C-O-H fluids. These fluids have high helium concentrations and are
enriched in trace elements, including U and Th. This study utilizes the
radioactive U-Th-He decay system to determine ages of the fluids trapped in
diamonds (yielding the diamond formation ages), and to constrain the timing of
their impact on different lithospheric provinces. By combining the He isotope
ratios with trace element compositions in the three types of C-O-H fluids
(carbonatitic, silicic, and saline), this study will constrain the sources of
C-O-H fluids in the deep Earth, for example, whether they were introduced from
the surface by subduction or whether they originate in the mantle. The study
will provide new insights on C-O-H fluids in the deep earth through time.
Moreover, it will have important impacts on our understanding of the deep carbon
and water cycle and the global circulation of volatiles between mantle and
crust, which have fundamental impacts on life at the Earth's surface.