* 1725903
* MRI: Acquisition of a Spectroscopic Ellipsometer to Enhance Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Research and Educational Experiences
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Salomon Turgman Cohen, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2019
* USD 152,505.00

This grant is to acquire a spectroscopic ellipsometer for advancing materials
research at Kettering University. This award will allow the university to expand
research capabilities, support integration of research and experiential learning
into courses, and enhance outreach programs in science and engineering fields.
As many new educational programs have been established at Kettering recently,
research projects targeted at engineered materials and surfaces have been
launched, spanning a wide range of collaborative disciplines. An ellipsometer
will add breadth to the growing laboratory capabilities essential to many
ongoing research projects on campus. Undergraduates will benefit from using the
ellipsometer not only as a part of the research experience, but also as a part
of their courses, since many research-grade instruments are integrated into
their classes. Additionally, the university is expanding its graduate offerings
and is currently developing a Master?s program in Materials Science and
Engineering. Therefore, this instrument will also greatly benefit the new
graduate program. This award will also enrich the outreach programs offered
through the university, designed to spark interest in science and engineering
fields in the Flint community and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
instrument is a J.A. Woollam M-2000 Ellipsometer. This model can reach a wide
audience with ease of use, while also offering full research-grade capabilities,
such as measuring film thickness, optical constants, refractive index, and pore
size distribution. Materials science and engineering related research projects
recently established at Kettering encompass multiple disciplines. Investigators
involved in this proposal mentor many undergraduate research assistants. This
ellipsometer will enable researchers to overcome the challenges associated with
developing the process-property relationships, necessary to optimize and
engineer new materials and surfaces. Examples of projects, which will be
supported by this ellipsometer, include developing engineered surfaces for
orthopedic implants, investigating the deposition behavior of organosilicons in
plasma, creating new materials and models for sodium-ion batteries, improving
food storage materials, monitoring of surface-initiated polymerization kinetics,
depositing silicon dioxide thin films with plasma, synthesizing materials for
tissue engineering and wound repair, and understanding refractive index for thin
ferrofluid layers. This award is co-funded by the CBET Division and CMMI
Division.