* 1725289
* Heads and Chairs Workshop on Future of Undergraduate Geoscience Education
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Sharon Mosher, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2019
* USD 61,470.00

The University of Texas at Austin has been granted an award to organize a
workshop titled "Heads and Chairs Workshop on Future of Undergraduate Geoscience
Education" in July 2017. The objective of this workshop is to build on the
previous progress and design successful strategies and best practices for
changing undergraduate programs in different types of institutions. At this
workshop, participants will 1) discuss the concepts, skills and competencies
identified by the wider geoscience academic and employer community during the
previous grant and how these relate to their individual department undergraduate
curricula and program, 2) work on implementation strategies together with each
other and with some heads and chairs that attended the 2016 Summit who have
already spent a year working to implement changes in their programs, and 3)
develop individual action plans for their own departments. Prior to the
workshop, participants from the 2016 heads and chairs meeting will be asked to
provide updates on their individual department action plans, including what has
been accomplished, what was or was not successful, and future plans. The updates
on action plans will be synthesized, analyzing them by institution type,
similarity and determine which strategies work best, what obstacles occur and
how to overcome them. This synthesis will inform discussions and development of
actions plans at the 2017 workshop. The education of undergraduate students in
departments that successfully change their programs will be greatly enhanced,
and those students will be better prepared for graduate school and future
employment. The experiential learning recommended by the wider geoscience
academic and employment community is also most conducive to learning by
underrepresented groups and to their future success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this workshop, combined with compiled and synthesized results of the
2016 Heads and Chairs Summit on the Future of Undergraduate Geoscience
Education, will provide critical data on effective strategies for changing
undergraduate curricula and programs and in identifying common obstacles or
roadblocks and how they can be overcome. Creating change in departments,
particularly with respect to undergraduate curricula, is very difficult and
being able to design successful strategies for changing undergraduate programs
in different types of institutions will be a significant advance.