* 1725428
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Dependence Programming and Optimization of Scalable Irregular Numerical Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Robert Harrison, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Dynamic and irregular applications, such as in the Multiresolution Adaptive
Numerical Environment for Scientific Simulation framework, are notoriously hard
to implement efficiently, especially on emerging complex and heterogeneous high-
performance computing platforms. This is further compounded by the lack of
suitable programming models capable of expressing these kinds of applications,
while at the same time allowing the tools to efficiently map the applications on
a variety of hardware. The intellectual merits of this project are in advancing
the state of the art in dependence-based programming models, compiler
technologies and runtime techniques that address these issues. The project's
broader significance and importance are in laying down the intellectual
foundations for the composition and optimization of irregular scalable
algorithms, focusing on challenging and highly-significant spatial-tree
algorithms. This project enables design and implementation of high-performance,
portable irregular applications, as well as training of the future employees of
companies and government who work in these domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project redefines the prevailing abstractions by unifying and extending the
Concurrent Collections (CnC) dependence-based programming model with novel
compiler and runtime techniques, and applying these to a very important class of
dynamic, irregular numerical computations such as the ones found in the above
simulation framework. Innovations in the programming model allow the programmers
to separate the specification of the algorithm from a specification of how to
efficiently map the application on a variety of different platforms with a
variety of different tuning goals. Compiler innovations enable previously
elusive optimizations of irregular applications, while runtime techniques enable
efficient execution on modern, heterogeneous and distributed machines.