* 1725756
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy for Research, Undergraduate Training, and Curricular Enhancement
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrew Mehl, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 188,500.00

An award is made to Knox College in Galesburg, Illinois to provide instrument-
based research training and hands-on classroom experimentation for undergraduate
students through the acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with Energy
Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy. The new instrument will help to prepare students
in Environmental Studies, Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Neuroscience for more
advanced science degrees and research careers. The instrument will also be
available for use by local community college students and faculty for additional
scientific training and data acquisition. In addition, the new instrument will
be used for outreach into local K-12 classrooms via remote image access as well
as through Knox's yearly summer youth program, College 4 Kids. Through these
outreach activities, the project will increase area students' interest and
confidence in studying the sciences.

The research uses of the instrument will be many and will vary across
disciplines, with researchers from multiple departments at Knox and Monmouth
Colleges making use of new capabilities including digital image capture, higher-
resolution imaging, automated stage rotation, and elemental analysis. Research
uses will include imaging newly-created hydrogels for characterization,
examining fern gametophyte development and glial cell morphology, performing
elemental analysis of archaeological ceramics and wetland rocks for the purposes
of sourcing and interpreting environments of deposition, capturing images for
3D-printing of fish jaws, as well as digital imaging of microscopic
invertebrates from soils and other environments. Researchers will be able to
accurately image, measure and share data from a variety of microscopic samples,
vastly increasing data accessibility as well as our understanding of small-scale
processes across the sciences.