* 1725855
* MRI: Acquisition of a fluorescence microscope to serve as a regional resource for dynamic, live-specimen imaging research and education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Eva Strawbridge, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 216,582.00

An award is made to James Madison University (JMU) to fund the acquisition of an
automated, fluorescence microscope system for dynamic, live-specimen imaging to
advance research and education at JMU and in the surrounding region in Virginia.
This instrumentation will expand the scope of research in multiple departments
at JMU and in neighboring institutions by enabling faculty and students to study
the dynamics of molecules, cells, and tissues. JMU and most of its neighboring
colleges are primarily undergraduate institutions and are committed to engaging
students in learning through faculty-mentored research. Indeed, students are
responsible for over 95% of the total research use of our core microscopy
facility. The new microscope system will provide these students with exposure to
live imaging and multi-fluorescence technologies unavailable elsewhere in our
region, and will expand the facility's ability to increase research
opportunities for undergraduates. This instrumentation will also enhance formal
upper-division courses such as Human Histology and Environmental Microbiology by
providing students with practical training in light microscopy techniques.
Moreover, in an effort to expand our impact on undergraduate research training,
we will work with Bridgewater College's Biology Department (a neighboring, small
liberal arts college) to provide access for their upper-division courses.
Finally, this microscope system will support science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) education in the northern Shenandoah Valley region by enhancing
the JMU Biology Department's local elementary school outreach program. This
program provides K-5 classes with the kinds of science enrichment experiences
known to pique early interest in science (but often only accessible to select
populations) to all students regardless of academic readiness, language and
cultural barriers, and socioeconomic status. This state-of-the-art instrument
will be integrated into 5th grade learning modules focusing on the components
and dynamic nature of cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new fluorescence
microscope system will open new investigative avenues for researchers at JMU and
in the region by enabling the study of dynamic processes at multiple levels of
biological organization-from molecular assemblies to entire organisms-and by
accommodating multi-fluorescent-label imaging with a broader diversity of
fluorescent probes. It will advance the research and training programs of at
least 16 faculty members from three institutions and multiple STEM fields
including biology, kinesiology, regenerative medicine, mathematics, engineering
and science education. Projects that will be substantially impacted include:
cornea tissue wound healing and regeneration; using molecular and mathematical
tools to investigate cell- and organism-level responses to protein mis-folding
(a component of many neurodegenerative diseases) in nematodes; genome
reorganization during crustacean development; the relationship between stress
and feeding behavior in mammals; and the role of endocrine signaling in the
control of sexual signal production in snakes. The new instrumentation will also
impact research in JMU's Kinesiology and Engineering departments, among others,
as well as at neighboring institutions such as Bridgewater College, Eastern
Mennonite University and the Marion DuPont Equine Medical Center.