* 1725413
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multipoint Laser Vibrometer for Studying Multiscale and Nonstationary Dynamics of Materials and Complex Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Matthew Allen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 470,250.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a
Multipoint Laser Vibrometer (MPV800) system to enable potentially transformative
research in civil and mechanical engineering, materials, and biomedical
engineering. The MPV800 system tracks transient and random vibrations and
structural deformations, allowing researchers to monitor the dynamic response of
materials, components and systems with challenging geometries and soft
materials, such as biological tissues. The MPV 800 also monitors nonlinear
vibration and wave propagation. Researchers will gain an enhanced understanding
of the dynamic behavior of complex systems that can lead to advances in early-
diagnosis of disease, more reliable 3D printing processes and the development of
novel materials and structures with enhanced resilience. The MPV800 system will
also be used in laboratory projects to educate the next generation of vibration
engineers and outreach events for industry and the public.

The MPV800 laser vibrometer with 5-optical units and 40 fiber heads enables
noncontact and full-field vibration measurements up to 0.5 mm spatial
resolution, and bandwidth ranging from several Hz to 100 kHz. This new system
also uses a wavelength of 1550 nm for higher reflectance and lower noise in
testing soft and hard materials, even materials with high water content such as
biological tissues, swollen polymers and hydrogels. A total of 10 major users
will use the system to measure the dynamic response of soft, porous,
multiphasic, and hard materials with an unprecedented range and resolution in
time and space. The MPV800 system will provide essential measurements to update
models of sophisticated assemblies in civil and aerospace applications. It will
also be used for noncontact characterization and structural health monitoring of
3D printed parts and tissue scaffolds. Analysis of wave propagation in cartilage
and tendons will reveal new insights on the high loading-rate response of those
tissues and the tissue behavior that leads to osteoarthritis.