* 1725122
* TRANSFORM-PGR: Manipulating Agrobacterium-mediated transformation and T-DNA integration for plant synthetic biology and genome engineering
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Stanton Gelvin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,467,146.00

Non-technical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;The introduction of DNA into plants (plant
transformation to generate genetically modified or transgenic plants) has become
a core technology for basic plant research and the agricultural biotechnology
industry. Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation is the most
commonly used method to generate transgenic plants. The bacterium Agrobacterium
can transfer large DNA-molecules (T-DNA) capable of encoding numerous genes
sufficient to, e.g., encode a novel biosynthetic pathway. Thus, Agrobacterium-
mediated transformation is a key tool for synthetic biology. Although the
Agrobacterium host range is broad, many agronomic important species or specific
cultivars remain recalcitrant to transformation. In addition, T-DNA integrates
randomly into the plant genome. Consequently, T-DNA may disrupt genes important
for plant development and productivity. Random T-DNA integration often occurs in
genomic regions that silence encoded transgenes, leading to unpredictable and
unstable transgene expression. It is therefore important to develop novel
technologies to increase transformation efficiency of a broader range of crop
species and agronomic important varieties, and to insert T-DNA into defined
locations of any plant genome. This project will develop novel technologies to
broaden the plant host range of Agrobacterium, and to direct the integration of
T-DNA to specific plant chromosomal regions pre-selected by the scientist. In
addition, this project will develop novel technologies to deliver genes to
plants efficiently without subsequent integration into the plant genome. This
latter technology is important for delivering plant genome engineering reagents
without maintaining these reagents after they have accomplished their tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes tool
development for the plant research community to help enable functional genomics
for a broad spectrum of species. Because Agrobacterium-mediated transformation
is the preferred DNA transfer approach, one goal of this project is to increase
the efficiency of transformation by debilitating plant defense responses to
Agrobacterium. This will be accomplished by engineering Agrobacterium strains
that can secrete Type III effectors and suppress plant defense responses to
enhance transformation. Because controlled T-DNA integration and predictable
transgene expression is important for synthetic biology, a second goal is to
build a system to facilitate effective and precise DNA integration into plant
genomes. This system will be developed using CRISPR/Cas9 to generate breaks in
specific tomato genomic sequences that will "trap" T-DNA. These integration
sites will be chosen to maximize the probability of stable transgene expression
through numerous plant generations and under field conditions. The expression of
targeted and randomly integrated transgenes will be assessed. Agrobacterium is
also used to deliver genome engineering reagents to plants. However, integration
of these reagents is undesirable, and they usually are segregated out of the
engineered plants. This is difficult for vegetative-propagated species. The
third goal of this project is to develop Agrobacterium strains that can
efficiently deliver but not integrate T-DNA encoding genome editing reagents, or
will secrete these reagents through a Type III secretion system. This will be
accomplished by altering Agrobacterium VirD2, the protein that leads T-DNA from
the bacterium into the plant and which is important for T-DNA integration.