* 1725278
* Subdivision Based Isogeometric Analysis driven Electro-Acoustic Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Alejandro Diaz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2021
* USD 429,947.00

Many devices important to modern society rely on acoustic or electromagnetic
waves to achieve their purpose: miniaturized antennas, sensors in wearable
devices, acoustic engineered materials. The performance of these devices is
affected by the presence of objects in their vicinity: the shape and location of
near-by, interacting objects play a crucial role in the performance of the
system. To achieve optimum performance it is necessary to consider,
simultaneously, the design of the transmitting or receiving device, as well as
the design of objects in its environment. This research will investigate
computer-based methodologies to optimize the shape of such devices and their
environment, taking into account the effect of close-by objects, optimizing
their shape or placement to achieve optimal electromagnetic or acoustic
performance. The goal is to develop a computer based framework that facilitates
exploration of novel design concepts and has the potential to generate
extraordinary designs, with applications ranging from wearable or deformable
technologies for digital communications, to devices for medical imaging, for
threat detection, or for noise mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach
relies on isogeometric analysis and subdivision surfaces, and carries this
representation across geometric description, analysis, and optimization. For
analysis, we formulate an isogeometric integral equation version of wave
scattering problems based on subdivision surfaces, a geometry representation
technique popular in computer animation, and on an expansion of eigenbasis on
the subdivision surface. For optimization, we rely on a new formulation for
topology optimization methods that supports a subdivision surface representation
and the associated eigenbasis expansion, allows simultaneous shape and topology
modifications, and supports sensitivity analysis. To facilitate exploration of
the design space, we establish mappings between the solution eigenbasis and the
spectral content of far fields, which determine electromagnetic and acoustic
performance. Thus, each eigenbasis is associated with an object of given shape,
and it encodes information that reflects both the shape and the electromagnetic
or acoustic behavior of the object. This combines the shape of the object and
its behavior into a single entity, to be optimized and investigated as a
possible building block in multi-object designs. The outcome will be a design
framework that allows designers to build scenes from pre-computed building
blocks, and explore the optimal placement of objects and their optimization in
various scenes. Catalogs of standard scenes involving common objects will be
constructed and used to evaluate design performance in different environments.