* 1725880
* Collaborative Research: IUSE-EHR: Cultivating Inclusive Identities of Engineers and Computer Scientists: Expanding Efforts to Infuse Inclusive Excellence in Undergraduate Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Robin Hensel, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2020
* USD 605,906.00

This project aims to develop inclusive professional identities among engineering
and computer science students through the process of redesigning undergraduate
curricula. Inclusive professional identities are defined here as engineering and
computer science students with: (a) the necessary technical knowledge, skills,
and abilities to work in their chosen field, (b) an appreciation for how all
kinds of diversity strengthen engineering and computer science as disciplines,
and (c) knowledge of how to act in inclusive ways and create inclusive
environments within their field. This project builds on a prior exploratory IUSE
grant to develop, implement, and assess curricula for first-year engineering
courses designed to help beginning engineering students identify with an
inclusive vision of the engineering profession. The first objective is to
transfer the first-year curricula to three other universities with different
institutional characteristics and extend this curricula from engineering into
computer science. Throughout this process, the pathways and barriers to
successful transfer and adoption of this curricula will be studied. The second
objective is to expand efforts into the second and third year courses in
engineering and computer science in ways that sustain student engagement with
diversity and inclusion. The project will develop and assess (a) discipline- and
course-specific diversity activities (in particular, case studies from the
engineering and computer science profession), and (b) training for graduate
teaching assistants and faculty to facilitate effective and inclusive teams. The
third objective is to measure both the short term and long term impact of the
diversity and inclusion activities on the development of inclusive professional
identities in students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in its transformative approach toward changing engineering and
computer science collegiate cultures. This work complements initiatives that
support historically underrepresented populations: rather than focusing
exclusively on members of underrepresented groups, the focus is on preparing all
students to work in diverse environments and to leverage inclusive behaviors
that will support retention of students in STEM from all backgrounds,
underrepresented and majority alike. The broader impact of this project allows
for development and distribution of curricula that will prepare all STEM
students to enact inclusive professional behaviors. Creating inclusive climates
in collegiate STEM departments contributes to broadening participation by
ensuring that students from underrepresented groups experience equitable
learning environments where they can participate fully in STEM learning. STEM
professionals who are prepared to infuse diverse perspectives in their everyday
practices and create inclusive work environments carry great potential to make
robust contributions for the public good of society.