* 1725301
* Sulfur Isotopes in Subduction Systems and the Global Sulfur Cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alicia Cruz-Uribe, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2022
* USD 341,444.00

Sulfur is one of the most abundant elements in the Earth, is an essential
ingredient for life, and plays a pivotal role in geologic and environmental
processes. A large part of the global sulfur cycle involves exchange between the
surface and interior of the Earth at subduction zones, where one tectonic plate
sinks beneath another. As a volatile element, sulfur has the potential to be
released into the Earth's mantle during the physical and chemical changes that
take place during subduction. Sulfur released during subduction can be re-
introduced into the atmosphere from subduction-related volcanic arcs, such as
those found along the Pacific rim. While the chemistry of sulfur released at
volcanic arcs has been well studied, the mechanism by which sulfur is released
during subduction, and the effects of subducted sulfur on the mineralogy of the
upper mantle, the volcanic arc, and arc-associated ore deposits (i.e., gold and
copper), are poorly constrained. This team's work addresses this knowledge gap
in the sulfur cycle by directly examining sulfur-bearing minerals in rocks from
ancient subducted plates and deep arc volcanic systems, which have been brought
back to the surface of the Earth via tectonic processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of field-based observations and
thermodynamic modeling, one of the most important outcomes of this work will be
the identification of coupled sulfide-silicate reactions that occur within
subducting slabs. The oxidation state of the fluids released during these
reactions has important consequences for the redox state of the upper mantle and
volcanic arc system. These observations will be coupled with analyses of the
sulfur isotopic signature of sulfides from exhumed high-pressure rocks and deep
arc crustal cumulates, which will provide a tracer for different sources of
sulfur throughout the entire subduction process. A broad range of lithologies,
including meta-sediments and meta-igneous rocks, will be analyzed in order to
capture the scope of subducted sulfur isotope values. In combining sulfur
isotope signatures with the reactions that likely take place in a variety of
subducted lithologies, the redox and isotopic composition of sulfur-related
fluids that feed arc volcanic systems will be characterized in a way that has
never been done before. These linkages will be tested by quantifying the sulfur
isotopic signature of sulfides in deep crustal arc cumulates from the Lesser
Antilles arc, which provides a novel opportunity to test how differences in
subducted sediment across an arc may influence the sulfur isotopic signature in
the volcanic arc. This work will provide University of Maine students with
access to techniques not currently available in the State of Maine.