* 1725940
* CREST3: Engaging Undergraduates in the Community of Science through Modeling
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Tim Herman, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 599,971.00

This project builds on recent experiences that demonstrate the power of physical
models of proteins to engage students' interest in the molecular biosciences.
The project will have a dual focus on undergraduate students who are currently
underrepresented in the sciences and on undergraduate faculty who teach topics
related to molecular structure and function. Faculty will lead small teams of
students in an exploration of a current research topic, with a special emphasis
on the process of scientific research. In order to enhance the students'
understanding of a particular molecular process, the team will design a physical
model of a protein that plays a key role in that process. In so doing, the
students will be introduced to the community of science and begin to see
themselves as legitimate members of that research community. At the same time,
faculty in this project will collaborate in the development of hands-on
instructional materials that will transform the way this topic is currently
taught in their bioscience classrooms. Instructional materials will begin with
current student understanding and scaffold their knowledge so that they can
better understand the significance of cutting edge research. Both components of
our project support current efforts to improve undergraduate education as called
for by the National Science Foundation's Vision and Change report.

This project will be carried out in collaboration with the undergraduate student
chapters of the American Society of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB).
The intellectual merit of this project rests on students' exploration of a topic
and modeling of a protein that is related to the research of a scientist who
will be honored at the annual meeting of this professional society. Students
will bring their models to the annual meeting where they will have an
opportunity to meet with the distinguished researcher and their colleagues in an
informal "teaching session". Past experience has demonstrated that the physical
models will serve as thinking tools to stimulate meaningful conversations
between researchers (experts) and students (novices). In a second component of
this project, undergraduate faculty will participate in a collaborative summer
workshop that will focus on the development of student-centered instructional
materials that can be used to enhance students' understanding of
structure/function relationships. These instructional materials will include
accurate physical models of proteins created by 3D printing technologies as well
as schematic models of proteins involved in molecular pathways, digital
animations of proteins, and molecular landscapes that place proteins within
their cellular contexts. Project assessment will measure both the persistence of
underrepresented minority students in their pursuit of a career in science and
the impact of the program on the teaching practices of the participating
faculty. The results of this project will be disseminated via workshops at
future annual meeting of the ASBMB. The project's instructional materials will
also be available for loan through the Milwaukee School of Engineering Model
Lending Library.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).