* 1725919
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer with Cryoprobe
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Thies, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 478,169.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Programs. Professor Leah Casabianca from Clemson
University and colleagues Mark Thies, Julia Brumaghim, Sourav Saham, and
Nishanth Tharayil are acquiring a 500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometer equipped with a cryoprobe. This spectrometer allows research in a
variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of
significant economic importance, as well as the study of biologically-relevant
species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is a powerful tool available to chemists
for the structural study molecules. An NMR is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the changing interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid
state. The results from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, forensics, and biochemistry.
This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research performed by
undergraduate students. Students from a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program are also involved in the use of the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NMR spectrometer enhances research and
education at all levels. It benefits researchers exploring selenium antioxidant
mechanisms using 77-selenium NMR spectroscopy, studying nanoparticle toxicity,
and determining dynamic time and length scales in ionic polymers. The
instrumentation is employed in studying anion and ion pair recognition and
stimuli-responsive functional materials. Researchers are analyzing bioconjugates
of carbon quantum dots and carrying out biogeochemical research on soil carbon
sequestration. The spectrometer is also used for studying fluorine chemistry,
tailoring lignin properties for high-value applications, synthesizing peptoid
polymers, and studying applications to synthetic organic chemistry.