* 1725841
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Seahorse XFe 96 oxygen flux analyzer for integrative organismal and cellular biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Herman Lehman, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 271,077.00

An award is made to Colgate University to undertake multi-disciplinary research
at the cell and organelle level through the acquisition of a Seahorse XFe96
oxygen flux analyzer. This instrument, which facilitates detailed analysis of
cellular metabolic rates, will support research in animal physiology, virology,
genetics, and neurotransmitter biology. A diverse group of researchers across
two primarily undergraduate institutions (PUI) are eager to incorporate the
Seahorse XF analyzer within their classes and research programs. The requested
instruments will play a central role in collaborative faculty-student research
in biology and neuroscience at Colgate University and Hamilton College, and will
facilitate current and future excellence in undergraduate research training in
the sciences. In addition, the requested Seahorse instruments will have a
significant impact on instructional laboratories across the curriculum in areas
that include neuroscience, animal physiology, and microbiology. Between
undergraduate research training and utilization in courses, this system will
impact approximately 150 undergraduates a year. The projects will facilitate
research with potential societal benefits in the fields of aging, viral
infection, and cancer, and will provide outreach opportunities for high school
students interested in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Seahorse XFe96
oxygen flux analyzer is a multimodal system capable measuring cellular metabolic
parameters including glycolysis rate and mitochondrial stress. In addition to
its use in classroom laboratory settings, this unique technology will be
deployed in student-focused research laboratories to investigate the following
research questions: (1) How do cellular metabolic rates change with body size
and age of dogs and how are they linked to whole-animal metabolism? Differences
in longevity demonstrate that small dogs have significantly longer lifespans
that larger breed dogs. Thus, dogs constitute an informative group to study
connections between life-history and physiology. We can only use Seahorse
technology to untangle this basic biological rule due to the nature of working
with primary fibroblast cells from young and old dogs. (2) How do reoviruses
alter cellular metabolic pathways when used as oncolytic agents? Reoviruses are
non-pathogenic mammalian viruses. However, very little is known about how
reovirus replication alters a host cell's metabolic state, another basic
biological principle that can only be elucidated with the use of a Seahorse
XFe96 because metabolic alterations due to viral infections can only be measured
using intact cells. (3) Does the transcription factor Kr√ºppel-like factor 4
(KLF4) protect against cellular damage due to malfunctioning mitochondria, and
KLF4 is a mediator of cell cycle regulation and development? However, the role
of Klf4 in regulating cellular metabolic pathways remains to be elucidated.
Seahorse XF technology is the only method to measure mitochondrial metabolism
and glycolysis (as an alternative pathway). (4) How does the whole-animal
cellular phenotype of intact C. elegans change when exposed to the estrogen-like
molecule DES, which decreases fertility in animals? The Seahorse XF technology
is perfect to determine the effects of DES on cellular metabolism over multiple
generations. (5) What effect does ascorbic acid (AA) have on the growth and
development of larvae of the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta? Larvae reared on
AA-deficient diets grow less and develop more slowly relative to larvae fed a
normal AA-containing diet. The mechanisms of AA-dependent growth in insects
remain unclear and the seahorse technology will allow us to directly examine the
metabolic underpinnings of this AA-dependent process. Together, these projects
will significantly enhance student-faculty research at Colgate University and
Hamilton College.