* 1725655
* X-Labs: Cross-Disciplinary Practice Focused Undergraduate Laboratory Transformation for Biology, Chemistry and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Heather Vance-Chalcraft, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Carson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 598,188.00

Traditional laboratory instruction for students in biology, chemistry and
physics classes has followed a structured approach, in which students learn how
to collect data and draw conclusions following a precisely defined series of
steps. Unfortunately, these exercises are not a particularly apt representation
of how science is performed in working research laboratories. The X-labs project
at East Carolina University (ECU) will study how to change laboratory
instruction using an Argument-Driven Inquiry model, in which students will have
the chance to engage in authentic research practices such as asking questions,
developing models, and communicating and reviewing results with their peers.
This study addresses a clear national need for understanding how different
instructional approaches affect student learning, and for clarifying the
practices that lead to development of science identity in students. Results from
the project will help to refine and evaluate science laboratory instruction, to
develop better science education for the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's goal is to transform foundational undergraduate laboratory courses
through inclusive curricula across disciplines, using a common laboratory
structure, language and emphasis for instruction. The project will employ a
model that separates science practices into three areas: empirical
(investigation design, data collection and analysis), representative (modeling,
data presentation, argument construction) and interactive (argumentation,
critique and revision). Many types of published, validated interdisciplinary
instruments will be used to assess student knowledge and attitudes. Using the
same instruments in laboratory classes in multiple disciplines will allow
triangulation of data within and between disciplines. Using the same
instructional approach in biology, chemistry and physics is expected to increase
student ability to engage in science practices across STEM disciplines. An
annual conference will be hosted for ECU STEM faculty and graduate students and
regional community college faculty, providing a platform for interdisciplinary
exchange of ideas and building a culture of instructional practice beyond the
host institution. This work will inform science educators on how to reframe
disciplinary laboratory courses with a focus on science practices.