* 1725587
* Geometry and Topology of Fluid Turbulence: Theory and Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Schatz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2021
* USD 548,136.00

This research project explores and experimentally tests a radically new
mathematical framework for understanding and predicting complicated behaviors in
numerous fundamental and practical problems in science, engineering, and
medicine (e.g., weather forecasting, characterization of cardiac arrhythmias,
etc.). Complex behaviors in many such problems are often governed by patterns
that appear fleetingly but repeatedly. The research develops general, powerful
techniques for identifying and quantifying key patterns, including the temporal
sequences in which the patterns may appear; knowledge of the patterns and
sequences can then be harnessed to construct "road maps" for predicting future
behaviors. This study will focus on demonstrating "proof of principle" by
constructing road maps of complex behavior observed in turbulent fluid flow in
laboratory experiments. If successful, the results of this study will lead
directly to the development of faster and more accurate ways to make predictions
of complicated behavior in large real world problems. For example, the ability
to identify and quantify important patterns and sequences in atmospheric
turbulence should enable weather forecasts that are better and more rapid than
those currently possible today. All software and useful solution data produced
by the research activities will be made publicly available. The research program
tightly integrates with teaching and learning at the undergraduate and graduate
levels and includes activities to increase participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this research program is to
develop a novel geometrical/topological approach to modeling and prediction of
turbulent flows and to validate it experimentally. Investigation will focus on a
weakly turbulent flow in a shallow electrolyte fluid layer. A combination of
existing numerical methods and new methods developed as a part of this program
will be used to compute a large set of unstable states (known as exact coherent
states in fluid dynamics) and the network of connections between these states,
given by the numerically exact solutions of the mathematical model of the flow.
Temporal averages will be compared with state averages in experiment and
simulations to verify the statistical predictions of periodic orbit theory. A
low-dimensional predictive model for the dynamics based on the topology of the
network of connections will similarly be validated against experiment and
simulations. Understanding, prediction, and control of spatiotemporally chaotic
dynamics, in general, and of turbulent fluid flows, in particular, is largely an
open problem of both practical and fundamental significance. The
geometrical/topological framework that will be developed and tested under this
project will provide a novel reduced-order, predictive, dynamical description of
turbulent fluid flows. This framework will also provide a connection between the
dynamical description and the conventional statistical description of fluid
turbulence. In addition, this framework should serve as a foundation for a
radically new way to control complex dynamical regimes in a wide range of
applications.