* 1725920
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Early Field Experiences for Prospective Mathematics Teachers through the University Teaching Experience Model
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Fran Arbaugh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 733,570.00

This IUSE Development and Implementation for Engaged Student Learning project
addresses the urgent need to improve the preparation of undergraduate
prospective secondary mathematics teachers. The project will test the
implementation of a field experience model designed to accelerate prospective
teachers? capacity to design and implement equitable learning environments that
enhance understanding and achievement in mathematics from the start of their
teaching careers. The project will research the implementation of the University
Teaching Experience (UTE) model where secondary prospective teachers assume
teaching responsibility in an undergraduate mathematics course early in their
preparation program with mentoring provided by mathematics teacher educators.
Enhancing early field experiences for novice mathematics teachers can better
prepare them for their initial years of practice. Since high-needs schools
largely employ early career teachers, improving student outcomes in high-need
schools depends upon making sure that novices are well-prepared for ambitious
teaching as soon as they enter the profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves collaborative research across three different teacher
preparation programs (Michigan State University, The Pennsylvania State
University, and University of Delaware) to achieve two broad aims: (1) assess
the portability of the UTE model to a wide range of university-based teacher
preparation institutions and (2) gather both quantitative and qualitative data
to investigate the development of PSTs' knowledge about teaching and their
teaching practice as a result of participating in the UTE. Data collection will
include videorecorded observations of PSTs' teaching twice during the UTE with
follow-up observations of teaching twice during the PSTs' subsequent student
teaching placement to determine the influence of the UTE experience on practice
in secondary mathematics classrooms. Additionally, participants will complete
pre and post-assessment of their knowledge of algebra teaching and participate
in interviews during their UTE experience. Control group data from two of three
implementation sites will be compared to UTE participants' data to assess the
effectiveness of the UTE. Finally, to determine the scalability of the UTE
model, final grade data for students enrolled in the mathematics courses
involved in the UTE will be collected and analyzed, along with artifacts of
implementation, such as syllabi from each institution. Research findings will
inform the field about how the prospective teachers' knowledge and algebra
teaching practices are influenced by mentored teaching experiences early in
their preparation program. In particular, this study is among the first to
examine how prospective teachers' understanding of the professional obligations
of mathematics teaching that guide teacher decision making develop as a result
of participating in such early field experiences. Finally, the findings will
inform teacher preparation in other subject areas, such as science education, by
providing a model for teacher preparation courses to partner with other
introductory undergraduate courses that also serve as gateways to STEM degrees.
The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is providing co-funding for this
project in recognition of its alignment with the broader teacher preparation
goals of the Noyce effort.