* 1725335
* MRI: Acquisition of a Low-Vibration, Cryogen-Free Cryostat Microscope System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Zi Qiu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2019
* USD 232,278.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation project
supports the acquisition of a low-vibration, cryogen-free measurement system at
the University of California - Berkeley for studying emerging two-dimensional
materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides. The system
enables optical and electrical measurements of materials properties with high
precision under large magnetic fields, and offers precise control of charge and
novel intrinsic properties of electrons in the two-dimensional materials. The
trifecta of magnetic field, electrical contacts, and optical excitation offers
new research opportunities for probing the quantum phenomena of these novel
materials as well as exploring their optoelectronic applications. In the
meanwhile, the system provides a platform for forging new collaborations,
student training and workforce development. The research positively impacts
society through the development of new atomically-thin materials that
revolutionize major areas of computing, electronics and human
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The emerging,
atomically-thin two-dimensional crystals of graphene and transition metal
dichalcogenides offer exciting opportunities to develop novel optoelectronic
devices by engineering quantum phenomena at the atomic scale. Owing to their
reduced dimensionality, two-dimensional materials process unprecedented
properties through their enhanced many-body interactions and quantum
confinement. To fully explore two-dimensional materials, researchers must
understand the interplay among the electrons, lattice phonons, and excitons in
such reduced dimensions. The research enabled by this instrument acquisition
spans materials science, physics and device engineering. With a novel
combination of magnetic field, electrical contacts, and optical pump of
materials at low temperatures, the critical quantum behaviors and transport
properties of two-dimensional materials can be revealed, which is the key to
developing future optoelectronic devices such as valley light-emitting diode,
wearable piezoelectric generator, and ultrathin optical sensors.