* 1725797
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Central Computing Facility at University of California Santa Barbara
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 800,000.00

This project, acquiring a computer cluster (mini-supercomputer) to replace the
old one, aims to serve the computational needs facilitating scientific research
and education in multiple areas. The machine includes 120 node Infiniband
interconnected cluster for efficient message passing interface (MPI) parallel
processing, four shared memory "fat nodes" with 1 Terabyte (TB) of memory/node,
four graphic processing unit (GPU) nodes built around NVIDIA Tesla P100 1
Gigabyte (GB) GPUs, and four Intel Knight's Landing nodes. This blended system
will serve the computational needs of the vast majority of campus researchers.
This system will also service users needing large-scale resources by allowing
development, prototyping, and benchmarking calculations locally, prior to
production runs at supercomputer centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
enabled spans multiple departments and supports research in many campus centers
including AlloSphere Research Facility, the California Nanosystems Institute,
the Center of Polymers and Organic Solids, the Earth Research Institute, the
Kavli Institute of Theoretical Physics, the Marine Science Institute, the
Materials Research Laboratory, and the National Center for Ecological Analysis
and Synthesis. This interdisciplinary and mainly collaborative research will be
facilitated by the presence of an available local facility, without the
administrative hurdles and delays associated with application to supercomputing
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The cluster is expected
to play a prominent role in educating the next generation of scientists,
engineers, and mathematicians. The NSF Integrated Graduate Education and
Research Traineeship (IGERT) program in Network Science and Big Data will also
employ the cluster that will additionally be utilized by undergraduates, high
school, and community college students and K-12 teachers via existing sponsored
programs. It will also contribute to attract others students and researchers.
Furthermore the facility will service graduate participants in the University of
California Leadership Excellence through Advanced Degrees (UCLEADS) and the
Bridges to Doctorate programs. These programs help increase the number of under-
represented students involved.