* 1725190
* Quantifying Entrainment and its Effects in Isolated, Sheared Cumuli and Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sonia Lasher-Trapp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 549,738.00

Earth's precipitation is primarily produced by deep cumulus clouds. Many aspects
of cumulus convection are affected by entrainment, the process by which
turbulent clouds introduce dry air from outside the cloud. Entrainment results
in the dilution of the cloud which decreases the updraft speed and cloud height,
and potentially prevents precipitation formation. This award will provide
funding for the systematic investigation of entrainment in storms that occur in
regions with environmental wind shear, the conditions that can sustain supercell
thunderstorms. The researcher plans to develop general relationships between
wind shear, cumulus entrainment, and convective precipitation which can be used
to improve prediction of thunderstorm initiation, and rain, hail and lightning
that form within these storms. In addition, the project will contribute to the
development of two early-career researchers who will be trained in atmospheric
science and high performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research on
cumulus entrainment has largely not taken wind shear into consideration. This
project will use the CM1 cloud model to address three main hypotheses: 1)
Unidirectional vertical wind shear enhances entrainment (compared to the non-
sheared case) into a cloud updraft in its thermal-like stage, but directional
vertical wind shear decreases this enhancement, 2) In environments with
sufficiently strong vertical wind shear to generate a rotating updraft, the
thermal-like initial updraft transforms into a jet-like updraft, decreasing the
entrainment into, and dilution of, the rotating updraft, 3) The increased
entrainment and dilution into a cloud updraft in its thermal stage, and the
decreased entrainment and dilution of the jet stage results in non-negligible
(&gt;10%) decreases and increases (respectively) in precipitation production
within the storm.