* 1725212
* Anorthite in Magmatic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Hanna Nekvasil, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2022
* USD 370,999.00

Meeting our ever increasing need for a steady supply of natural resources
requires an increasingly sophisticated understanding of processes that form and
store such resources. Gaining insights into these processes requires research
that spans all aspects of the transformation of geologic material into
exploitable ground-based resources, from what is originally brought up from the
Earth's interior, to the nature of the final mechanisms of concentration of
resources on the surface. This project focuses on furthering our fundamental
understanding of what lies in the Earth's interior, deeper than humans can
directly access, and what portion of this mantle material is brought to the
Earth's surface during quiescent volcanic activity beneath the sea at mid-ocean
ridges and during violent volcanic eruptions on land. New insights into the
mantle in these regions and the mechanisms of moving magma to the surface will
be gleaned by studying a mineral found in both of these geologic environments,
the mineral anorthite, whose origin remains enigmatic and cannot be explained by
our current understanding of the geologic processes at work in the Earth's
mantle. This research capitalizes upon a set of new observations obtained
through research on a synthetic version of the mineral that suggests very
different behavior in magmas than has been broadly assumed and has the potential
to dramatically change our view on how magmas are produced in the mantle and the
changes they undergo as they ascend. This research involves a combination of
experiments simulating conditions within the Earth, modeling, and looking at
natural anorthite crystals in rock samples. This multi-faceted approach is vital
for training the next generation of geoscientists at all levels and will be used
to introduce college freshmen to interdisciplinary science, provide research
experiences for undergraduates, and finally to provide Ph.D. level research
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In specific, the proposed work uses
experimental and thermodynamic modelling approaches to investigate a little-
recognized deviation from the classic melting loop topology accepted as
dictating plagioclase compositional behavior in igneous rocks since the time of
Bowen. This deviation is in the form of a pseudo-azeotrope in the anorthite-rich
region of plagioclase and plagioclase-olivine compositional space at elevated
pressure that destabilizes plagioclase and inhibits anorthitic plagioclase from
evolving normally towards Na-enrichment as the magma cools. The proposed
research will constrain this behavior in the compositional space of upwelling
mantle and by doing so will provide new insights into the origin of highly
anorthitic plagioclase crystals in mid-ocean ridge and subduction zone magmas.
Furthermore, the change in plagioclase and melt stability relations dictated by
the pressure effect on this topology implies an elevated pressure region of high
melt production and an important role for a peritectic reaction involving
aluminous spinel. As neither of these implications can be predicted by current
models of magma production in these environments, this research has the
potential to open the door to a variety of new studies on the origin and
evolution of magmas at compressional and extensional plate margins that can
integrate such behavior into a next-generation mechanistic model of magma
formation in the Earth's mantle.