* 1725818
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Force Measurement, Single-Molecule Manipulation and Other Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Xiaohu Xia, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 135,669.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) programs. Professor Jaroslaw
Drelich from Michigan Technological University and colleagues are acquiring an
atomic force microscope (AFM). An AFM is a powerful tool to look at single
molecules on a surface. It operates through an atomically sharp tip attached to
an extremely soft cantilever that can sense forces at tiny atomic levels (pico-
newton forces). Utilizing the forces between tip and a molecule, AFM can even be
used to manipulate single molecules moving them to desired locations. Using this
information, projects measure the mechanical strength of single covalent bonds.
This can lead to practical applications, for example, preparing better quick-
response and moisture-resistant smart adhesives. Adhesion forces between
materials for civil engineering application can be investigated. The research
enabled by the AFM will have broad impacts in areas such as health, energy,
environment and national security, and even the economy. Faculty, postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate researchers in at least 16
research groups at Michigan Tech are trained to use this powerful
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This atomic force microscope enhances research
and education in areas by measuring van der Waals and magnetic forces between
the tip and surface; the rupture force of non-covalent interactions between
molecules and tip, and the scission force of covalent bonds in a molecule
anchored between the tip and surface. Applications to projects include
monitoring enzyme catalysis in real-time, and performing surface charge
microscopy of biological cells. The microscope is used in the study of quick-
response and moisture-resistant smart adhesives, and adhesion forces between
materials for civil engineering applications. In other projects the shape and
surface characteristics of atmospheric particles and atmospheric processing of
black carbon are studied. The lattice structures of proteoglycan-galectin-3
cross-linked complexes are imaged and the ligand binding force of galectin-3 is
measured.