* 1725633
* EAR-PF: An Experimental Investigation of the Rheological Behavior and Seismic Anisotropy Signature of Deep Crustal Amphibole-Rich Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Cailey Condit, Condit                  Cailey         B
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Cailey Condit has been granted an NSF EAR postdoctoral fellowship to carry
out research and educational plans at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She will investigate the way amphibole, a common but poorly understood mineral
within the earth's crust, behaves when it is deformed under high temperatures
and pressures. This work will directly augment our understating of continuous
deformation within ductile shear zones in the deep crust, where rocks flow
rather than break, and within subduction zones, where oceanic crust is
descending beneath continents. This experimental work is aimed at constraining
the strength of these highly deformed, amphibole-rich zones and investigating
their geophysical properties so that geophysicists can make more accurate
inferences about amphibole-rich rocks from remote observations of the deep
crust. By shedding new light on the strength and deformation behavior of
amphibole, these data allow us to better predict how continuous deformation may
influence the mechanics within zones of earthquake production. The education
plan involves Dr. Condit (1) co-teaching a graduate-undergraduate seminar in
rock deformation at MIT, (2) acting as a research mentor for several
undergraduate researchers, (3) continuing and expanding her geologic outreach on
social media, and (4) making geologic presentations at assisted living
facilities to disseminate geologic knowledge across generations.

Dr. Condit will utilize the state-of-the-art facilities at MIT's rock
deformation laboratory to conduct a series of experiments on amphibole,
deforming samples at a range of temperatures, pressures, and strain rates
representative of those found in the middle to lower crust. With these
experimental results, she will determine the deformation mechanisms of amphibole
and its rheology under deep crustal conditions. She will then directly tie her
observations of these experimentally deformed rocks to naturally deformed
amphibole, and collect seismic anisotropy data from the experimentally deformed
amphibole samples. This will allow for a direct comparison between deformation
mechanism, rock strength, and seismic anisotropy signals produced by the
deformed amphibole. These insights will allow geophysicists to better link their
remotely sensed observations of seismic anisotropy with the amphibole-rich rocks
that produce those signals in the deep crust. Geologists working on naturally
deformed amphibole-rich rocks will also be able to use these data to constrain
the strength and deformation mechanisms of their rocks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.