* 1725502
* MRI: Acquisition of a Pulsed Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Gary Lorigan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 836,073.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. Professor Gary Lorigan from
Miami University at Oxford (Ohio) and colleagues Michael Crowder, David Tierney,
Carole Dabney-Smith and Richard Page are acquiring an X-/Q-band pulsed electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer. This instrument allows research in a
variety of fields that study molecules with unpaired electrons such as biology
and environmental studies. In general, an EPR spectrometer yields detailed
information on the geometric and electronic structure of molecular and solid
state materials. It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes
of the unpaired electrons as they are short-lived, highly reactive species
involved in many chemical transformations. Graduate and undergraduate students
(including those from in an NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program) are trained in the researchers' laboratories to be competitive in
careers in academia and industry. Students from the nearby Central State
University (an Historically Black College or University (HBCU)) also have access
to this instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EPR spectrometer enhances
research and education at all levels. It aids researchers in probing the
structure of the KCNE1/Q1 channel complex; elucidating the binding mechanisms of
different substrates and inhibitors for metallo-B-lactamases, and studying the
electronic state of high-spin cobalt(II) magnetic materials and enzymes. The
instrumentation is also used in determining the chloroplast membrane transport
mechanisms and studying the proteins involved in muscle contraction and signal
transduction. The spectrometer is employed in probing the protein-protein
interactions of the CHIP/Hsp70 protein complex and investigating the
structure/binding of homo/hetero-oligomeric proteins. Finally, the EPR
spectrometer serves as a regional resource for other state institutions and
nearby universities.