* 1725207
* Collaborative Research: What Do Obsidian Pyroclasts Tell Us? Constraints from Textures, Volatiles, and Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2021
* James Watkins, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2021
* USD 261,212.00

Plinian eruptions of silicic magma are among the principal geological hazards
along volcanic arcs. Within the United States, fifty-five volcanoes producing
such type of eruptions are designated as serious threats by the United States
Geological Survey, including eleven rated as very high threats in the Cascades
alone (e.g., Mount St Helens, Crater Lake). A Plinian eruption involves the
explosive ejection of ash, pumice, and gas into the atmosphere, with smaller
amounts of older rock and obsidian pyroclasts. During its ascent to the surface,
magma partially degasses as gas bubbles nucleate, grow, and coalesce to form
permeable pathways allowing gas to escape. The efficiency of this degassing
prior to, and during, the eruption modulates the explosivity of the latter: an
efficient degassing in "open-system" prompts the magmatic foam to collapse and
may lead to an effusive eruption, whereas inefficient degassing in "closed-
system" may cause the magma to fragment and erupt explosively. Obsidian
pyroclasts, the subject of this study, are dense pieces of glassy, partially
degassed magma found in Plinian deposits. Because they are some of the only
samples that preserve the degassing pathway of magma, these clasts play a
central role in models for magma degassing and volcanic eruptions. Yet, their
origin remains uncertain. A long-held tenet is that obsidian pyroclasts are
parcels of bubble-poor melt formed by the collapse of a magmatic foam
("vanguard" magma) prior to the eruption, and then subsequently excavated by the
ascending magma during the explosive eruption. Recent textural and chemical
studies of obsidian pyroclasts at Mono Craters (California) have questioned this
precept and alternatively suggest that obsidian pyroclasts are syn-eruptive and
form by sintering of volcanic ash after magma fragmentation. This study will
therefore test the hypotheses that 1) pyroclastic obsidians do not form by
magmatic foam collapse but are the products of ash sintering in the conduit
after fragmentation, 2) textures and volatile contents can be used to identify
relics of "vanguard" magma excavated by explosive eruptions, and 3) volatile
contents in obsidian pyroclasts reflect the gas composition of the erupting
mixture. Results of this study will allow a full utilization of the unique
records of volatiles of the obsidian pyroclasts to decipher the dynamics of
volcanic eruptions.

To test the different hypotheses, this study will include micro-scale textural
and chemical analyses performed on explosive products of the ~5,500 BCE
Cleetwood eruption of Crater Lake (USA), the 1340 CE North Mono Crater eruption
(USA), and the pre-climactic short explosive eruptions of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991
(Philippines). The first task is to examine the origins of obsidian pyroclasts
for which co-genetic pumice appear to record variable degrees of foam collapse.
If the new model holds, then obsidian pyroclasts will not be part of a continuum
with the densest pumices. The second task is to examine vesicle textures of
dense glassy fragments that formed during hiatuses between eruptions to
establish whether those textures can be used to discriminate "vanguard" magma
emplaced before eruption from obsidian produced during eruption. The final task
is to investigate variations in volatile contents and isotopic compositions of
obsidian pyroclasts to decipher their records of magma volatile budgets and
degassing pathways in ways that go beyond the simple closed- versus open-system
degassing models. Techniques used include Fourier-Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy, micro-Raman spectroscopy, Electron Microprobe, and Secondary Ion
Mass Spectrometry. Detailed measurements of vesicle and crystal size and shape
distributions will be made using a combination of 3D High-resolution X-ray
Computed Tomography and 2D Scanning Electron Microscope images of thin sections.
The analyses of natural samples will be complemented by experiments involving
crystallization, hydration, and ash sintering. These efforts will lead to a
better understanding of the nature and timing of pre- and syn-eruptive processes
undergone by magma on its way to the surface.