* 1725661
* SPX:  Collaborative Research:  Harnessing the Power of High-Bandwidth Memory via Provably Efficient Parallel Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Benjamin Moseley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 03/31/2018
* USD 249,999.00

An important bottleneck for many parallel scientific applications is memory
performance. Recently, vendors have introduced a new memory called high-
bandwidth memory (HBM) as an approach to alleviate this bottleneck. This project
will develop an algorithmic foundation for using HBM. The project has the
potential for a broad economic, technological, and scientific impact, since
industry has an investment in this technology and many of the nation's strategic
codes are being run on HBM-capable machines. The PIs will integrate research
with education at the graduate and undergraduate levels by training PhD, MS, and
honors program BS students in cross-cutting issues encompassing algorithm
design, high-performance software, and processor architecture. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The new approach offered by vendors is to bond memory (HBM) directly
to the processor chip, which allows for more connections, enabling higher
bandwidth. Although the size of the new memory is larger than modern on-chip
caches, physical constraints limit the capacity of the memory to be
significantly smaller than DRAM. HBM does not cleanly fit in the standard memory
hierarchy. This project will develop a foundational understanding of how to
algorithmically design codes for HBM enhanced architectures. Overcoming these
intellectual challenges to achieve multi-core scalability using HBM requires new
algorithms, models, and abstractions, spearheaded by this collaboration between
researchers who study hardware issues, high performance computing challenges,
and theoretical modeling and analysis.