* 1726630
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Training in Chemical Structure-Function Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Bayram Saparov, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 216,979.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program and the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Professor George Richter-Addo from the
University of Oklahoma and colleagues Daniel Glatzhofer, Robert Cichewicz,
Indrajeet Sharma and Bayrammurad Saparov are acquiring a single crystal X-ray
diffractometer. X-ray diffraction is a powerful tool to investigate the atomic
structure of solid materials. It is used to understand how the atoms are
arranged and bonded to each other in a material. The knowledge of the atomic
structures of materials is fundamental to understanding their properties and
developing improvements. The applications of microscopic structural knowledge
ranges from chemistry to biology, materials and medicine, to applications such
as developing better agrochemicals, electronic devices or pharmaceuticals. The
instrument advances the training of students in research and is also employed in
the annual Sooner Upward Bound program each summer that brings in inner-city
(OKC) high school students at high risk for academic failure. This acquisition
also assists research and training at five other partner Oklahoma institutions:
Oklahoma State University, Northeastern State University, Southeastern State
University, University of Science and Arts and Southwestern Oklahoma State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This diffractometer advances research and
education at the University of Oklahoma and surrounding area. It helps in
identifying reactive molecular-level, metallo-intermediates in the global
nitrogen cycle and developing new families of semiconductor materials and
photovoltaics. The instrumentation is also used to characterize intermediates
for organic transformations and applications in asymmetric synthesis.
Researchers are developing semi- and total-synthesis methodologies and
determining the absolute stereochemistry of natural products. This
diffractometer is essential to determine the crystal structures of solid-state
metal oxides/sulfides and organoactinide complexes.