* 1726351
* ADVANCE Partnership: Faculty Intervention Guide and Decision Tool for Improving the Academic Workplace
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Karen Graham, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,752.00

This project addresses the need to efficiently and effectively increase
awareness of bias incidents in the academic work environment while also
enhancing STEM faculty and university leaders' abilities to address bias
incidents in a manner that will result in more positive outcomes for all. The
project will create systemic institutional change by scaling up the levels of
awareness about and interventions used to address implicit bias in scientific
research and learning settings. The University of New Hampshire UNH, working
with three partner institutions, Ohio State University, University of Virginia,
and University of California at Irvine, will use rigorous research methods to
develop and scale up the evidence-based, interactive intervention resources.
Once developed and piloted at these institutions, the bias awareness guide and
intervention tool will be distributed nationally. Information about the
awareness tool and decision guide for addressing bias incidents will also be
distributed broadly via professional associations such as The Association for
Women in Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research methodologies for developing
this bias awareness guide and decision tool include the collection of extensive
information from faculty across the partnering institutions. Thus, the
partnership enables the project leaders to oversample STEM faculty whose
personal backgrounds fit multiple underrepresented categories. In so doing, the
researchers are able to incorporate rank and social identity differences between
persons potentially acting in implicitly biased ways as well as rank and social
identity differences among those on the receiving end of bias incidents. The
project therefore captures intersectionality of faculty whose actions reinforce
or disrupt barriers to equality as well as the intersectionality of those who
must navigate equity barriers. Research conducted at the University of New
Hampshire as part of its ADVANCE IT program confirms that bias incidents in the
academic workplace create a negative climate for STEM women faculty and for
other faculty with minority status in their respective fields. Negative climate,
their research also shows, has a significant negative impact on STEM women
faculty members' job satisfaction and increases their intention to quit. Prior
research also shows that the greater faculty members' beliefs in their
colleagues' propensity to intervene when bias incidents occur, the lower the
impact of bias incidents on workplace climate. Thus, increasing both faculty
members' awareness of bias incidents and individual skills for addressing bias
incidents when they occur helps to maximize positive workplace climate outcomes.
The project's novel contributions also include the use of video vignettes to
accurately contextualize intersectional faculty experiences, which will in turn
enable the multiple institutions who adopt the bias awareness and intervention
tools to raise awareness about and propensity for intervening in bias incidents
of multiple kinds and in multiple contexts across their institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of women faculty in
academic institutions.Â  Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in
policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.