* 1726895
* Workshop:  Disrupting Illicit Supply Networks: New Applications of Operations Research and Data Analytics to End Modern Slavery; Austin, Texas, and Washington, DC
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Noel Busch-Armendariz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2018
* USD 99,829.00

This award provides support for a workshop to convene an interdisciplinary team
of scholars to identify promising research directions for applications of
operations research (OR) and data analytics aimed at the disruption of illicit
supply networks such as human trafficking. The United States Department of State
considers human trafficking a form of modern-day slavery and broadly defines it
to be when a person is deceived or coerced in situations of prostitution, forced
labor, or domestic servitude. Human trafficking is a key example of illicit
networks that operate in and to the detriment of society. Other examples include
arms trafficking, drug trafficking, animal trafficking, and human smuggling. By
bringing together scholars from disparate disciplines, the goal of the workshop
is to identify new research approaches and breakthrough strategies for
disrupting the illicit networks commonly found in human
trafficking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop, which will consist of two
meetings, the first to be held at The University of Texas at Austin and the
second to be held in Washington, DC, will enable scholars from operations
research, management science, analytics, machine learning, and data science to
exchange ideas and outline a potential research agenda for the development of
disruptive interventions against illicit networks. The agenda developed at this
workshop will help move understanding of such illicit systems from descriptive
characterization and predictive estimation toward improved dynamic operational
control. OR and data analytics are fields ideally suited to bring this
perspective to the study of illicit networks. Few studies have approached this
problem from a dynamic systems theoretical perspective that allows the social
justice challenge to be represented as a mathematical system that can be
analyzed in terms of decision variables to help guide, control, and constrain
behavioral dynamics toward desired goals. Solutions to remediate the effect of
illicit networks are inherently interdisciplinary, typically involving the
fields of criminal justice, social work, social science, economics, healthcare,
and law. Such systems are dynamic and exploit and victimize members of the
community. What is more, they involve both legal and illicit activities at the
same time, which often obscures criminal activity from law enforcement. These
systems can be hierarchical, nonstationary networks of interconnected activities
and participants that involve intersectional decision making by perpetrators,
victims, and/or bystanders. Highly common among such systems is a paucity of
data due in large part to the hidden aspects of the crime and the partial
observability of the population of interest. The workshop aims include examining
the structure and nature of illicit networks within an analytic and modeling
framework; exploring the form and complexity of viable, real-world solutions
using OR methodologies; assessing the characteristics and amount of data needed
to model and analyze the problem; proposing a research agenda to guide the
efforts of interdisciplinary teams of scholars to develop methods and solutions;
and initiating and facilitating ongoing interactions among workshop attendees
and their research collaborators, including junior investigators and graduate
students.