* 1726808
* The STEM Ambassadors Program: Building An Inclusive Community of Scholars through Mentoring and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Margaret Riley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2021
* USD 956,654.00

To maintain global competitiveness and a high standard of living for its
citizens, the nation requires a strong scientific and technical workforce.
Evidence is mounting on the importance of student participation in a ecosystem
of activities designed to support success in academic programs in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). An important element is
participation in authentic undergraduate research experiences, that in its
traditional form is a resource-intensive activity. The STEM Ambassadors Program
at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst and its partner institutions
(Holyoke Community College and University of Massachusetts, Boston) will develop
and test a scalable low-cost model for offering authentic research experiences
to STEM students using Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs)
as a component of a network of activities for student success. The research team
will investigate academic success using a Social Cognitive Career Theory
framework to identify and examine cognitive, contextual, and cultural variables
that impact student trajectories in their academic programs. The multi-site
longitudinal mixed methods comparative study tests the hypothesis that student
success, retention, and graduation in STEM are affected by institutional
context, student formal course load, engagement in research, participation in a
network of formal and informal mentors and advisors, volunteering in a variety
of STEM outreach activities, and participation in a rich offering of STEM-
related social events.

With regards to intellectual merit, The Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT)
framework suggests that career interests are shaped by socio-cognitive and
behavioral inputs over time and are influenced by environmental supports and
barriers. The multi-site sequential-explanatory study will utilize a qualitative
wave of data collection to explain and inform the Hierarchical Linear Modeling
of individual growth over time. Quantitative data include repeated measures of
key SCCT constructs, such as STEM self-efficacy STEM outcome expectations, and
STEM interest and goals. Control groups are sampled from the population of
students that were eligible and invited to STEM AP, but did not join. Regarding
broader impacts, findings from the research will contribute to a growing body of
literature on increasing student success for a diverse population of students
pursuing degrees in STEM.