* 1726213
* Beyond DFT: Accurate Simulations of Low Dimensional Materials For Energy and Device Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Brenda Rubenstein, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2022
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research focused on advancing understanding of two-dimensional materials. Two-
dimensional (2D) materials possess extraordinary properties. They are among the
strongest materials ever discovered and can change from metals to semiconductors
and vice-versa just by stacking them in layers, stretching, or doping them. This
points to the potential applications of 2D materials in energy storage,
batteries, and semiconductor devices. The research team will use highly accurate
simulation techniques, called quantum Monte Carlo methods, to illuminate the
properties of interesting inorganic 2D materials, the transition metal
dichalcogenides and the post-transition metal chalcogenides. Based upon the
material properties uncovered, the team aims to "engineer" and model new
2D-materials suitable for electronic devices capable of outperforming
traditional devices and using light to split the water molecule to harvest
hydrogen for energy. This award also supports the team's efforts to mentor
underserved area students through the college applications and annual science
fair processes, and to educate a diverse body of younger scientists about the
physical sciences as part of local outreach efforts to underserved populations,
including local high school Girls Who Code Clubs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research focused on advancing understanding of
two-dimensional materials. Two-dimensional (2D) inorganic materials within the
quantum confinement limit are emerging as an important class of nanomaterials
for novel applications in information technology, optoelectronics, spintronics,
and energy storage and conversion technologies. Because of the effects of
enhanced quantum confinement and high surface-to-volume ratios, low dimensional
materials possess extraordinary chemical and physical properties, including band
gaps and metal-semiconductor transitions whose properties can be tuned by
altering their doping and layering. As a result, they can range from insulators
to topological insulators to semiconductors, and even, superconductors.
Understanding the properties of these materials thus presents a materials
research opportunity that could have immediate importance to the future design
of semiconductor devices. The team aims to develop high accuracy methods to
overcome limitations of first principles density-functional-based approaches,
particularly in their application to 2D materials, to enable better
understanding of experiments. The method development involves combining Quantum
Monte Carlo with cluster expansion methods that are commonly used to model
alloys. The team will use these methods to study mono/few layer structures of
post-transition metal chalcogenides spanning from metals to gap semiconductors.
Direct gap compounds for photovoltaics and photoelectrochemical water splitting
applications will be designed using alloying as a means to tune phase stability,
and electronic and optical properties. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use
this research to educate a diverse body of younger scientists about the physical
sciences as part of local outreach efforts to underserved populations, including
local high school Girls Who Code Clubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.