* 1726332
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU-Enabled Computer Cluster for Molecular Modeling Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Paul Smith, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation, and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs. Professor Christine Aikens from Kansas
State University and colleagues Paul Smith, Daniel Andresen, Bin Liu, and
Jeffrey Comer are acquiring a graphic processing unit (GPU) computer cluster. In
general, computer clusters are constructed with central processing units (CPU)
as the core computational hardware. GPUs were subsequently developed as
processing units and used to accelerate the video display on computer monitors.
Computational scientists have found a combination of CPU/GPU systems are
especially fast for certain computations, especially simulations. Software
developed for computational simulations have reached the stage at which they can
provide quantitative or semi-quantitative accuracy for a variety of molecular,
biomolecular, nanoparticle, and materials modeling applications. These
simulations provide needed atomic-level insight into chemical mechanisms and
biological interactions that are difficult to study experimentally. This system
provides for the computational needs of molecular modeling applications across
chemistry, physics, engineering and biology. This system is used for research
and training at Kansas State University. Researchers from across the state
including those at community colleges, non-Ph.D. granting institutions, and
minority-serving institutions also have access to this system and receive
significant computing time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This computer cluster enhances
research and education. It aids the modeling nanomaterials; understanding the
fundamentals of electron-electron and electron-nuclear interactions. This
cluster is also used in elucidating the factors involved in determining the
selectivities of alcohol dehydration products on zeolite catalysts and carrying
out protein-nanoparticle modeling to understand protein conformational
transitions that sample relevant protein-surface configurations. The computer
cluster is used in understanding denatured state ensembles in protein folding
and understanding the role of protein aggregation which may be relevant to
Alzheimer's disease.