* 1726946
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Cluster to Enable Advanced Bioscience and Engineering Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Adam Hoppe, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/2018
* USD 796,359.00

This project, acquiring a High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster and an
ancillary Parallel File System, aims to be able to fulfill the demand for
computationally intensive data analysis and simulation resulting from the
increased scale and complexity of biological and biotechnical data. The
underlying work addresses the challenge created when analyzing, managing, and
relating this type of information generated by the interdisciplinary distributed
center in the state (BioSNTR: Biochemical Spatio-Temporal Network Resource). The
HPC cluster supports the BioSNTR's data analysis research activities, which
spans the disciplines of genomics, optical microscopy, satellite imaging,
computational chemistry, and electrical, and mechanical engineering; in fact, it
will be a hub for BioSNTR, a distributed research center across the state
created by another NSF-funded project that has resulted in 10 new tenure-track
hires across SD. This center has acquired new optical microscopes that can
produce massive amounts of data, requiring intensive computational
reconstruction methods driving pressing need for local HPC resources. A previous
MRI enabled the creation of a next generation gene sequencing facility that,
coupled with BioSNTR hires in bioinformatics, drives the need for expanded HPC
capabilities for a range of genomics applications. BioSNTR aims to link advanced
imaging with next generation sequencing to connect the system-level genotype to
phenotype. The HPC platform is essential for realizing the integration of large
data sets. Additionally, the South Dakota Image Processing Laboratory (IPLab)
would benefit from this equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering
applications include satellite and fluid dynamic computation. IPLab develops
novel techniques to account for atmospheric anomalies that adversely impact
spectral reflectance signatures measured from land features. Future work
includes extensive computational processing of Landsat scenes for climatological
analysis (3 to 4 million data sets). Estimates indicates that this work will
consume all the processing power within the current cluster for an entire year.
Simulating efficiencies in energy power systems relies heavily on high parallel
processing. Bioscience and biotechnology have entered a new era in which the new
instrumentation transforms the scale of complexity of biological data. These
instruments produce expansive information about organismal phenotype/function
and genotype, thereby creating a computational challenge in analyzing, managing,
and relating this information. Beyond the more traditional disciplines, the
instrumentation will facilitate research in emerging areas. Examples include
data intensive research methods to analyze high frequency financial transactions
within economics, and journalism research using data mining techniques to study
the characteristics of social factors that contribute to collaborative
conversational tendencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation allows inclusion of parallel computer processing into the
graduate courses within the biological, chemical, and statistical science and
enhances the development of curriculum within the Computer Science program. The
new cluster leverages a recently-funded REU site focused on early undergraduate
students from tribal and community colleges. The investigators are able to
coordinate yearly training workshops in transcriptomics and image analysis in
collaboration with BioSNTR. These will be open to students, researchers, and
faculty throughout the state.