* 1726716
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Photon Emission/Electro-Optical Microscope for Non-invasive Evaluation of Electronic Devices and Systems Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Swarup Bhunia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 999,804.00

This project, acquiring a new high resolution microscope, aims to allow users to
analyze the performance of electronic devices and systems. With a user friendly
interface and the use of intuition, the instrument is expected to maximize its
accessibility for on-site use and for off campus users. The platform will be
used for teaching, education, and outreach. This effort is shared by six
universities in Florida. The effort enables:&lt;br/&gt;- Remote access
capability to reach over 500 students every year both on and off campus;
&lt;br/&gt;- Material and expertise on hardware security related topics for
educators to incorporate in their classroom curricula;&lt;br/&gt;- Help to bring
experts into their classrooms to discuss real-world applications; and
&lt;br/&gt;- Exposure of undergraduates to advanced microscopy techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;This new high resolution photon emission and electro-optical
microscope enables the analysis by visualizing the transistor functionality non-
destructively. When analyzing performance in this fashion, maximum impact is
gained from multiple features such as: &lt;br/&gt;- New high sensitive detectors
that enable high resolution; &lt;br/&gt;- Laser scanning configuration that
enable static and dynamic failure analysis; &lt;br/&gt;- Static laser scanning
stimulation that contribute to identify the source of shorts and resistive
defects; and &lt;br/&gt;- Electro-optical probing and frequency mapping that
enable rapid identification of regions of interest. &lt;br/&gt;The unique
capabilities of the instrument constitute a critical enabling parameter for
research in hardware and system security areas. These include:&lt;br/&gt;-
Counterfeit detection by providing more detailed data than general electrical
tests in less expensive and non-destructive manner; &lt;br/&gt;- Semi-invasive
physical attacks by enabling advanced contactless probing techniques and laser
injection to measure circuit activity; &lt;br/&gt;- Trojan detection by
performing trust analysis of fabricated integrated circuits for validation of
security and trust; and&lt;br/&gt;- Reverse and anti-reverse engineering by
complementing conventional reverse engineering and extracting the intellectual
property blocks critic information.