* 1726964
* MRI: Acquisition of a Microgrid Cyber-Physical Testbed for Advanced Energy Management Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Reinaldo Tonkoski, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 08/31/2020
* USD 277,335.00

This Major Research Instrumentation project will acquire a microgrid cyber-
physical testbed to enable the simulation, emulation, and testing of novel
technologies being developed by South Dakota State University (SDSU) and its
collaborators to enable microgrid development and deployment. The proposed
microgrid cyber-physical testbed will be a resource available to all SDSU
faculty, staff, postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate students,
as well as other researchers across South Dakota and North Dakota. This cyber-
physical testbed will enable the interdisciplinary development and collaboration
among researchers in power electronics, power systems, controls, and energy
markets, and laying the groundwork for collaborative research with industry as
well as national and international partners. This project will not only advance
energy sustainability, but also promote economic development and employment
opportunities. Through the training of professionals in the use of this new
system, this project will contribute to building a skilled workforce. The
investigators will add new materials and lab curricula to current courses, and
provide research and educational experiences to both graduate and undergraduate
students. A workshop will be organized to train other students, faculty, and
power professionals in the region, and help recruit underrepresented students to
STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this equipment will enhance
the research infrastructure of SDSU Microgrid Laboratory in three research
areas: a) energy management and integration of renewable energy sources, b)
cyber-physical system security, and c) energy resource design, simulation
modeling, and power management. The research capacity will be further enhanced
through collaborations with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) by
remotely connecting their Power-Hardware-In-The- Loop (PHIL) capabilities with
the proposed cyber-physical testbed. This interconnection will leverage the SDSU
Microgrid Laboratory's research capabilities and the extensive grid testing and
high performance computing capabilities at NREL Energy Systems Integration
Facility. The data collected during testing will provide new evidence of the
interaction of new control architectures with the grid that includes different
distributed energy resources. The installation of this unique equipment in the
Dakotas will enable the design and testing of novel advanced energy management
systems by analyzing the impact of integrating different energy resources in
microgrids. The results are expected to advance energy infrastructure in remote
areas, urban areas, and large buildings, with a focus on data centers.
Furthermore, this equipment will enable real-time analysis on the impact of
power management systems in storage device dynamics and lifetime, and enable the
design of novel algorithms to dispatch batteries and ultra-capacitors, extending
their lifetime and ensuring economical operation.