* 1726177
* MRI: Acquisition of a total organic carbon analyzer for undergraduate training and research quantifying how climate-glacier interactions impact land-to-ocean fluxes of carbon
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Allison Bidlack, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,277.00

EAR-1726177&lt;br/&gt;Fellman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
acquisition of a dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and total dissolved nitrogen
(TDN) analyzer that will be located in a lab shared by the USFS Pacific
Northwest Research Station and the University of Alaska Southeast. Acquisition
of this instrument will provide the infrastructure necessary to quantify DOC
fluxes from watersheds of varying glacial coverage, thus creating a space-for-
time substitution to determine how climate-glacier interactions are driving
ecological change in the region. The DOC/TDN analyzer will replace an aging,
non-functional instrument that is located off campus and is owned by the USFS.
Acquisition of this instrument will allow the investigators to reinvigorate
stream biogeochemistry research efforts aimed at understanding the biophysical
impacts of glacial change on coastal watersheds in southeast Alaska, facilitate
access to the instrument by outside users, and enhance undergraduate training.
In particular, the instrument will strengthen the research training
opportunities for undergraduates in Environmental Science as well as provide the
opportunity to recruit and train members of two groups (rural and Alaska Native
students) that are traditionally highly under-represented in the Environmental
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DOC/TDN analyzer allows for rapid and precise
measurement of concentrations of DOC and TDN. Research applications include: 1)
determining how climatically-driven changes in snow/rainfall regimes that
influence the timing and magnitude of glacial runoff are driving stream water
DOC and nutrient fluxes in the region, 2) quantifying the relationship between
disinfection byproduct formation, DOC concentrations and precipitation event
size in watersheds that currently or may provide drinking water in rural
watersheds, 3) testing the use of DOC as a proxy for methylmercury
concentrations in forested and wetland-dominated watersheds, and 4) determining
how seasonal changes in the movement of water from soils to streams controls the
production, speciation and timing of lateral carbon export from forested
ecosystems.