* 1726095
* MRI: Acquisition of a CytoViva system for highly interdisciplinary research and education in nanoscience and nanotechnology
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jaime Ramirez-Vick, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2021
* USD 289,328.00

This project involves acquisition of a CytoViva optical microscope instrument
that will benefit over 10 faculty and 100 undergraduate and graduate students
(including underrepresented groups) at three Midwestern institutions of higher
education, namely Wright State University (WSU), Otterbein University, Ohio, and
Ball State University (BSU), Indiana. The cutting-edge equipment will facilitate
the optical imaging and spectral confirmation of a wide range of nanomaterials
in live biological systems or composite materials. Thereby, its acquisition will
strengthen the research of these scientists and will lead to new
interdisciplinary collaborations that will offer fundamental insight into
critical nano-biomedical and environmental problems. The exploitation of the
CytoViva system as a teaching tool will contribute to the development of modern
academic curricula and the next generation of instrumentalists. Furthermore,
over 100 high school students will be annually engaged in hands-on nano-related
activities (Exploring STEMM Program at WSU). The scientific results and
pedagogic materials will be shared with the scientific community at large and
general public through various venues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
CytoViva system will consist of a high signal-to-noise-enhanced dark-field
optical microscope and an integrated hyperspectral imaging system. It will be
equipped with a proprietary Dual Fluorescence Module, which will facilitate the
real time, simultaneous imaging of both fluorescently-labeled and non-labeled
nanomaterials with high spectral. The CytoViva technique has the following
unique capabilities: a) no sample preparation and no alteration in the targeted
environment, b) improved time- and cost-efficiency, c) pixel-specific spectral
data, and d) the capability of differentiating between similar nanostructures
based on finite differences in their aggregation state, orientation, and
functionalization. The breadth of interdisciplinary research projects impacted
by the CytoViva system will include a) identifying the broad-spectrum antiviral
mechanism of silver nanoparticles against deadly viruses, b) developing
methodologies for studying the cellular trafficking and transformations of noble
metal nanomaterials for biomedical applications, c) understanding the molecular
basis of gene expression regulation involved in the antibiotic resistance of
pathogenic bacteria using gold nanoparticles functionalized with aptamers, d)
treating and detecting docetaxel resistant prostate cancer by targeted
nanomedical formulation, and e) cytosolic mapping of digitalis Na/K-ATPase
complex internalization as a potentially new cellular signaling mechanism.