* 1726573
* MRI: Development of a Scanning-Probe-Assisted Confocal Microscope for Investigating Optical and Magnetic Properties and Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2021
* USD 572,121.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This instrument project is on development
of a scanning-probe-assisted fluorescence microscope for simultaneous thermal,
mechanical, magnetic resonance, and optical measurements of materials at
variable temperatures and over micrometer and nanometer length scales. The
complementary imaging techniques, integrated into a single platform with long-
time, stable temperature control, enable nanoscale research that explores new
materials and devices of emerging scientific and technological importance such
as nanoscale sensing and information processing. As a whole, this project brings
together a team of researchers with complementary expertise in sold-state
physics, optics, and nano-engineering. Further, it offers students and
postdoctoral researchers interdisciplinary education and the ability to interact
with a wide network of collaborating research groups. These partnerships not
only provide a broad dissemination platform but also allow the principal
investigators to advance ongoing efforts to recruit and train students from
communities under-represented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of this instrument is a closed-cycle cryo-
workstation for variable temperature operation (4 K to 350 K) via contact to a
thermal plate designed to minimize vibrations from a cryo-pump. A set of
precision stages allows users to control the relative positions of the
excitation laser beam, the scanning probe, and the sample. A miniature
electromagnet is used to create a magnetic field of variable amplitude and
direction, whereas a flat, glass-imprinted wave-guide serves as the source of
resonant microwave and/or radio-frequency. The areas of research benefiting from
this instrument include (i) the investigation of single photon emitters using
two-dimensional semiconductors, (ii) the study of carrier spin dynamics in
diamond, (iii) the development of new protocols for magnetic resonance imaging
and spectroscopy at the nanoscale, (iv) the characterization and control of
phase-change materials, (v) the investigation of magneto-plasmonic and spin-wave
effects in magnetic nanostructures, and (vi) the understanding of single-photon
dynamics in topological photonic metamaterials.