* 1726345
* MRI: Acquisition of a Versatile Pump-Probe Transient Absorption and Fluorescence Upconversion System
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jenny Lockard, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 314,573.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Piotr Piotrowiak from
Rutgers University Newark and colleagues Edward Castner, Elena Galoppini, Jenny
Lockhard and Kevin Belfield (New Jersey Institute of Technology) are acquiring a
pump-probe transient absorption and fluorescence upconversion spectrometer
system. This is a laser based system which enables the study of a wide range of
laser phenomena that address significant challenges of social, environmental and
economic importance. Research topics focus on solar energy research, renewable
energy and green chemistry, photovoltaic materials, and biomarkers linked to
human health. The instrumentation strengthens research and training at three
institutions: Rutgers-Newark, Rutgers-New Brunswick and the New Jersey Institute
of Technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This pump-probe transient absorption and
fluorescence upconversion spectrometer system enhances research and education at
all levels. It serves researcher who are testing the interplay between electron
transfer and vibrational cooling in extended donor-acceptor arrays as well as
those seeking understanding of ionic liquids. Research probing the fundamental
relationship between molecular structure and nonlinear optical properties of
chromophores also utilize this instrument. The spectrometer system is used to
look for surface modification strategies and synthetic tools to understand
interfacial charge separation and electron transfer dynamics. Researchers carry
out mechanistic studies on photocatalytic properties of hybrid materials to
unify nanoscience, coordination chemistry and catalysis. The spectrometer is
important in seeking to unravel terrestrial surface photogeochemistry in the
Archaen period.