* 1726395
* MRI: Development of a High Pressure Spatial CVD for Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Volkmar Dierolf, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 523,999.00

This award from the Division of Materials Research and the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports the development of a new reactor for enabling
the synthesis of new materials for technologies in solid state lighting, power
electronic systems, and laser technologies. This equipment will be used to grow
new materials under extreme conditions such as high pressure, new elements
integration, and integration of highly dissimilar materials. One PhD student and
a postdoctoral fellow will contribute to designing, building, and optimizing the
reactor and its relevant processes for producing these new materials of
unconventional III-nitride semiconductors and oxynitride materials. Such new
materials will have impacts on developing device technologies with applications
in energy efficiency and renewable energy, smart vehicle and power delivery
systems, optical communications, and internet-of-things. This new reactor design
will also be scalable for future technology transfer, if proven successful. The
project will support the training of next generation of instrument
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Division of
Materials Research and the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
development of a novel chemical vapor phase (CVD) reactor for enabling the
exploration of high indium content III-nitride alloys and oxynitrides, which
require high pressures (&lt; 100 atm) to prevent decomposition of the nitride,
and their device applications. Two key elements, spatial separation of source
material/ precursors and high reactor pressures, will be combined in a novel
high pressure spatial CVD (HPS-CVD). A (&lt; 2 inch diameter) wafer is
continuously rotated through multiple different source chambers leading to
mixing of the desired precursors in the user controlled boundary layer thickness
(&lt; 1 mm) preventing pre-reactions and reducing diffusion distances. Such a
reactor currently does not exist and its development will enable progress in
(epitaxial) growth of hard to synthesize functional materials due to
decomposition limitations ultimately enabling novel device designs and exploring
new science. The equipment being developed will integrate well with the existing
eco­ systems based on a closed-loop and integrated approach for addressing basic
science and applied material research needs in the III-nitride semiconductors
beyond conventional material systems and oxynitrides. Specifically, the
materials enabled by this equipment include: high indium content
AlInN/AlInGaN/BInGaN-based heterostructores and growth, dilute-anion impurity
III-Nitride alloys and heterostructures, rare-earth doped III-nitride alloys,
along with functional oxynitrides. The concept of HPS-CVD can be expanded beyond
III-Nitride and oxynitride materials, and it is expected this concept will be
extended for material integration in the future.