* 1726447
* MRI: Acquisition of a HPC System: Computing for Sustainability
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Hridesh Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2019
* USD 678,214.00

This project, acquiring a new high performance computing (HPC) platform, aims to
accelerate knowledge discovery, to provide external visibility, and to help
problems of national need and societal benefit while supporting research from
approximately 30 investigators from 20 departments in 6 colleges. The work
builds on the expertise of scientists and the institutional focus on simulation-
and data-driven science to create computing infrastructure that enables advances
in the following four areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Sustainable Energy: The new
HPC cluster enables high throughput analysis and helps identify future
technologies (such as wind, solar, and bioenergy) while serving as the key
platform for computational materials research in catalysis, batteries, 2D
materials and organic electronics for virtual exploration design and control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Digital Agriculture: The institution emphasizes
microbial organisms for bio-renewable production, plant science research
emphasizing biotechnology of important cereal crops (e.g., maize, barley, and
soybeans) genomic advances, phenotypic prediction, precision agriculture,
climate sciences, and sustainability of farming practices. Thus the research
efforts span microbial, plant, and animal species, all of which are becoming
more and more data driven.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Sustainable Healthcare: The
HPC platform supports (with data-driven approaches for translational health)
basic applications to health care in nanoparticle synthesis and targeted drug
delivery mechanisms, identification of biomarkers for Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's diseases, and modeling of multi-phase flow physics for sustainable
pharmaceutical applications. The institution's biomedical program spans
veterinary medicine, sciences, human sciences, and engineering
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- HPC Research and Training: The infrastructure
enables continuation of training activities to prepare a globally-engaged HPC-
aware workforce. Hardware, software, and training methods are under development
to design robust, comprehensive, open, science-driven, user-friendly
cyberinfrastructure consisting of standardized and curated datasets of interest
with processing capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses three main classes of broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;- Availability of computational algorithms to the broader
research community as open-source codes, enables broad impact (national and
societal) on sustainability efforts in energy, food, healthcare, and
infrastructure design;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Enhancing and enabling new
collaborative efforts by enriching the current research infrastructure that
incorporates HPC into advanced course to train undergraduates and graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in computational modeling and algorithm
development; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Availability of time to primarily
undergraduate institutions coupled with active recruitment plans to attract
women, underrepresented minorities, and first generation students to the
institution. &lt;br/&gt;These goals will be achieved in conjunction with two NSF
awards: RED RIDE and S_STEM ECSEL.