* 1726457
* MRI:  Development of Multi-mode Integral Field Units for Magellan (IFU-M)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Crane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 727,676.00

One of the main ways that astronomers study the universe is by splitting the
telescope light from celestial sources into its component colors. This
technique, known as spectroscopy, can often reveal the underlying processes that
govern stars, galaxies and the like. A traditional astronomical spectrograph
obtains color information at the expense of imaging. However, a modern Integral
Field Unit (IFU) spectrograph is able to do both. An IFU obtains an image and a
spectrum at each pixel of the image of an astronomical source. The resulting
data cube can be studied to determine the spatial distribution of light across a
single extended object, or it can be used to study multiple stars or galaxies at
once. This project will support the development of an IFU system for the
Magellan/Clay telescope at the Las Campanas Observatory. When completed, this
instrument will enable a wide range of investigations into topics from the
formation of young stars to the dynamics of gas outflows in distant galaxies. In
addition to providing a new tool for research, this project will also serve as
an essential training opportunity for students and early career scientists. Live
feeds from the telescope will be used in conjunction with undergraduate classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the previous MRI award, 0923160
(PI: Mateo), which funded the development of the Michigan/Magellan Fiber System
(M2FS) spectrograph. The M2FS system actually consists of two high-performance
optical spectrographs that deliver resolution, R, in the range 1000 to 40,000
over a wavelength range 370-950 nm. Since commissioning in 2013, M2FS has been
used to support over 30 distinct science projects proposed by 18 different
investigators. This project will develop multi-mode Integral Field Units for
Magellan (IFU-M), to be used in conjunction with M2FS. One key design innovation
that enables this instrument is the use of fiber gangs, which handle O(10)
optical fibers at once for faster fabrication and assembly. Fabrication and
assembly will take place at the PI?s lab at the University of Michigan; the
completed instrument will be deployed at the Nasmyth focus of the Magellan/Clay
telescope at Las Campanas Observatory, where it will undergo commissioning and
use as a facility instrument.