* 1726069
* MRI: Acquisition of Adaptive Cluster for Performance and Forensics Analysis of Distributed Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 147,100.00

This project, acquiring a computational cluster, aims to provide opportunities
for research in machine-learning, algorithm development, and protection of
information in multiple environments. The capacity to evaluate and analyze
performance and residue data generation in data mining, machine learning
computations, should allow better control and less risk of breaches in
cybersecurity. The availability of these enhancements would also permit use of
these systems for applied, interdisciplinary research using large-scale data and
cross-correlation analyses for predictive modeling. The investigators measure
performance systematically to support forensic analysis of data residues, in
order to detect possible security risks in the use of such platforms. The
procurement of the instrumentation yields a significant expansion in data
mining, security, and forensics research. Core research foci in cyber security,
digital forensics, and data mining research enables a work plan based on defined
problems in distributed computing environments related to performance,
algorithms, and data security. The gained instrument and expertise provide the
institution with the ability to support national level customers such as U.S.
Army Aviation &amp; Missile Research, Development and Engineering Center,
National Institute of Health (NIH), and other government agencies that depend on
effective and secure distributed learning to analyze and process sensitive data.
A key issue with solving both the forensics challenges and the performance
analysis is having access to an instrument such that investigators
can&lt;br/&gt;-Tune, adjust, and redeploy environments, &lt;br/&gt;-Take nodes
offline to be examined forensically, &lt;br/&gt;-Ensure a consistent baseline
exists against which other environments are compared, and &lt;br/&gt;-Run
meaningful experiments within their discipline while enabling the collection of
valuable performance and forensics data (permitting non-data mining and
utilizing digital forensics).&lt;br/&gt;The proposed adaptive cluster instrument
enables these four goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
computational research capabilities provide essential resources for
undergraduate and graduate students' research as well as for training and
exposure activities involving K-12. Students will be afforded hands-on
opportunities in research and classroom activities directly utilizing the
cluster. The skills gained should lead directly to internships and permanent
employment opportunities for doctoral students in the six colleges and/or
institutes. The university services a high percentage of rural and financially
depressed areas; has a 34% enrollment of non-white students, with 60% female
enrollment. The instrumentation offers exposure opportunities for cohort
activities to Scholarships for Service Program.