* 1726824
* MRI: SusChEM: Acquisition of a hybrid distributed computer system to enhance integration of chemical theory, computation, and experimental research at Duquesne University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Seybert, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 265,060.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Jeffrey Evanseck from
Duquesne University and colleagues Jeffry Madura, Ellen Gawalt, Mihaela-Rita
Mihailescu, and Tomislav Pintauer are acquiring a hybrid computer cluster having
central processing units (CPUs) and graphics processing units (GPUs). The
cluster is used in computational chemistry research projects. These projects
employ theoretical chemistry programs and algorithms or processes using
principles from quantum mechanics or molecular mechanics (often called molecular
dynamics simulations). The acquisition enables graduate and undergraduate
students to undertake computational research projects. Using theoretical methods
coded into computer programs, they provide insight on projects involving the
development of novel materials for energy conversion, gas storage, sensors and
catalysis, and the development of new biomaterials with superior properties. The
computer cluster is a resource for students and researchers at other
institutions such as Lincoln, Chatham, Slippery Rock, Washington and Jefferson,
and Franciscan Universities as well as the University of Texas Rio Grande
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computer cluster enhances research and
education at all levels. It enables investigations of the intrinsic structure
and reactivity of actinide ions, diamond-like semiconductors, and catalyst
regeneration in transition metal mediated atom addition and cyclation reactions.
The instrumentation is also used for studies of dopamine and serotonin
transporters and of thermodynamics of chlatrate hydrates. The cluster benefits
the study of formyl and alpha-hydrogen bonds and the investigation of friction
and wear in organic films.