* 1726642
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoimprint Lithography Instrument for Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Lane Baker, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 458,600.00

This award will be used to obtain a nanoimprint lithography (NIL) instrument for
advanced fabrication of materials and devices. This instrument will provide
state-of-the-art fabrication abilities that can be used for both fundamental and
applied research. A unique aspect of this instrument is the possibility to span
multiple length scales, from millimeters to nanometers and retain alignment for
large (millimeter or micro scale) and small (nanoscale) features. This
instrument also allows fabrication of multiple devices at one time, which will
increase speed, efficiency and overall throughput. The instrument will be used
to fabricate structures for original research projects that include construction
of chemical and biochemical sensors, design of nanoscale materials fabrication,
and investigations of virology and cell biology. Students trained with the
instrument will develop skills applicable to frontier fabrication techniques.
The instrument will be used in interdisciplinary studies in chemistry,
biotechnology, physics and materials science which will lead to diverse training
opportunities for postdoctoral associates, and undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system fills a critical gap in fabrication
abilities at Indiana University. This instrument will provide a route to key
components and devices in specific research activities in the following areas:
(1) Multichannel mobile nano- and microscale fluidic probes; (2) Nanoimprinted
nanofluidic devices for studying virus assembly; (3) Nanopatterned microchannels
for investigations of bacterial motility; (4) Fibers for passive
thermoregulation; (5) Nanostructured surfaces for templated assembly of 2D and
3D materials; (6) Zero-mode optical waveguide approach to in singulo real-time
virus assembly; (7) Nanoimprinted wells for template-assisted assembly of metal
nanocrystals; (8) Fabrication of topological oxide nanowires; (9) Hyperspectral
and polarimetric sensing; (10) Nanoimprinted non-centrosymmetric metal
nanoparticle building blocks for plasmonics; (11) Nanopatterned surfaces for
template-assisted assembly of virus-like particles; and (12) Nanoimprinted
pillar arrays for force measurement of bacterial Tad pili. Understanding the
structure and formation of molecular and self-assembled materials is critical to
student education and training in interdisciplinary fields. Faculty involved in
this proposal participate in the summer NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates. This combination of interdisciplinary research, state-of-the-art
instrumentation, nanoscience seminars, and an active recruiting program lays a
solid foundation to attract and retain outstanding students, postdoctoral
fellows, and faculty members.