* 1726326
* Vertical Evacuation Structures Subjected to Sequential Earthquake and Tsunami Loadings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Charles Roeder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,144,872.00

In extreme events, such as major earthquakes or tsunamis, public safety is a
primary concern. A major subduction zone earthquake could cause a large tsunami,
which could render constructed infrastructure near the coastline, traditionally
designed for only seismic loads, to be severely damaged and result in loss of
life. In coastal regions at low elevations, it may be difficult to quickly move
to higher ground in the short time between the initial ground shaking and the
arrival of a tsunami from a subduction earthquake. However, a vertical
evacuation structure (VES) could provide refuge, with the most promising VES for
large coastal populations being buildings with lower stories capable of
resisting the sequential earthquake demands and tsunami loads. This research
will investigate a new structural system for a building to serve as a VES, where
the structural elements are continuous from the end of the pile to the top of
the structure. This new system will use the above-wave-height stories for
evacuation; the lower (below wave) stories will use connections that allow walls
and slabs of the lower, non-evacuation floors to "breakaway" at the highest
water level. Although counterintuitive, this breakaway system will reduce the
tsunami load demands on the structure, further protecting the building and its
occupants. This research will investigate the interactions of the structure,
soil, and tsunami waves for both traditional systems designed only for seismic
loads and the new breakaway structural system. The results of this research will
provide first-of-its kind data for this new type of VES, which can improve life
safety in tsunami-prone regions and provide course-ready material for graduate-
level classes and seminars for researchers and practitioners. Data from the
project will be archived and made publicly available in the NSF-supported
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(http://www.designsafe-ci.org). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although evacuation
structures have been built in tsunami-prone regions in Japan and the United
States, they are typically low-rise structures with limited shelter capacity. In
contrast, taller structures could serve dual purposes, such as a hotel with
lower stories housing retail or conference rooms, with upper levels designed for
evacuation. Under earthquake loading, buildings are expected sustain damage in
the maximum credible event and, unless specific to the site, soil-structure
interaction is neglected. This design philosophy would not serve for a VES,
which must be designed to: (1) remain damage-free during the maximum credible
earthquake, (2) sustain the maximum considered tsunami at the lower floors,
including horizontal and vertical forces, where initial research shows that
these tsunami force demands can be two to five times the design earthquake
forces, and (3) account for changes in the stiffness and strength of the soil
due to liquefaction and scour. This research will address the fundamentals of
sequential earthquake and tsunami hazard building performance to serve as a VES,
accounting for full nonlinear soil-structure-wave interaction. Two structural
systems will be studied: exterior concrete walls, which are a traditional
structural solution for seismic loads, and a new structural system utilizing
continuous concrete filled tube pile-column frames with breakaway connections at
the floors below the inundation depth, tuned to fracture at specific loading
resulting from hydrostatic buoyancy. The research activities will involve the
following: (1) investigate fundamental characteristics of the soil-structure
system through computational simulation, (2) experimentally study tsunami
demands on the structure using the NHERI Large Wave Flume at Oregon State
University, (3) analytically couple the tsunami demand and structure-soil
response analyses using the NHERI Computational Modeling and Simulation Center
resources, and (4) combine the findings to evaluate current and establish new
design methodologies for VESs subjected to sequential earthquake and tsunami
hazard loading.