* 1726291
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Leslie Hicks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 448,838.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Jeffrey Johnson
from University of North Carolina Chapel Hill and colleagues Gary Pielak, Marcey
Waters, Leslie Hicks and Alexander Miller have acquired a high-performance
quadrupole mass spectrometer with atmospheric pressure chemical ionization
(APCI) capabilities. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species embedded in complex samples. In a typical experiment, the
sample components travel into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized and
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of
the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the
research infrastructure at the University and regional area. Because it is in a
multi-user core laboratory, the instrument broadens participation by involving
diverse students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research enabled by this instrument is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It aids the development
of chemical transformations to enable rapid construction of complex natural
products and congeners. It is also used to improve understanding of how the
intracellular environment affects protein stability interactions and structure.
The mass spectrometer is also used for designing and developing catalysts for
the conversion of hydrocarbons, biomass, and carbon dioxide to commodity
chemicals. The instrument serves researchers designing and characterizing new
chemical probes.