* 1726812
* MRI:  Acquisition of a high performance matrix-assisted laser ionization dual time-of-flight (MALDI/TOF-TOF) mass spectrometer (MS)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Carolyn Cassady, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 391,186.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Carolyn Cassady from
University of Alabama Tuscaloosa and colleagues Yuping Bao, Jason Bara, Marco
Bonizzoni and Paul Rupar are acquiring a matrix assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer with collision induced
dissociation (CID) capabilities (MALDI/TOF-TOF MS.) In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex samples. MALDI TOF
combines gentle ionization (ideal for producing intact ions of peptides,
proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and other similarly
sized species) with a detection mode that offers an excellent balance between
sensitivity and accuracy across a wide mass range. This highly sensitive
technique allows identification and determination of the structure of molecules
in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
the university and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by
involving diverse students with this modern analytical technique. It is also
used in outreach activities, such as the annual Alabama Advanced Instrumental
Techniques Colloquium (AITC), which exposes undergraduate students from
throughout the region to state-of-the-art instrumentation. Students in an NSF
Research experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in chemistry and materials
science also use the MALDI/TOF-TOF MS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mass
spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. It aids researchers
in developing techniques for the analysis and sequencing of acidic peptides
using deprotonated ions and for characterizing structures, molecular weights and
other properties of polymer-ionene hybrids. The MALDI/TOF-TOF MS is used to
examine iron oxide nanoparticle platforms for a variety of biomolecules and
polymers. The instrumentation is also used for characterizing host-guest
complexes of hyperbranched polyelectrolytes and analyzing polyimines produced by
anionic ring opening polymerizations.