* 1726304
* MRI: Agro-combs: Development of a mid-infrared dual-comb spectrometer for the detection of agriculturally significant gases
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Stephen Welch, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,692,426.00

An award is made to Kansas State University to support a team of world-class
physicists and agronomists to develop a dual-comb laser spectroscopic system for
the detection of agriculturally significant gases. This system is based on the
Nobel-prize winning concept of the optical frequency comb and is hereby called
an "agro-comb". The most critical agricultural challenge is to double crop
production by 2050 to meet surging world food demand. To do so, plant, soil and
environmental scientists need accurate data on the concentrations of multiple
agriculturally significant gases at relevant time and spatial scales. Such data
are indispensable for applications such as crop breeding, nutrient management,
crop water use, and livestock gas emission monitoring. The agro-comb will
support a collaborative group of interdisciplinary users from Kansas State
University and throughout the United States and Canada. Broader impacts of this
project include the training of young researchers in this highly
interdisciplinary research area. Important societal outcomes also include
potentially commercial technology which could widely influence precision
agriculture management, breeding programs, and other areas. Project scientists
will team up with existing University outreach programs to offer summer research
opportunities to undergraduate students and hands-on activities for middle-
school children, particularly girls. Furthermore, they will present related
science to children throughout Kansas via a traveling lecture series, among
other outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agro-comb is a mid-infrared
laser system for the simultaneous measurement of multiple trace gas
concentrations with high sensitivity over a 10 m path. The intellectual merit of
the research is the sensitive detection of agriculturally relevant gases in the
field, with the unprecedented combination of speed, spectral width, and
sensitivity that dual-comb spectroscopy offers. The agro-comb's broadband but
discrete nature will permit the high-resolution detection of carbon dioxide and
water, including forms that incorporate deuterium, carbon-13, and oxygen-16
isotopes, with a single open-path instrument. Such simultaneous measurements,
never before possible, are key to understanding the carbon and water cycles by
improving knowledge of photosynthesis, soil respiration and evaporation, and
plant transpiration. These measurements can be made over individual sub-plots of
different crop varieties, to expand the ability to connect a plant's traits to
its genetic composition. The agro-comb will also be used to detect important
gases such as methane, nitrous oxide, and ammonia, which can be used to monitor
gaseous losses of nitrogen from soils and methane emissions from feedlots.