* 1726947
* MRI:   Acquisition of High-Sensitivity, Solids Capable 400 MHz NMR for Research and Undergraduate Training at the University of Colorado at Denver
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Scott Reed, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 289,800.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Scott Reed from
University of Colorado Denver-Downtown Campus and colleague Liliya Vugmeyster
have acquired a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer with solid
state capabilities. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields
such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for studying the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the changes in interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
important to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from
these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry, forensics and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate students via
independent student research and traditional academic coursework as well as
researchers and master's students. The spectrometer is used by several programs
that cater to underrepresented minority populations. Examples are Colorado
Undergraduate Summer Program (CUSP), Graduate Experiences for Multicultural
Students (GEMS), Building Research Achievement in Neuroscience (BRAiN), Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship, LabCoats, Research Initiative for Scientific
Enhancement (RISE), Maximizing Access to Research Careers (MARC U-STAR), Student
Cancer Research Fellowship and Summer Undergraduate Minority Mentoring in
Translational Science (SUMMiT).

This NMR spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. It may
impact research efforts on the preparation of photo-releasable lipid probes,
studies of structure-function relationships of modified RNA, and exploration of
near-infrared self-illuminating nanoparticles for in vivo optical imaging of
tumors. The instrumentation is also used for studying structural mechanisms of
calcium inhibited C2 domains, exploring the role of interfacial interactions in
the survival of unfrozen water in Antartic soils, and studying the mechanistic
nature of protein dynamics transitions. The spectrometer benefits investigations
on the effects of lipid interactions on internal dynamics of amyloid-beta
fibrils, on phase transitions in liquid-crystalline elastomers, and on
applications of solid state 14-nitrogen and 17-oxygen NMR to natural organic
matter.