* 1726931
* MRI:  Acquisition of Liquid Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ralph Wheeler, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 253,583.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs. Professor Victor Ryzhov
from Northern Illinois University and colleagues Ralph Wheeler, Elizabeth
Gaillard, Melissa Lenczewski and James Horn are acquiring a liquid
chromatograph, ion-trap, time-of-flight mass spectrometer (LC-IT-TOF-MS). In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized and measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows the detection and determination of the structures of molecules
in a complex mixture. In an instrument with an ion trap, a combination of
magnetic and electric fields capture the charged particles. With the TOF
capabilities the sample is finely vaporized into a spray, then the ions are
accelerated by an electric field to allow further characterization. The liquid
chromatograph component allows separation of mixtures before the components are
analyzed. This acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the
University and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving
diverse students in research and training using this modern analytical
technique. The instrument serves students and researchers from various
undergraduate colleges such as Harper, Rock Valley and Knox Colleges as well as
Olivet Nazarene University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mass spectrometer enhances
research and education at all levels. The tool benefits researchers studying
engineering proteins and age-related processes that could be relevant to the
eye. The instrumentation is also used for studies that may be relevant for
understanding proteomics, developing delivery agents for boron neutron capture,
and discovering enzyme inhibitors. The mass spectrometer also enables research
for new synthetic methods for complex organic synthesis; These methods that may
be relevant for drug discovery studies. Finally, the instrumentation is used to
study peptide photodegradation and water pollutants.