* 1726624
* The Mathematical Education of Teachers as an Application of Undergraduate Mathematics (META Math)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Douglas Ensley, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,211,962.00

This project will create textbook-independent, college mathematics modules
aligned with recommendations from the Conference Board of the Mathematical
Sciences 2012 report titled, "The Mathematical Education of Teachers II."
Specifically, each module will present the teaching of secondary level
mathematics as an application of a traditional, undergraduate mathematics major
course. These materials will raise the application of teaching secondary-level
mathematics to parallel traditional application areas such as engineering,
physics, economics, and life sciences, which have always been featured in
college mathematics. The modules developed by this project will be classroom
tested and evaluated to provide feedback for improvement as well as for creating
a blueprint for additional future module development in all mathematics major
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will increase faculty capacity to
guide undergraduate pre-service teachers in (i) making explicit connections
between undergraduate mathematics and the school mathematics they will teach,
and (ii) developing sophisticated understanding of mathematics taught in grades
7-12. The specific objectives of this project are to (i) develop quality
instructional modules that make explicit connections between college mathematics
and school mathematics; (ii) pilot test these materials; and (iii) research
student learning that results from the use of these modules and evaluate the
effectiveness of the process created to develop the modules. This project will
also provide insight into the impact of module usage on a faculty member's own
understanding of school mathematics content from an advanced perspective. The
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is providing co-funding for this
project in recognition of its alignment with the broader teacher preparation
goals of the Noyce effort.