* 1726355
* MRI: Acquisition of an SEM-EDS System: Advancing Scientific Discovery and Student Scientific Inquiry in Rural Illinois
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,544.00

Western Illinois University will acquire a Scanning Electron Microscope with an
Energy-Dispersive detector for research and undergraduate education in the
Departments of Geology, Chemistry, Biological Sciences, and Anthropology.
Research ranges from basic study of non-biologic materials to organisms that
require high magnification to observe. The electron microscope system will also
be integrated in the training of undergraduate and graduate students who are
part of Western Illinois' Research Inspiring Student (RISE) program, giving them
important experience with state-of-the-art observational and analytical tools.
The electron microscope system will be used as well in a cooperative outreach
program to help bring meaningful scientific experiences to primary and secondary
classrooms in rural Illinois. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable
Western Illinois University (WIU) to acquire an SEM (Scanning Electron
Microscope) with EDS (energy dispersive X-ray), The availability of this
equipment will help advance active research programs at a small rural
institution in western Illinois that range from the basic study of inorganic
materials to complex symbiotic associations between plants and microorganisms.
The specific research projects include studying 1) factors and processes
involved in decay and preservation of vertebrates, 2) synthesis, structure, and
properties of inorganic materials, 3) evolution of clam shrimp and the processes
involved in fossil preservation, 4) deep processes involved in magmatic mixing
events, 5) feeding morphology in invertebrates, 6) microbial involvement in the
unique rock formations found within caves, and 7) plant-fungal interactions and
microbial adaptations to extreme conditions. Students, both from the sciences
and science education, will be exposed to this modern equipment in their classes
and through individual research projects as part of the opportunities offered by
the Research Inspiring Student (RISE) program at WIU.