* 1726058
* MRI: Acquisition of an Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer with Solid-State Capabilities for Shared Use at the University of Maryland
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Lawrence Sita, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 504,523.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs. Professor
Lyle Isaacs from University of Maryland College Park and colleagues Lawrence
Sita, Chunsheng Wang, Dongxia Liu and Efrain Rodriguez are acquiring a 500 MHz
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. An NMR spectometer
measures the magnetic properties of atoms when molecules are exposed to various
frequencies of light. These signals identify the atoms present in the compound.
This spectrometer probes the properties of solid materials, including batteries,
polymers, catalysts and biomolecules. The NMR is used by chemists, engineers and
their students working on interdisciplinary research in materials, nanoscience,
catalysis and energy science. The instrument is the first solid-state NMR at the
University of Maryland. It is a resource available to other institutions in the
region and a valuable instrument to train students in NMR techniques preparing
them for their later careers in academia or industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NMR spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. The
infrastructure acquisition impacts the preparation of cucurbit[n]urils, studies
of intermetalloid clusters, and the self-assembly of ionophores and hydrogels.
The instrumentation is also used to study catalytic metal-mediated small
molecule fixation and to carry out carbon-hydrogen bond activation with oxygen
as direct oxidant. The spectrometer is useful for preparing new catalysts from
zeolite materials, for probing structures in superconducting solids and for
studying electrochemical energy storage.