* 1726925
* MRI: Acquisition of a high speed multiphoton laser-scanning microscope for research and training at UNLV
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrew Andres, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 998,614.00

An award is made to the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) to acquire a
high-speed multiphoton laser scanning microscope system to view the behaviors of
cells in living tissues with time-lapse images. UNLV is the only research-
intensive university in southern Nevada, and the largest in the state. Expansion
of the scope and impact of UNLV research activities is a high priority for the
State of Nevada, and part of its plan to diversify the economy beyond the gaming
and tourism industries. The UNLV Confocal and Biological Imaging Core provides
training and support for laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy in a wide array
of biological, environmental, and engineering applications. Graduate students
from across UNLV and nearby post-graduate professional universities receive
basic and advanced training in quantitative fluorescence microscopy techniques,
advancing the national goal of developing a diverse STEM workforce. Graduate
students use the majority of Core instrument time, and are assisted by
collaborating undergraduate researchers. In additional, other undergraduate UNLV
students will experience the new multiphoton technology through modules in
advanced laboratory coursework. In 2015, UNLV was ranked as one of the 10-most
diverse public universities in the US. UNLV is also a Minority-Serving
Institution for Native American and Pacific Islander students and an emerging
Hispanic Serving Institution. Tours and demonstrations will be provided to
students from nearby high schools and two-year and four-year colleges through
outreach activities. To further recruit a diverse range of students to STEM
disciplines, videos showing the inner workings of plant and animal tissues will
be developed and presented in Clark County K-12 classrooms. Similar
presentations for Science Caf√© Las Vegas will enhance scientific literacy by
introducing the lay public to the fascinating behaviors of cells within living
tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly acquired multiphoton laser scanning
microscope provides advanced technology to obtain images from living tissues to
depths of 1 mm. This instrument will be located in the UNLV Confocal and
Biological Imaging Core, so that it will be available on a first-come, first-
served basis to scientists and students across Nevada. Availability of this
instrument eliminates the barrier of transporting samples to other states, and
enables Nevada researchers to study living systems at new levels of sensitivity
and depth. The high-speed imaging technology decreases tissue damage and
increases sensitivity, allowing detection of fast-changing processes over
periods of seconds to hours. This type of imaging is driving unexpected
discoveries about the brain and how cells work together to build the
architecture of many other organs. The advanced capabilities of multiphoton
laser scanning microscopy will be used to study a wide range of biological and
engineering systems, such as hormonal control of gland secretion, electrical
oscillations in living mouse brain slices, repair and regeneration of eye
tissues, organization of bio-fouling bacteria, and electrical activity of
polymers for robotics and nanotechnology.