* 1726035
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3D printer for Additive Manufacturing of Functional Materials for Biological Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Teng Ma, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2019
* USD 193,025.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will enable the acquisition of a
3D printer for additive manufacturing of functional materials for biological
applications. The PIs at Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU) are exploring
processes, structures and performance measures of novel engineered materials
that will lead to significant achievements in material processing that have
profound biological applications. This grant fills a gap in instrumentation at
FAMU and enhances the current synergy across the PIs' research platform and
offer unique solutions for different funded projects and thrust areas in the
biological arena such as drug delivery, electrospinning, cancer therapy and
scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. The project brings together researchers
from chemical and biomedical engineering, pharmaceutical sciences, chemistry and
industrial engineering and will play a key role in the education of
undergraduate, graduate minority students and postdoctoral fellows across
different disciplines. In particular, for the first time it will allow cross
talk between the biological scientists and engineers thus resulting in
development of novel fundamental science and devices that will play a key role
in biomedical sciences. Introduction of materials education with the help of
acquired printer and proposed research in the curriculum at different
departments will provide a means to motivate minority students, retain them and
enhance their scientific capability thus producing a pool of well-trained
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
grant will support acquisition of a state-of-the-art 3D printer with unique
capabilities of multi-material printing and the ability to pattern these
multiple materials in three dimensions. Research component involves a)
development of a novel bioprinting platform to print co-cultures using cancer
cells and tumor associated fibroblasts which can simulate the human stromal
characteristics b) integration of electrospinning and 3D printing to develop
hierarchically structured scaffolds for tissue engineering c) 3D printed models
for transdermal drug delivery of molecules like Testosterone and Estradiol and
scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. 3D bio-printing of cancer cells shows
significant promise for creating complex tissue and organ mimics and eliminates
the gap between the in vitro drug screening and animal models. The requested
nScrypt Biological Architectural Tool (BAT) system is a bio-printing platform
with the ability to host up to four separate materials and print on curved
surfaces or print 3D structures with a motion control accuracy of ±5 microns and
repeatability up to ±2 microns in XY. The Smart pump included in the printer
system has the ability to print a wide variety of biomaterials including living
cells. The ability to control separate pumps/devices all under one software
control and one platform provides a unique multilayer, multi-material and multi-
structure capability which makes this printer ideal for the proposed projects.