* 1726727
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Geoscience, Forensic Chemistry and Science Education Research at Florida International University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jose Almirall, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 309,890.00

Florida International University will acquire a Scanning Electron Microscope and
accessory detectors for research and undergraduate education in Geosciences,
Forensic Chemistry and Science Education. Geoscience research projects include
study of volcanic processes and the identification of the origin of volcanic ash
layers and other volcanic particles in nearby marine sediments, microfossils as
preservers of paleoclimate indicators, and geochemistry of minerals in Andean
ore deposits for identifying the source of metals in anthropological artifacts.
The proposed instrument will be used for a wide range of research applications
in Forensic Chemistry through analysis of materials such as gunshot residue,
glass, adhesive tape, soil, and ink. The instrument will continue a long-
standing partnership between geoscience and chemistry in sharing analytical
instruments and it will accommodate remote users in an NSF project to explore
the impact of remote instrument operation on undergraduate teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable Florida International
University to acquire an SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) with EDS (energy
dispersive X-ray), XRF (X-Ray Fluorescence) and CL (Cathodoluminescence)
capabilities. The proposed instrument will support Geoscience research in the
areas of volcanology and igneous geochemistry, paleontology and stratigraphy,
and ore geochemistry and geoarchaeology, and Forensic Chemistry research on a
wide array of forensic materials (glass, paint, textiles). The common theme of
this research is the application of microbeam instruments with diverse
capabilities for investigation of the concentrations and spatial distribution of
major and trace elements in geologic and forensic materials. Advancement of
knowledge in these fields will be supported by shared expertise and the
versatile capabilities of the SEM acquisition together with other available
instrumentation. Knowledge will also be advanced in the understanding of student
learning, especially the impact of using major instrumentation made possible
through remote operation.&lt;br/&gt;