* 1726550
* Integrated Data-driven Technologies for Individualized Instruction in STEM Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,999,438.00

This project aims to develop intelligent learning technology designed to react
to individual student performance data, so as to personalize instruction. Such
technology has significant potential to transform the American educational
system by providing a low-cost way to adapt learning environments to individual
students' needs and by informing advanced research on human learning. This
project will create the technology for a new generation of data-driven
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs), enabling the rapid creation of
individualized instruction that supports learning in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The net result of this work will be a
modular framework of educational data mining methods that offer student-
adaptive, individualized support at multiple granularities, that have been
implemented, iteratively refined, and empirically validated for learning impact
and robustness across systems. This project will develop hierarchical data-
driven, interpretable, and robust models that optimize student learning.
Moreover, it will investigate whether integrating hierarchical data-driven agent
decision-making with user-initiated decisions can help students learn to make
better decisions for their learning. Teaching students to make effective
decisions can fundamentally transform educational assessment: the emphasis
should not be just on what students have learned, but on whether students can
learn and adapt in productive ways in future situations. By providing
individualized instruction using data, it has the potential to make
individualized learning support accessible to a broad audience, including
students that are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. These efforts
serve the national interests by strengthening the nation's ability to develop
and diversify the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop and empirically evaluate a general hierarchical data-driven
framework that would induce hierarchical hints and adaptive hierarchical
pedagogical decision making policies across three STEM domains, including logic,
probability, and programming, where building traditional ITSs is extremely
challenging. More specifically, this project will 1) advance research on data-
driven approaches to ITSs by adapting them to make subgoal hints and
hierarchical decisions similar to those of human experts; 2) evaluate the
robustness of our general hierarchical data-driven framework by comparing it to
flat data-driven approaches not only on each individual ITS but also across
ITSs; and 3) close the loop by using data-driven policies to improve students'
decision-making and their long-term problem-solving abilities. The proposed work
is poised to have a significant impact by making ITSs more effective, by
improving student performance in STEM domains, and by teaching students to make
effective pedagogical decisions. If successful, it will close the loop by using
data-driven policies to support student decision-making and eventually improve
their long-term problem-solving abilities through hybrid human-machine
interactive decision-making in-vivo experimentation.