* 1726533
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Layer Deposition Tool for Research, Education, and Outreach at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Michael King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2019
* USD 416,623.00

Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a core processing technique in nanoscale
science and engineering and is used for a wide variety of materials and devices
ranging from electronics to biomaterials. An ALD reactor acquired through this
Major Research Instrumentation award provides this capability as a shared-user
facility in the Vanderbilt Institute for Nanoscale Science and Engineering,
enabling innovative research, education, and outreach throughout Middle
Tennessee. Vanderbilt researchers come from a wide variety of disciplines
including physics, chemistry, materials science, and engineering. Furthermore,
the ALD tool is accessible by students and researchers at nearby universities
such as Tennessee State University, Fisk University, Belmont University, Middle
Tennessee State University, University of Tennessee, and Austin Peay State
University. Research enabled by the tool includes nanophotonics and
optoelectronics, biomaterials and biosensors, as well as energy storage and
conversion. The scientific research is tightly integrated with education,
including hands-on training for undergraduate and graduate students on this
state-of-the-art instrument. In addition, leveraging various outreach programs
at Vanderbilt University, the impact of this project is extended to high-school
students through demonstrations of fabrication of nanostructures. Moreover, the
close collaboration between Vanderbilt and Tennessee State University, a
historically black university, facilitates participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALD tool, installed as a shared user facility
in the Vanderbilt Institute of Science and Engineering, catalyzes new
collaborations among nanoscience researchers at Vanderbilt University and across
Middle Tennessee. The tool is capable of deposition of atomically thin and dense
metal and dielectric films as well as coating of nanoparticles. This capability
enables transformative research activities addressing a broad range of
nanoscience and nanoengineering areas including nanophotonics, optoelectronics,
biomaterials, biosensors, solar energy conversion, and next-generation energy
storage systems. In particular, the ALD enables fabrication of ultra-thin gate
dielectrics as well as phase-change optics at the nanoscale. In the area of
biomaterials and biosensors, the ALD enables new biocompatible coatings for both
nanoscale materials as well as macroscale medical devices. In energy research,
the ALD allows researchers to explore novel battery and solar cell materials as
well as thermal systems and coatings.