* 1726180
* Grappling with Graphs: Researching and Improving Student Graphing Skills Using An Interactive Digital Graphing Tool
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Joel Abraham, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 565,565.00

Calls for reforms at all levels of undergraduate teaching in STEM fields
encourage students to be active participants in the process of science with
inquiry and quantitative data analysis, interpretation and construction of
graphs, and decision-making. But there is currently a dearth of research-backed
tools and curriculum for teaching overarching skills involved in the scientific
process, including generating testable hypotheses, experimental design,
exploring and interpreting data, and making evidence-based arguments. This is
especially true in the large introductory classes that constitute many students'
first exposure to a scientific field in college. This project will build on a
budding research base exploring where students have trouble with using graphs
with and how they learn to construct graphs. It will expand this research base
both in depth and breadth, using the GraphSmarts Research Tool, which was
purposefully designed to reveal students' competence and difficulties with graph
construction. Data collected in this project will transform this research tool
into an invaluable teaching tool which can provide both students and instructors
rapid feedback on areas of student difficulty with graphing in order to fine-
tune instruction and student learning of this critical
skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to
leverage the resources of an industry-academia partnership to establish a rich
database of student graphing practices and to use those data to equip
introductory biology students with a strong foundation of graphing knowledge and
skills. On a recently completed cyberlearning project, the SimBiotic Software
company explored ways of giving students authentic scientific problems (using
simulations) in open-ended environments, but still providing immediate and
specific feedback to both students and instructors that can help guide students
towards a better understanding of how to design a meaningful experiment. The
current project will build tools for another key piece of the scientific process
- data display and interpretation, as evidenced through constructing graphs. The
first objective is to expand and validate the existing GraphSmarts tool's
ability to collect the full range of common graph construction competencies
among undergraduate biology students. Qualitative data from student and
instructor think-aloud graphing interviews will be critical in guiding the
refinement of the GraphSmarts tool to enable future data collection in the
absence of interviews. The second objective is to build an additional graphing
scenario in ecology/evolution using the GraphSmarts tool and implement this
scenario in diverse introductory biology settings to solidify the dataset of
student competencies and difficulties with graph construction. Data from this
project will be critical in guiding the development of GraphSmarts teaching
modules to provide real-time feedback regarding graphing difficulties to both
students and instructors and offer assessments to evaluate the development of
student proficiency with graphing.