* 1726528
* MRI: Acquisition of a Ultra-High Resolution Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance (FTICR) Mass Spectrometer for the Georgia Institute of Technology Core Facilities
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Julia Kubanek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,009,201.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Facundo Fernandez from
Georgia Institute of Technology and colleagues Julia Kubanek, Nga Lee Ng and
Matthew Torres are acquiring a high resolution Fourier-transform ion-cyclotron
resonance mass spectrometer (HRes FTICR-MS) with ESI (electrospray ionization),
MALDI (matrix-assisted laser desorption), ECD and EDT (electron-capture
dissociation and electron-transfer dissociation), CID (collision induced
dissociation) and imaging capabilities. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is
one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small
quantities of chemical species in complex samples. In a typical experiment, the
components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized and the ion
masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection of
molecules and determination of their structure even when present in a complex
mixture. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the
university and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving
diverse students in research and training using this modern analytical
technique. It also provides training opportunities to many undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students as well as high school students through a
variety of programs such as Engaging New Generations at Georgia Tech through
Engineering and Science (ENGAGES), a program that is directed towards
underrepresented students in the Atlanta area. This advanced mass spectrometer
serves as a regional resource through collaborations involving multiple
institutions such as Emory University, Spelman College, Morehouse College, Clark
Atlanta University, Georgia State University, the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, and other institutions.

This mass spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. It
benefits researchers studying proto-peptide evolving systems: post-translational
modifications in large, intact, G-protein coupled receptors and their associated
G proteins. The instrumentation is also used in investigations of metabolomics
and lipidomics, and in developing 3-dimensional surface analysis tools and
applications that may be useful to follow brain changes after traumatic brain
injuries. The mass spectrometer benefits research in cell manufacturing,
synthetic phage modification, nanoparticle metabolomics, and glycoproteomics. In
addition, the instrument is used for research studies of photosynthetic electron
transfer, quorum sensing, food-disinfection by-products, protein trafficking,
and nanomaterials.