* 1726249
* Learning physics by practicing it with physical apparatus or using interactive video: is there a difference?
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Eugenia Etkina, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 597,781.00

This project will advance understanding of how students develop scientific
reasoning abilities when using an online resource. Education is shifting rapidly
from traditional classrooms and laboratories to more flexible, online learning
environments in which students do not always have access to physical equipment.
Research has shown that students can learn scientific abilities through
collaborative hands-on investigative experiences and subsequent analyses and
discussions. This project will explore the extent to which those same scientific
abilities can be developed using high-quality interactive videos of experiments.

This project will couple the flexibility of web-based video technology with the
Investigative Science Learning Environment (ISLE), a pedagogical framework that
leads students through processes of scientific reasoning used by practicing
scientists. The ISLE framework, most often implemented in a traditional setting
where lecture is separated from apparatus-based lab experimentation, has already
been shown to improve students' scientific reasoning abilities. Today e-learning
resources such as this project's video-based ISLE (vISLE) are blurring the lines
between lecture and lab and opening up the possibilities for authentic
scientific investigations in non-traditional settings. The goals of this project
are: A) to gain a deeper and more nuanced understanding of how students engage
in science practices using an e-learning resource such as vISLE. Do students
learn fundamental physics principles using vISLE and what scientific reasoning
abilities or habits of mind do they display and develop using vISLE? and B) to
gain an understanding of how the advantages of videos can be exploited to extend
authentic scientific investigations into non-traditional venues (such as in the
classroom or in a homework assignment).