* 1726017
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU-Based Cloud Infrastructure for Inter-/Multi-Disciplinary Research and Education at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Shaoen Wu, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 260,000.00

This project, acquiring equipment to establish a GPU-based cloud, aims to enable
big data related interdisciplinary projects, specifically collaborative research
projects in computer science, large-scale medical data, computational chemistry,
and geology. These include:&lt;br/&gt;- Intelligent Internet of Things
(IoT),&lt;br/&gt;- Smart Health,&lt;br/&gt;- Spatial Computing, and &lt;br/&gt;-
Computational Chemistry&lt;br/&gt;The intelligent IOT research would utilize the
infrastructure to develop new deep learning models to enable smart living and
navigation for vision impaired people. The big data enriched health research
expects to find effective solutions to solve problems of obesity and non-
communicable chronic diseases, serious threats to public health in the US and
globally, using the instrumentation to compute the models with enormous health
data. The geoscience research would enabled the establishment of "American
Spatial Data Portal" (ASDP) that will provide a central repository of spatial
data to expedite research on geospatial data mining and applications. A cloud
geospatial education system would be developed on the instrument to transform
the nation's geoscience education. The computational chemistry research would
take advantage of the computation capability of the cloud to discover, design,
and evaluate new and low costs catalysts for important chemical reactions, which
could significantly change the life of the world. This GPU-based cloud is
expected to facilitate the data and computation intensive research progress
across many disciplines not only at this mainly undergraduate university, but
also at other institutions through authorized and scheduled remote access.
Furthermore, the infrastructure would be shared via high speed internet to other
colleagues in the nation, and to international collaborators who are
interested.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;By involving
students in the activities of installation, configuration, and instrumentation,
this project would provide valuable opportunities to train future scientists,
engineers, and instrumentalists. The developed new cross-list courses and summer
training program would train hundreds of both senior and graduate students on
GPU and big data related knowledge and skills. Moreover, due to the appropriate
mentoring that the investigators are able to offer, overall students and
minorities can benefit.