* 1726215
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computing Cluster for Gravitational-Wave and Multimessenger Astrophysics in the Era of LIGO Detections
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Carlos Lousto, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 346,661.00

This MRI award supports a team of researchers at the Rochester Institute of
Technology's (RIT) Center for Computational Relativity and Gravitation (CCRG) to
acquire, deploy, and maintain a new state-of-the art computational cluster,
GreenPrairie, to be used in research at the frontiers of gravitational physics,
relativistic astrophysics, advanced high-performance computation, and scientific
visualization. GreenPrairie will be the main computational workhorse of the
CCRG, and it will directly enable the research of undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty across four departments and
three colleges at RIT. It will foster the growth of three graduate programs in
astrophysics, mathematical modeling, and computer science, and support research
on behalf of several large community-wide collaborations in numerical
relativity, gravitational waveform source modeling, and relativistic
astrophysics. Scientific visualizations from the cluster will be used to support
a funded REU program on multi-messenger astrophysics, and programs at RIT's
National Technical Institute for the Deaf to promote science to the deaf and
hard-of-hearing communities. The cluster will also be a vehicle for public
outreach events on science, mathematics, and computing through site visits and
annual community-wide public exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GreenPrairie
consists of a 1296-core, high-speed, large-memory computer cluster, with 768 TB
of attached storage, and will be housed within the "Black Hole Lab" computer
facility at the CCRG. Research with GreenPrairie will focus on some of the most
extreme phenomena in the universe, where the strongest gravitational and
magnetic fields interact with ultra-relativistic matter and high-energy
radiation, that can only be studied through advanced, large-scale computation
and visualization. The cluster will be used for timely simulations of key
astrophysical sources for advanced LIGO, which uses information from theoretical
waveforms to interpret the observed signals and determine the nature of the
astrophysical sources. Specifically, the cluster will be used to simulate black-
hole binaries, and their merger waveforms, across the entire space of parameters
relevant to advanced LIGO and next generation detectors, as well as fast
response simulations triggered by gravitational wave detections. The cluster
will also be used to study accretion problems involving close and/or merging
binary black hole systems which are expected to be observable in the
electromagnetic spectrum by current and future astronomical surveys, such as
LSST. Finally, the cluster will be a testbed for developing novel computational
techniques that will permit efficient computation of heterogeneous systems
involving multiple kinds of physics with very different length scales, and
multiple evolution schemes.