* 1726887
* MRI: Development of Multi-field Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Joseph Ross, Jr., Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 02/28/2022
* USD 534,372.00

Elastic constants are fundamental properties of any solid material and knowing
their changes with temperature and/or under applied magnetic or electric field
is essential for understanding different physical processes that take place in
different materials. However, measurement of elastic constants using
conventional techniques is not always a trivial task. It usually requires large
number of samples and/or numerous time-consuming tests, especially if the
measurements are performed at low and high temperatures and/or under various
external stimuli such as electric and magnetic fields. Multi-field Resonant
Ultrasound Spectroscopy (MF-RUS) apparatus under development in this project
will allow rapid experimental determination of the full set of elastic constants
of any solid from the single test using only one sample as small as 1 mm3 in the
wide temperature range, with or without applied electric or magnetic fields. The
broad capabilities of the MF-RUS will enable comprehensive characterization of
different solids, and enhance research in many fields, including materials
science and engineering, physics, and chemistry. By allowing rapid and easy
evaluation of elastic properties of different materials, utilization of MF-RUS
will further foster development of new materials for widely varying applications
including energy harvesting, storage and conversion, defense, and transportation
systems. Once developed, this unique instrument will be available to researchers
from other academic institutions, industry and laboratories through a well-
established Materials Characterization Facility's users program at Texas A&amp;M
University. Eighteen research projects at Texas A&amp;M University and other
academic institutions, including two minority serving institutions, currently
supported by NSF and other federal agencies will benefit immediately from the
development of MF-RUS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elastic constants, as the second
derivatives of the free energy with respect to strain, not only relate stress
and strain tensors, but also provide fundamental information about the character
of atomic bonding in solids, and thus they are considered to be one of the most
fundamental materials properties. While the elastic constants represent
primarily equilibrium thermodynamic properties, the attenuation is direct
manifestation of irreversible processes related to energy absorption by various
physical processes in the material. Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) is a
simple, inexpensive and elegant experimental technique that can be used to
determine simultaneously Young's and shear moduli of isotropic solids, or a full
set of elastic constants (Cij) of single crystals, as well as ultrasonic
attenuation, using single crystal or polycrystalline sample as small as 1 mm3.
Currently, commercially available RUS instruments are limited to room
temperature measurements while some existing custom-made RUS systems allow
measurements up to 1320ºC in controlled environments, in magnetic fields up to
7T from cryogenic temperatures to 327ºC, or under an electric field but only at
room temperature. A Multi-Field Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (MF-RUS) system
under development in this project will be unique since it will allow
simultaneous measurements of elastic constants and ultrasonic attenuation of
solid materials from liquid helium temperature up to 1900ºC, with or without
electric fields of up to 1000 V/mm or magnetic fields of up to 7T, and in
various atmospheres (air, high vacuum, inert gases, etc.) This RUS system will
be modular and will be developed in stages over the 3-year project period with
partial functionality as each module is added. This instrument will provide a
powerful new tool to observe and quantify changes in elastic coefficients and
ultrasonic attenuation as a result of various physical processes in the solid,
such as first- and second-order phase transformations or different inelastic
relaxation mechanisms due to different processes such as thermoelastic
relaxation and motion of point defects (e.g. interstitial and vacancy hopping),
linear defects (e.g. dislocations) or planar defects (e.g. domain walls or
martensitic transformation phase interfaces, etc.).