* 1726368
* MRI: Acquistion of a Confocal Microscope for research and teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* John Stolz, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 333,191.00

An award is made to Duquesne University to support the purchase of a Nikon A1Rsi
confocal microscope. This instrument will be central to the research of 22
faculty from two different colleges and three different departments on
Duquesne's campus. It will play a central role in the education and professional
development of pre-college, undergraduate, and graduate students. The faculty
are committed to training the next generation of scientists, and Duquesne
University is a PhD granting institution, with a robust doctoral program. Access
to the confocal microscope will undoubtedly aid in the training of these PhD
candidates. The microscope will support undergraduate education in five
different undergraduate laboratory courses training approximately 80
undergraduate students a year in advanced microscopy techniques. Undergraduates
working with faculty in their primary research projects will be trained and
encouraged to use the confocal microscope system in support of their work. The
faculty are also committed to providing pre-college enrichment activities for
minority and underserved students through our ongoing pre-college enrichment
activities, such as i) providing high school students from Pittsburgh Public
Schools with primary research experiences, ii) sharing science activities with
the middle-school aged children in the Hazelwood Summer Camp program, and iii)
producing digital media and science programming targeted to pre-college students
and designed to inspire enthusiasm about science and research. Furthermore, a
new pre-college enrichment activity will be developed in partnership with the
Citizen Science Lab, Pittsburgh's first and only community life sciences
laboratory. This will provide confocal microscopy training workshops for pre-
college students and the public, engaging approximately 60 people per year. The
goal of these training programs is to promote enthusiasm, understanding and
retention in STEM disciplines for students at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscope will be used extensively to
support the fundamental research activities of 22 tenure-track, independently
funded faculty, each directing meaningful research programs that will
significantly advance knowledge in their chosen fields. In the past, the faculty
have been highly productive and successfully published 42 articles in the past
10 years that employ confocal microscopy. All of the research projects supported
by this instrument have the capacity to transform their fields and include
studies devoted to understanding i) cell growth and movement, ii) organismal
development and cell-cell communication, iii) membrane transport and movement of
material inside the cell, iv) analyses of genetic mutants, cell structure and
gene expression, v) neurobiology, vi) immune responses, and vii) bacterial
community structure. Thus, the intellectual merit for the use of this microscope
will have broad reaching implications for the scientific community.