* 1726891
* Scholarly Leaders Originating as Practicing Educators in Two-Year College Mathematics (Project SLOPE)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Kathleen Quardokus Fisher, American Mathematical Association of Two-Year College
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 305,110.00

Two-year colleges maintain a central and rapidly expanding role in the
development of the scientific and technical workforce specifically, as well as
of a well-educated citizenry. Current efforts in two-year college mathematics
targeted towards increasing student success and accelerating student progression
have provided momentum for improvement. Two-year college faculty are uniquely
positioned to provide insight into the varieties of prior mathematical
experiences and practical understandings that their students bring to classrooms
and thus can play a central and meaningful role in the development of the
education research base needed to inform and support lasting improvement.
Crucially, research conducted by practitioners for practitioners holds the
promise of immediate relevance and great impact for the development and growth
of empirically-based improvement efforts. Unfortunately, for a variety of
systemic reasons, there has been a dearth of such research by community college
faculty for community college contexts. This exploratory project will provide
the foundation for developing two-year college mathematics faculty researchers
engaged in classroom inquiry through the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning
(SoTL). SoTL has been demonstrated to be a transformative practice of
simultaneous knowledge generation, professional development, and teaching and
learning advancement in postsecondary education, but has not been
comprehensively examined within the unique contexts of two-year college
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the research gap
surrounding two-year college mathematics faculty SoTL research by first
conducting a critical analysis and synthesis of existing programming and the
literature base that focuses on the intersection of SoTL, two-year college
faculty research, and mathematics education research in postsecondary contexts.
Central to this inquiry will be an examination of the relationship between
faculty researcher needs and the structures of two-year colleges. Following this
needs, barriers, and opportunities analysis, the results will be used to develop
and implement a pilot national program initiative to engage two-year college
mathematics faculty in SoTL research. The pilot program will be a fifteen-month
comprehensive faculty association with the American Mathematical Association of
Two-Year Colleges that provides training in SoTL, as well as support in
undertaking this scholarship and in navigating the structures of two-year
colleges that might pose challenges to engaging in SoTL. In this pilot program,
six two-year college mathematics faculty will implement a SoTL project in their
classroom and plan for the dissemination of the results. The pilot will be
evaluated to refine its design to meet the needs of participants and to allow
for future expansion of the program and related programs.