* 1726424
* MRI: Acquisition of Motion Capture/Analysis System (MCAS) for Leading-edge Research and Teaching
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Sohyung Cho, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 185,358.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will support the acquisition of
a motion capture/analysis system (MCAS) for leading-edge research and education
on complex body movement analysis in medicine, sports and occupational safety.
The instrumentation will bolster interdisciplinary research and support SIU
graduate programs in Engineering and Applied Health. An essential tool for
research in dynamics, controls, and biomechanics, it will be an important
regional resource, serving the Southwestern Illinois and Eastern Missouri. The
MCAS will be integrated into SIU's undergraduate research programs and will be a
core research and educational platform for SIU and institutions in the St. Louis
metropolitan area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MCAS provides a comprehensive
platform for data collection, analysis, and modeling of the forces exerted by
different muscle groups and that are being applied to ankle, knee, and hip
joints. These data are critical to research projects on preventing
musculoskeletal disorders and determining injury mechanisms and ways to minimize
the risk of injury. The MCAS will enable complex body movement analysis, forming
the basis for improved modeling and simulation and leading to improved physical
therapy and training programs. For example, the instrumentation will enable
researchers to analyze kinematic gait patterns, measure muscle activation
patterns, and collect kinetic data, which will be combined with the kinematic
data to calculate the load being applied to the ankle, knee, and hip joints and
develop enhanced models for biomechanical gait analysis. The instrumentation,
along with surface electromyography, will also be used to collect and analyze
data on body movement and muscle activation of surgeons performing minimally
invasive surgery. The instrumentation will enable the detection of muscle
fatigue and the time-to-fatigue in vulnerable muscle groups-- to advance
fundamental fatigue analysis research and determine the impact of muscle fatigue
on surgical performance. Such real-time feedback on time-to-fatigue will provide
crucial information to surgeons, enhancing their surgical performance and
reducing harmful errors. Coupled with the breadth of expertise of the research
team-- in engineering, modeling, obesity and exercise physiology-- the
acquisition of this MCAS will provide a key resource for advancing fundamental
research on complex body movement analysis and potential interventions to
enhance human performance and reduce injury.