* 1726706
* Uncertainty Management and Proactive Maintenance for Lithium-ion Batteries in Electrified Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Zhimin Xi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2017
* USD 303,401.00

The objective of this project is to optimize performance, improve safety,
minimize over-design, and reduce cost of battery systems in electrified
vehicles. If successful, higher adoption of electrified vehicles is foreseeable
in the near future to revolutionize the future transportation systems so that
environmental challenges can be addressed for conserving energy and cutting back
on carbon emissions and pollution. This research will also have significant
impact on other applications such as aircraft electric systems, military
portable devices, and aerospace battery applications, where lithium ion
batteries are used for energy storage. These impacts will result in economic and
social benefit and help the U.S. stay competitive globally. The theory and
methodology will be integrated into education through modifications in related
courses in order to engage graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the uncertainty management and
proactive maintenance of lithium ion batteries in electrified vehicles. The
scope of the proposed work is to: i) increase accuracy of a baseline battery
model; ii) develop an intelligent uncertainty management system; and iii)
facilitate proactive maintenance decisions for lithium ion batteries. The
investigators will address four issues including: i) characterization of battery
model uncertainty under various battery operating conditions; ii) quantification
of various uncertainties and their coupling effects in the battery system; iii)
prediction of battery remaining useful life (RUL) under various battery
operating conditions; and iv) validation of the proposed approaches on an
electrified vehicle. Traditionally, researchers employ electrochemical models to
improve battery model accuracy. However, a full order electrochemical model is
not feasible for the battery management system (BMS) in electrified vehicles,
and a significant level of model simplification must be established to meet the
computational efficiency requirement which will cause unwanted model error. The
first contribution of the research project will be to study an effective model
uncertainty characterization approach to improve model prediction accuracy of a
low-fidelity model (i.e., an equivalent circuit model) so that its accuracy is
comparable to that of a high fidelity model (i.e., an electrochemical model) but
with much higher computational efficiency. The second contribution of the
project will be to develop an intelligent uncertainty management system for more
effective battery performance estimation so that battery safety can be improved
and lifetime risk minimized. Finally, the challenge of battery proactive
maintenance stems from the complexity of battery devices. Even the best models
cannot predict the complex degradation and failure mechanisms. As a result,
accurate prediction of the battery RUL based on the underlying degradation
theory is almost impossible. The third contribution of the research will be to
study proactive maintenance decisions for batteries through accurate RUL
prediction using innovative data-driven prognostics and health management (PHM)
technologies.