* 1726705
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF AN INDUCTIVELY COUPLED PLASMA MASS SPECTROMETER (ICP-MS) FOR ECOLOGICAL, ENVIRONMENTAL, AND ECOSYSTEM-LEVEL RESEARCH
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* R. Kelman Wieder, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 327,647.00

A Major Research Instrumentation award is made to Villanova University for the
acquisition of an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) system
for ecological, environmental, and ecosystems-level research. This
instrumentation will be used by numerous researchers at Villanova University and
at other institutions in the region. Researchers will utilize the ICP-MS system
to 1) resolve current research limitations imposed by existing and obsolete
instrumentation, 2) gain substantial new understanding of a number of critical
environmental issues, 3) expand research capabilities by making the instrument
widely available for use within the university and across the region, and 4)
enhance high- school, undergraduate, and graduate education and access to
cutting-edge instrumentation through independent research and coursework. This
ICP-MS system will support undergraduate and graduate research and promote
research training and student education, contributing to Villanova's goal of
providing exceptional student research opportunities. Villanova is a primarily
undergraduate institution and has succeeded in improving inclusivity of
underrepresented groups (with a multicultural student body at 25%), and
acquisition of the ICP-MS will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in research. The researchers on this MRI grant teach primarily at the
undergraduate level and have strong records of mentoring independent
undergraduate research. Therefore, acquisition of this ICP-MS will expose the
next the generation of scientists to cutting-edge research and instrumentation
and increase our global competiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high resolution
Agilent 7900 ICP-MS system with Ultra High Matrix Introduction has exceptionally
low detection limits and allows for quantitative analysis of elemental
composition from a wide array of liquid or solid samples following digestion,
significantly expanding the research capabilities of the interdisciplinary group
of researchers at Villanova University. The low detection limits, the suite of
elements detected (from Li-6 to U-238), and the linear range of response (over
11 orders of magnitude) coupled with near- simultaneous multiple element
quantification effectively resolves existing research limitations. Specific
research projects that will utilize the ICP-MS system include: 1) analysis of
the environmental impacts of natural gas extraction, 2) evaluation of pollution
in the Athabasca Oil Sands region, 3) evaluation of metal pollution histories
and mobility in marsh soils, 4) assessing atmospheric pollution using lichens as
biomonitors in the Kathmandu Valley, 5) determination of the availability of
micronutrients for nitrogen- fixation, 6) detecting environmental change through
trace element signals in corals, 7) investigating how species range shifts
impact metals, 8) evaluating impacts of land use on stream water quality and
aquatic animal contaminant loads, 9) determining contaminant loads affecting
near-shore coral reefs, 10) assessment of storm water control measures, and 11)
determining catalyst composition in solid oxide fuel cells operations. ICP-MS is
an essential tool for all of these projects, and the acquisition of the
instrument provides critical insight on a number of pressing environmental
issues.