* 1726009
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing System for University of Central Arkansas
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* M. Emre Celebi, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 105,084.00

This project, acquiring a high performance computing and storage infrastructure,
aims to accelerate faculty research and enable enhanced research participation
opportunities and learning experiences for students in cutting-edge areas. The
specific instrument, a blade server system, contains a storage area network
subsystem for use by faculty and students in the Department of Computer Science,
and by other faculty members and their students' research assistants in Biology,
Mathematics, and Geography. Their research projects, in areas that include image
analysis, virtual reality, and data mining, require the use of high performance
resources and other advanced applications. The project constitutes a major
instrumentation enhancement to this mainly undergraduate serving institution.
The instrumentation provides or promotes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-High performance
computing and storage infrastructure to support large image databases, virtual
reality, and data mining research;&lt;br/&gt;-Access to vast amount of
experimental data from outside the campus;&lt;br/&gt;-Multidisciplinary use of
common equipment and infrastructure; &lt;br/&gt;-Enhancement of current research
efforts; and&lt;br/&gt;-Creation of new synergy among various research groups
that may lead to scholarly publications and additional research
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New research ideas and initiatives are expected to
emerge leading to additional high quality interdisciplinary research activities
that may enhance socioeconomic progress for the state and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
supports an improved learning environment that will contribute to integrate
research and education and foster collaborations within the university, and
further serve as a bridge to other institutions. The project directly benefits
approximately 150 undergraduate students and at least 25 graduate students per
year. The research training and education supported by the Blade Server System
should contribute to the development of a skilled workforce. Acquisition and
utilization of this new instrumentation expands opportunities for a diverse
community in an underserved area of the country.