* 1726578
* MRI: Acquisition of a modern powder X-ray diffractometer with in situ capabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Dhandapani Venkataraman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 259,528.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Kevin Kittilstved
from the University of Massachusetts Amherst and colleagues Dhandapani
Venkataraman, Wei Fan and Friederike Jentoft are supported for the acquistion of
a powder X-ray diffractometer. A powder X-ray diffractometer probes solid
materials with X-rays to reveal its internal composition and structure.
Successful research conducted with this instrument enables investigators to
synthesize new materials with potential to promote society's transition to
sustainable fuels and energy. This diffractometer expands the materials
structural characterization capabilities in the Five College Consortium in
Western Massachusetts. Besides the home institution, the consortium includes Mt.
Holyoke College, Amherst College, Hampshire College and Smith College. The
instrument is being integrated into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum at
U Mass Amherst. The instrument is also being integrated with several outreach
programs with area school teachers, students, and their
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diffractometer enhances research and education
at all levels. It especially aids in studies of the role that oxygen vacancies
play in regulating charge neutrality in strontium titanate bulk powders and
free-standing nanocrystals and determining the structures of molecular metal-
chalcogenide clusters with specific metal dopants. The instrumentation is also
used for analyzing structural changes that accompany ion transport in metal
halide perovskites with organic cations and investigating phase transitions in
metal carbide catalysts. The spectrometer facilitates understanding
crystallization processes during zeolite synthesis; studying structural changes
during the operation of oxide electrocatalysts and searching for nanophase iron
oxide phases within hyperthermophilic microbes.