* 1726617
* MRI: Acquisition of a Physical Properties Measurement System With 9 Tesla Magnetometer (Dynacool) for Research and Teaching at VCU
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Everett Carpenter, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 281,610.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will help acquire a Physical
Properties Measurement System (PPMS) with autorotation, supplementary electrical
measurements and low and high temperature capabilities coupled with a Vibrating
Sample Magnetometer (VSM) at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU).
Additionally, the cryogen-free PPMS/VSM would enable making robust low
temperature measurements without requiring liquid helium to extremely sensitive
magnetic measurements. The equipment will help enhance research and teaching
efforts at VCU and nearby universities including those related to Smart
Materials, Electron Theory of Solids, Solid State Physics and Experimental
techniques and Foundations of Nanoscience. Improved facilities at VCU will
impact high tech skills imparted to both regular and part time students which
eventually will help industries located in northeast
USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This major instrumentation will help support
researchers at VCU who have developed research programs in which fundamental
properties of magnetic materials are used in devising novel applications. These
materials are being studied at different length scales for applications ranging
from magnetostrictive sonar transducers, self-sensing magnetoelectric actuators,
spintronic devices, non-volatile memory, magnetic nanoparticular catalysts,
magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications such as magnetic hyperthermia
for oncological treatment and nanoscale sensors. The fundamental scientific
contributions include understanding anisotropic behavior of magnetic and
magnetostrictive materials along different crystallographic orientations,
magnetoelectric behavior of multifunctional magnetostrictive-piezoelectric
composites at multiple length scales, experimental understanding of self-
assembled ordered arrays of magnetic nanowires and quantum dots produced by
selective chemical or physical electrodeposition on nm-sized pores of an alumina
film and magnetic study of nano-manufactured nanoparticles of ferrites and
gadolinium based materials. These activities require a Physical Properties
Measurement System (PPMS) with supplementary Vibration Sample Magnetometer (VSM)
capable of measuring magneto-electric, mangetocaloric and magneto-optic
measurements at both low and high temperature and fields. Additionally, the use
of a liquid helium-free PPMS would enable robust low temperature measurements.
This will keep the operating cost very low while allowing sensitive magnetic
measurements (better than 10-6 emu) and observation of coherent spin transport
phenomena which are difficult to observe at elevated temperatures.