* 1726856
* Collaborative Research: Interactive Online Support for Open-Ended Problem Solving Spanning Science Practices and Domain Topics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Yaron, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 456,657.00

Online homework is widely used in introductory science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) courses at the college level with the goal of
contributing to student learning and success. Online homework systems encourage
students to study regularly throughout the semester and support student problem-
solving practice with minimal demands on instructors. However, current online
homework systems typically provide feedback only on the final answers to
multistep problems attempted by students. This Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE:EHR) Development &amp; Implementation project will develop an
improved system for online homework that will follow students as they engage in
free-form, multistep problem solving, and provide hints and feedback as needed
throughout the process. In addition, the interface will facilitate student
practice with constructing scientific arguments that involve supporting claims
with evidence. The online tools will be implemented, tested, and revised in
general chemistry courses at multiple institutions, including Carnegie-Mellon
University, Iowa State University, and Des Moines Area Community College. Thus,
the high-quality online resources produced are expected to help students develop
the problem-solving expertise that is needed for success in chemistry and other
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be structured as design
research around the conjecture that robust learning can be promoted through
online homework that: (i) supports free-form, multistep problem solving; (ii)
engages students in a range of science practices; and (iii) provides practice in
integrating concepts from across the domain. The work will build on the success
of the Cognitive Tutor Authoring Tools through two main extensions. The first is
a drag-and-drop expression builder that will allow students to construct problem
solving steps and scientific arguments with a degree of flexibility that
approaches that of paper-and-pencil problem solving, while allowing the
computing system to monitor and scaffold the work through hints and feedback.
The second is a domain browser from which students will drag and drop items for
their expressions. This will allow the computing system to monitor and scaffold
students as they develop strategies to solve a given problem. Thus, it is
expected that this project will extend the range of problem solving activities
that can be supported online in ways that research suggests will improve student
learning. Scaffolding more open-ended, multistep problems will provide students
practice with developing problem-solving strategies. Spanning a larger range of
science practices will help students learn domain content while engaging in
practices that better reflect those of chemists. Iterations in the design of the
system will be informed by: comparison of student problem solving within the
system to that of paper-and-pencil; examination of detailed log files on student
use for appropriateness of the hints and feedback provided by the system; and
evaluation of the degree to which the system can support problems that span
science practices and include topics from across the domain. Analysis of log
files gathered from the system will allow for design iterations that improve the
activities, as well as provide fundamental insights into how students solve
problems. The final year of the project will include a summative evaluation with
diverse student populations. Both the online tools and the results of the
evaluations will be broadly disseminated.