* 1726357
* MRI: Acquisition of a 0.7-m Research Grade Telescope for Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Matthew Wood, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 338,169.00

The Department of Physics and Astronomy at Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce
will open a new research-grade astronomical observatory at a site near their
campus. The observatory will feature a 0.7-meter diameter reflecting telescope
with a CCD imaging detector, along with hardware and control software to allow
both on-site and remote semi-autonomous observing. The new observatory will be
used for multiple purposes: scientific research involving college students,
improvement of astronomy classes, training of local school teachers in
astronomy, and outreach to the local community. The project will serve the
national interest by making a significant impact on the education of students in
the region and beyond and creating an exceptionally well prepared generation of
scientists and leaders. The primary service area of the university is extremely
diverse and made up of a large percentage of economically disadvantaged
communities with diverse demographics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program will be led by Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce astronomy faculty and
will involve undergraduate and masters-level students from the university, as
well as students from community colleges participating in summer programs. The
university researchers will also collaborate with astronomers both nationally
and internationally. The large and varied observational research program will
emphasize bright, time-variable astronomical objects such as rotating asteroids,
cataclysmic variable stars and pulsating white dwarf stars. The team will also
help characterize newly-discovered exoplanets by making extended follow-up
observations of exoplanet candidates from satellite missions.