* 1726643
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electroencephalography System for Research and Training On Neurophysiology of Language, Cognitive Neuroscience and Neural Plasticity.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Judith Kroll, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 199,743.00

This Major Instrumentation Grant award supports the acquisition of an integrated
Electroencephalography (EEG) system (ActiChamp 64 active-electrodes, Brain
Vision LLC) to establish the first EEG laboratory at the California State
Polytechnic University, Pomona (CPP), one of the few undergraduate Hispanic
Serving Institutions (HSI) in the US. EEG is a non-invasive neuroimaging
technique that allows the monitoring of human cerebral activity with millisecond
precision while cognitive processes unfold. The EEG laboratory at CPP will be
critical in developing cutting-edge research to study cognition and neural
plasticity. A particular research theme will focus on the neurophysiological
bases of bilingualism, asking how the cognitive and neural processes that are
engaged by the use of two or more languages affect learning and cognition more
generally. This award will enable a unique initiative to establish a cross-
disciplinary research program in electrophysiology and cognitive neuroscience
that will include a number of researchers in Psychology, Bioengineering and
Linguistics. The EEG laboratory will also be key in creating a unique research
and training consortium between CPP, Pomona College (a nearby research intensive
undergraduate institution), and the University of California, Riverside (UCR).
Overall, this award will significantly enhance research capacity at CPP, and by
doing so, will promote research-training opportunities for CPP's undergraduate
students who are predominantly members of underrepresented minorities. The
research to be conducted holds the promise to overturn many of the previously
held stereotypes about bilingualism, with implications for dual language
education and for the potential of bilingualism to protect aging
brains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of the planned research
will investigate the neurophysiological, cognitive and social underpinnings of
second language (L2) learning and bilingualism. In the last 30 years, advances
in neuroscience have changed understanding of the relationship between language,
cognition, and the brain. EEG provides information about what neural activity
occurs in response to specific language and cognitive processes with exceptional
temporal precision. Because language processing is extremely fast, the most
transformative application of EEG has been to capture and distinguish among
language and cognitive processes that would have otherwise not been measurable
simply by tracking behavior. More specifically, the team will develop research
on the cognitive and neural underpinnings of new L2 language learning and
consolidation, while analyzing the EEG signal in both time (ERPs) and frequency
(TF) domains. Questions related to changes in neural plasticity, network
reorganization, and functional connectivity as a function of L2 learning and
bilingualism will be investigated looking at the earliest changes in EEG network
connectivity, and EEG resting state networks. The goal will be to better
understand the overall cognitive and neural implications of bilingualism and L2
learning across the life-span from younger to older adulthood. Finally, the team
will exploit a unique feature of bilingualism by investigating the cognitive and
neural underpinnings of code-switching between two languages, the practice of
mixing two languages that is common in bilingual communities and that holds the
potential to reveal new insights into the way that multiple languages are
represented in the brain.