* 1726888
* Acquisition of a multi-user laser scanning confocal microscope to enhance interdisciplinary research, curriculum development, and minority students' interest in STEM careers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sang-Chul Nam, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 398,112.00

An award is made to Texas A&amp;M International University (TAMIU) through the
NSF-Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program to acquire a new laser scanning
confocal microscope. A confocal microscope is an essential tool for studying
cell and gene function in animals, plants, and microorganisms, as well as in
material sciences. The confocal microscope also improves the quality and expands
the scope of the research, training and educational activities in many
scientific disciplines, including biology, chemistry, and engineering. The new
confocal microscope will be housed in the Lamar Bruni Vergara Science Center
within the Department of Biology and Chemistry and the School of Engineering in
the College of Arts and Sciences of TAMIU. The confocal microscope serves as the
core and multi-user microscope for all departments at TAMIU as well as
surrounding Laredo communities, including the Laredo Community College (LCC).
Investigators that use the microscope will train undergraduate and graduate
students to utilize this imaging technique in coursework as well as research
environments. On a broader level, the microscope support several programs that
train college students from underrepresented groups pursuing college degrees.
These programs include; 1) the university's continued growth as a research-
oriented institution, 2) the range of available cutting-edge methodologies that
would improve scientific results and competitiveness for federal research
funding, 3) the development of hands-on research experiences for students, and
4) TAMIU's visibility in the community, as a leading academic institution of the
Rio Grande Valley. These needs are fundamental for student and faculty
recruitment and retention, professional growth, and the development of
technologically oriented graduates to foster the socio-economic development in
South Texas. This equipment will significantly enhance research productivity and
educational opportunities at TAMIU. It will also strengthen ongoing services to
communities and collaborations in the region. Thus, the new confocal microscope
will become an essential tool for current and future scientists as well as
engineers in all of Laredo communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
instrumentation primarily serves users from the Department of Biology and
Chemistry and the School of Engineering at TAMIU for individual research,
research training programs, and teaching. The four major research projects that
use the confocal microscope are multidisciplinary including investigation of the
roles of microtubules in Drosophila eye development; study of host-pathogen
interactions in Mycoplasma pneumoniae pathogenesis and their potential for drug
discovery; determination of the role of a novel gene cia7 in Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii; and non-destructive confocal imaging for surface analysis of
materials. Research projects benefit from increased resolution, enhanced
scanning speeds and the ability to conduct live cell-imaging experiments. The
new confocal microscope meets both the current and future needs for research and
education across multiple disciplines at TAMIU and Laredo communities.