* 1726252
* Collaborative Research: Mathematics of Doing, Understanding, Learning and Educating for Secondary Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Casey, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 264,941.00

Preparing students to make contributions in the fields of science, statistics,
mathematics, and technology is critical for our country to remain a world
leader. To accomplish this, it is important for our middle and high school
mathematics teachers to be well prepared for teaching mathematics. The
Mathematics of Doing, Understanding, Learning and Educating for Secondary
Schools (MODULE(S2)) project will create course materials that will be used to
develop preservice teachers' mathematical knowledge as it relates specifically
to the work of teaching geometry, statistics, algebra, and modeling. These
modules will be used in university mathematics courses and piloted with faculty
at universities and colleges of all types across the United States. The project
will promote effective instruction by offering professional development
activities for faculty using the modules during the summers and the school year.
Additionally, the project will investigate the impact of instruction with the
modules on preservice teachers' knowledge and inform nationwide efforts in
teacher education. This five year project will build on efforts by the
Mathematics Teacher Education Partnership (MTE-P) to create a gold standard for
the preparation of secondary mathematics teachers across its 90 member
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence has mounted in recent decades that
to implement sound mathematics instruction, teachers must possess understandings
of content that are specifically applied in the work of teaching (mathematical
knowledge for teaching - MKT). To develop MKT, preservice teachers need
opportunities to use mathematical knowledge to recognize, respond to, and
understand mathematical issues that arise in the context of teaching. Findings
from small pilots with initial geometry and statistics modules developed by the
project indicate an increase in preservice secondary teachers' MKT. MODULE(S2)
will expand these materials and examine the conditions of instruction that
impact preservice teachers' MKT, development of MKT, and expectancy and value in
using MKT as a resource for teaching. The project will use mixed methods to
provide empirically-based accounts of how factors of quality of instruction and
of instructional resources impact preservice teachers' MKT. In addition, results
will be used multiple times per year to improve the MODULE(S2) materials through
improvement cycles carried out as a part of the Networked Improvement Community
design. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is providing co-funding for
this project in recognition of its alignment with the broader teacher
preparation goals of the Noyce effort.