* 1726441
* MRI:  Acquisition of an ESI-TOF Mass Spectrometer by Trinity University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Adam Urbach, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 274,770.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Adam Urbach from
Trinity University and colleagues Laura Hunsicker-Wang, Corina Maeder and
Christina Cooley have acquired an electrospray ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometer (ESI-TOF-MS.) In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and study small quantities of chemical
species within complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components flow
into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized into ions and the ions' masses
are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows the structure of molecules
in a complex mixture to be determined. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure both at the University and in the region. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students in research and research training
using this modern analytical technique. It also provides training opportunities
to many undergraduate students through a variety of programs that involve the
chemistry, biology, physics, and engineering departments at Trinity, and
colleagues at 2-year and smaller 4-year institutions in the San Antonio area,
including Northwest Vista College, Our Lady of the Lake University, Palo Alto
College, San Antonio College, Schreiner University, St. Mary's University, St.
Phillips College, and University of the Incarnate Word.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mass spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. The instrument
may impact research on the development of methodologies for generating minimal
protein affinity tags by means of protein semi-synthesis, on selective enzymatic
digestion and on the development of a biosensing strategies through the
synthesis of fluorogenic polymers from protein scaffolds. The mass spectrometer
benefits investigations of the reduction potential in Rieske proteins using
structural and electrochemical analysis and chemical modification of site-
specific mutants. Finally, the EIS-TOF-MS is used to characterize the role of
the Dib1 protein in pre-messenger RNA splicing using a combination of
structural, biochemical, and single-molecule techniques.