* 1726527
* MRI: Acquisition of an electrospray ionization triple quadrupole mass spectrometer with ion mobility spectrometry for improved plant lipidomics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ruth Welti, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 496,823.00

An award is made to Kansas State University to acquire a Sciex 6500+
electrospray ionization triple quadrupole mass spectrometer with a linear ion
trap, SelexION ion mobility spectrometry, a binary pump, and an autosampler for
sample introduction, to be used in analysis of lipids from plants. The
instrument is to be housed at the Kansas Lipidomics Research Center, an
established analytical laboratory performing mass spectrometry-based lipid
analysis at Kansas State University. The mass spectrometer acquisition will
directly impact and advance the training of postdoctoral trainees, graduate
students, and undergraduates. Early-career faculty and faculty at primarily
undergraduate institutions will benefit from access to state-of-the-art lipid
analysis. Undergraduates learning and using mass spectrometry will include
students at Kansas State University, including participants in the McNair and
other undergraduate scholars? programs, and from historically black Fayetteville
State University. Training will include an annual workshop on mass spectrometry-
based lipid analysis (lipidomics) for faculty and trainees and a research club
focused on analysis and interpretation of lipidomics data on crop species.
Lipidomics has not reached its ultimate potential as an analytical tool, because
the methods, materials, and computational resources to effectively carry out
lipid profiling, particularly for plant lipids, are not conveniently available.
Thus, Kansas Lipidomics Research Center personnel will aid scientists who wish
to implement lipidomics analyses at their institutions by providing
consultation, protocols for sample preparation, plug-and-play mass spectral
methods, internal standards, and data processing systems, resulting in data
suitable for upload to and analysis at a publicly available database. Knowledge
obtained through use of the acquired mass spectrometer will be applied to
improve food, industry, and energy applications in major crops including
sorghum, camelina, and wheat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired Sciex 6500+ mass
spectrometer with accessories will provide improved definition of lipid
structure while maintaining high sample throughput. The ion mobility
spectrometry accessory will improve ability to specify lipid structural features
without slowing the analytical work flow, compared to current technologies. The
improved lipid structural specificity will provide scientists with the ability
to unambiguously assign specific lipids to metabolic maps, connecting
quantitative and structural information on plant lipids directly with genes and
enzymes, thus transforming our understanding of lipid metabolic pathways in
model and crop plants. The mass spectrometer acquisition will deliver critical
capabilities for the projects of researchers from fifteen laboratories.
Additionally, the mass spectrometer will be made available to new users as well
as past and current Kansas Lipidomics Research Center analytical users. Projects
will use the high structural definition provided by the Sciex 6500+ with ion
mobility spectrometry to link the lipidome accurately with plant genomes and
phenomes, while investigating the roles of lipids and the functions of lipid
metabolizing and signaling gene products in plants. Lipids will be analyzed in
genome wide association studies, and other large-scale studies of genetically
variant plant populations, identifying candidate genes putatively functioning in
lipid metabolism and signaling during plant stress responses. Other projects
will biochemically and functionally characterize lipid metabolic events that
occur during plant responses to stress and during growth and development. The
new instrument also will advance the work of scientists modifying plant seed oil
composition for increased yield and quality. Thus, the acquired mass
spectrometer will facilitate food, industrial, and energy crop improvement.