* 1726173
* MRI:   Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Console Upgrade for Chemical and Materials Science Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Yan Zhao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 286,457.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) pPograms. Professor Aaron Sadow from
Iowa State University and colleagues Yan Zhao, Levi Stanley, Martin Thuo and
Sarah Cady have acquired an upgrade for a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer by equipping it with a new console and a liquid-nitrogen,
cooled cryoprobe as well as a flow NMR system to monitor kinetics. This
spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as the
study of biologically relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists to study the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to understand the specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the changes of interactions
between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art
NMR spectrometers is important to chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. The results from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, forensics and biochemistry.
This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research performed by
undergraduate students via independent student research and traditional academic
coursework as well as researchers and graduate students and high school students
who participate in outreach activities. The NMR center also offers data
collection and analysis for nearby industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NMR
spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. It especially
benefits the development of synthetic materials to produce bacterial biofilms
and studies of catalytic reaction pathways. The spectrometer is also used in
developing catalysts for new reactions that couple carbon-hydrogen and carbon-
halogen bond activation with carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bond formation
and for engineering soft materials, one bond at a time.