* 1726734
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph-Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (IC-ICP-MS) for Research and Undergraduate Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Alison Keimowitz, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 196,799.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs. Professor
Alison Keimowitz from Vassar College and colleagues are acquiring an ion
chromatograph, inductively couple plasma mass spectrometer (IC-ICP-MS.) In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex
matrices. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer
where they are ionized and the ion masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a
complex mixture. The ionization using the inductively coupled plasma allows
detection of metal ions and several non-metals present in very small
concentrations. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the
university and regional area since this technology is accessible to students,
faculty and researchers in the Hudson Valley region of New York State including
Marist College, the State University of New York New Paltz, the Cary Institute,
and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mass spectrometer enhances research and
education at all levels. It aids researchers in exploring the mechanisms of
arsenic transformation as well as release, fate and transport of arsenic in
local waterways. The mass spectrometer also helps determine the depositional
history and provenance of mercury and lead in the Catskill mountains. The
instrument is used to find metal tracers in fish otoliths so as to determine
their spawning sites. In addition, the IC-ICP-MS is used to establish the
relationship of micronutrients in Catskill soils.