* 1726970
* MRI: Acquisition of Vibrating Sample Magnetometer for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Wilhelmus Geerts, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,330.00

This Major Research Instrumentation grant provides funding for the acquisition
of a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) used for the characterization of
magnetic materials. A VSM is used to determine the magnetic hysteresis curve,
i.e. the relation between the magnetic field and the magnetic moment. The
hysteresis curve provides the magnetic response of the material under an applied
field and is often referred to as the magnetic fingerprint. The VSM allows the
measurements of the magnetic moment both parallel and perpendicular to the
applied magnetic field. This unique instrumental feature is crucial to the
understanding of magnetic properties as magnetic moment and field are vector
quantities that have in addition to a magnitude also a direction. The instrument
is used to study thin film and powder materials that are currently being
investigated at Texas State University. The VSM acquisition enhances the
research in at least 8 different academic groups across 5 different programs.
Research projects impacted by the new VSM include studies of (1) new permanent
magnetic materials to be applied in wind turbines and generators, (2) two-
dimensional (2D) materials for electrochemical energy storage, (3) nanocomposite
materials with superior mechanical properties, and (4) novel metal oxide thin
films for applications in sensors, actuators, and new non-volatile memory
devices. The VSM instrument will enhance education and research within Texas
State which is a Minority-serving Institution with a significant population of
1st generation students and students from underrepresented groups. The VSM
further enable development of a meaningful collaboration with a regional start-
up company, Urban Mining &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Texas State University proposes
to acquire a high field vector vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) for the
characterization of magnetic materials including powders, thin films and bulk
magnetic materials. This vector VSM allows the study of the magnetization and
magnetic anisotropy over a wide temperature, field magnitude, and field
direction range. The fast temperature and field control and the simplicity and
robustness of tool enables the use of the new VSM as a work-horse magnetic
characterization tool and effectively implement it in Texas State University
undergraduate and graduate curriculum. The VSM acquisition enhances the research
in at least 8 different academic groups across 5 different programs. Proposed
research includes studies of the magnetic properties of: defect clusters in RRAM
transition metal oxides, low dimensional systems, specifically hydroxides and
oxyhydroxides that are being studied for applications in batteries, hard
magnetic materials including NdFeB permanent magnets, novel spintronic devices
and the role of oxygen vacancies, thin ferromagnetic films grown by MBE, RF
sputtered BFO films for application in novel sensors and applications, and
printed magnetic thin films for use in meta-materials.