* 1726809
* Collaborative Research: Retaining and Engaging Computer Science majors By Solving and Visualizing Algorithmic Problems on Real-world Data Sets
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Kalpathi Subramanian, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 551,216.00

The first two years of undergraduate Computer Science education are the most
critical for building students? foundational knowledge and sustaining their
interest in computer science. Both knowledge and interest help students not only
develop good skills in computer science, but also increase their resolve to stay
in the computer science major. This project will try to increase student
knowledge and interest by adding new functionality to a software program called
BRIDGES. BRIDGES helps instructors create engaging assignments for sophomore-
level courses on data structures and algorithms. To help them learn about data
structures, BRIDGES enables students to easily populate their own data
structures with large, dynamic data sets from real-world information systems,
such as popular social networks and scientific sources. Bridges also allows
students to interact with visualizations of their own data structures.
Preliminary results have shown that, in comparison to their peers whose data
structures courses did not use BRIDGES, students in BRIDGES-enabled courses have
greater knowledge gains and better progression through the major. This project
will enhance BRIDGES by adding code analysis functions and new data sources that
are relevant to student interests. These enhancements aim to support deeper
coverage of data structures topics, which may further increase student
engagement and learning. To study the impact of BRIDGES more thoroughly, BRIDGES
will be adopted and studied at three other institutions. This expansion will
enable evaluation of the impact of BRIDGES on different student populations.
This project serves the national interest through its focus on increasing
retention of students and building a more diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to extend the
BRIDGES curriculum to provide engaging, relevant assignments and strengthen
basic programming skills such as array addressing to reduce the number of
withdrawals in the first weeks of data structure courses. A second goal is to
follow best practices for engaging underrepresented students in computing.
Computational complexity will be incorporated through system support in BRIDGES
for performance reporting and real world algorithmic problems at different
scales to afford experience with orders of growth. The project will also extend
beyond the data structures course and into typical CS1/CS2 courses. BRIDGES will
be adopted at three partnering institutions, including non-PhD granting
institution and a liberal arts college, and will directly reach over 1000
students each year. That diversity will support studying the impact of BRIDGES
on student engagement and learning across populations of students. In addition,
students from the STARS Computing Corps, a national alliance for broadening
participation in computing, will incorporate BRIDGES materials within their
outreach programs that introduce computing concepts to K-12 students to reach an
even more diverse population of students.