* 1726165
* Using Micromechanical Experiments to Investigate the Rheology of Geologic Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Katharine Flores, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 447,438.00

The physical and chemical properties of geologic materials control the
development of Earth's surface and interior. Rheology is one particular branch
of the study of material properties, which characterizes materials' ability to
flow or deform viscously. The rheology of geologic materials is mainly
responsible for controlling mantle convection, plate tectonics, and the
formation of mountains. As such, rheology is directly related to numerous
natural hazards such as earthquakes, volcanoes, and tsunami, as well as the
production of natural resources. In this project, the investigators are using
tools from materials science to understand the rheology of minerals that make up
the bulk of Earth's crust and upper mantle. The data that result from this study
will allow geoscientists to better understand how plate tectonics works, both on
Earth and on other planetary bodies. The research project advances desired
societal outcomes by full participation of women in STEM, public outreach to
increase public scientific literacy and public engagement with STEM, development
of a competitive STEM workforce through undergraduate and graduate student
training, and laboratory improvement that enhances infrastructure for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate
the viscoplastic rheology of geological materials using micromechanical methods,
including nanoindentation and micropillar compression testing. In a
nanoindentation test, a sharp indenter is pushed into a specimen of interest
with a precisely controlled amount of force, typically to depths of tens to
hundreds of nanometers. A simultaneous record of the force and the displacement
is used to assess the elastic and plastic response of the test specimen. In a
micropillar compression test, a column of material with a diameter as small as a
few hundred nanometers is fabricated using a focused ion beam. Using a
nanoindentation instrument equipped with a cylindrical probe, uniaxial
compression tests are performed to determine the mechanical response of the
micropillar over a range of deformation conditions. In this project,
micromechanical deformation experiments will be performed at low to moderate
temperatures (T = -10 to 600 degrees C) on oriented single crystals of quartz,
plagioclase feldspar, orthopyroxene, and olivine. Data from these experiments
will be used to constrain the rheology of minerals under conditions where the
lithosphere is strong and low-temperature plasticity is predicted to be the
dominant deformation mechanism. The effects of rheological anisotropy will be
assessed using the same micromechanical methods. Experimental results will be
complemented by high resolution aberration-corrected scanning transmission
electron microscope imaging and electron energy loss spectroscopy to provide
insight into the atomic-scale structure and chemistry of crystalline defects
introduced by deformation.