* 1726315
* Accelerating Systemic Change Network: Promoting Knowledge Development to Support Institutional Change in Higher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Charles Henderson, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 905,141.00

Over the last several decades, researchers and curriculum developers in
undergraduate STEM education have made enormous strides in developing knowledge
about effective teaching and learning practices. However, this important work
has not yet translated into widespread change in teaching practices, because
knowing what needs to be done does not equal knowing how to move an institution
or department toward that goal. The goal of the Accelerating Systemic Change
Network (ASCN) is to develop new knowledge about how to move institutions to
adopt more effective teaching and learning practices. The ASCN will bring
together two important groups of people and ideas: 1) the established knowledge
about organizational change, discipline-based education research, and
institutional economics; and 2) the practical wisdom and the needs of higher
education instructors and networks of people who aim to improve undergraduate
education. These instructors and networks can use the resulting new knowledge
about institutional change to accelerate the impact of their own work at
improving undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASCN started a
year ago with a team of 24 university faculty and administrators from leading
STEM education institutions. These 24 individuals represent various disciplines
and have experience in discipline-based education research, education research,
the economics of higher education, and institutional transformation. This
organization can be thought of as a network of change networks because its
members are themselves members of other more specialized change networks. The
ASCN has six working groups covering the key issues of successful institutional
transformation: logic models, leadership issues, costs and benefits of change,
measurement and communication of progress, diversity and inclusion issues, and
alignment of incentives with systemic change. The network will be an open
network, so that anyone may join if they have the capability to contribute to
the effective functioning of the ASCN.