* 1726022
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanoindenter for Advanced Materials Research and Education at Lamar University
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Rafael Tadmor, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 395,805.00

Nanoindentation is a versatile material characterization technique that uses an
extremely hard tip to probe the surface of a sample by creating precise
indentations to measure surface mechanical properties. This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art
nanoindenter to build interdisciplinary collaborations and expand fundamental
research activities in the areas of nanomaterials, metamaterials,
microelectronics, high temperature coatings, tribology, antifouling surfaces,
polymers, and thin film coatings. It will provide enhanced infrastructure for
fundamental research at Lamar University and nearby institutions and will enable
faculty and students to collaborate in the development of emerging technology at
the university's recently established Center for Innovation, Commercialization
and Entrepreneurship (CICE). Undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in research and gain an understanding of small-scale
characterization and multi-scale behavior of advanced materials and the
instrumentation will be used in university outreach to the community, K-12 and
underrepresented minorities. The nanoindenter will be made broadly available to
the research community and information on the instrumentation will be
disseminated through an annual workshop, professional conferences, a website and
targeted outreach activities through CICE.

A nanoindenter measures mechanical/tribological properties such as hardness,
modulus, friction, adhesion, creep, and damping down to sub-nm length scale. It
can be used to characterize not only nanostructures, but also bulk materials--
by conducting numerous measurements rapidly and precisely. The instrumentation
will be equipped with a highly precise 2D transducer with shear force
capabilities, high temperature stage, high load transducer for tribology
applications, dynamic mechanical analysis and property in-situ surface mapping,
making it a versatile tool that enables a wide range of fundamental research
activities. The instrument will enable the study of the surface reliability,
failure mechanisms and contact mechanics of conventional and advanced materials,
as well as thin films, for applications such as advanced photovoltaic solar
panels, MEMS, antifouling surfaces and microelectronics. The nanoindenter will
also enable the design of new material systems ranging from micro to nano scale
with close control over their structures and physio-chemical properties and will
serve as a platform to study how to tune the mechanical properties of one- and
two-dimensional nanostructures through atomically deposited coatings.