* 1726109
* MRI:   Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer Console to Enhance Faculty and Undergraduate Research at Allegheny College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Ivelitza Garcia, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 236,990.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Timothy Chapp from
Allegheny College and colleagues Ivelitza Garcia and Mark Ams have acquired a
console upgrade for a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. In
general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the structural studies of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is important to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies have an
impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, forensics
and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research performed by undergraduate students via independent student research
and traditional academic coursework. Students work on these projects during
independent studies, summer research and senior projects, which prepares them to
enter competitive graduate programs and/or industries across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NMR spectrometer enhances research and
education at all levels. The instrument is used in studies of molecular torsion
and probes the role of fluorine on carbon-hydrogen-pi interactions. It is used
in determining Gibbs Free Energies, measuring the potential attractions between
substituents in organic molecules. The instrument also serves researchers
investigating sulfur chemistries and synthesizing phosphorus-stereogenic
frustrated Lewis pairs (FLPs) for catalytic asymmetric hydrogenation. The
spectrometer is used to characterize products of synthesis and the protonation
of binuclear nickel-phosphido complexes as molecular electrocatalysts for
hydrogen production.