* 1726621
* Development and Assessment of Full-scale Experiential Learning Opportunities in Structural Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Ronaldo Luna, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2022
* USD 599,821.00

Civil engineers are responsible for the design, construction, maintenance, and
renovation of our nation's infrastructure. A well-prepared workforce is crucial
for the continued operation of and improvement of this infrastructure. Civil
engineering programs across the country utilize small-scale hands-on projects
and/or large-scale conceptual projects in the learning process. However, small-
scale hands-on projects sometimes limit students' ability to accurately predict
the capacity and performance of a structure. Furthermore, civil engineering
students rarely have an opportunity to see a large-scale conceptual project
actually built or tested due to the size and the necessary testing capabilities.
An opportunity for students to experience the design and testing of full-scale
structural components is essential to their understanding of structural
engineering concepts. Thus, there is a significant need for students to
experience more real-world, hands-on learning opportunities with appropriate
scales that successfully illustrate structural behavior. This project will
provide undergraduate students with large-scale hands-on learning opportunities
that will increase their conceptual understanding before entering the workforce.
Students will have the opportunity to design, construct, and test a variety of
structural components in four courses at Saint Louis University and Rose-Hulman
Institute of Technology. Knowledge gained during this project and resources
developed will be disseminated widely to positively impact other civil
engineering programs. This project will lead to improving STEM learning and
learning environments, as well as aid in building the professional STEM
workforce for tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, there are three
primary goals for this project: (1) to develop and implement small-scale and
full-scale experiential learning modules in structural engineering courses at
Saint Louis University and Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, (2) to assess
student learning and impact on undergraduate education, and (3) to disseminate
findings and resources for wider impact at peer institutions across the country.
Experiential learning modules will be developed and implemented to allow
students to visualize the behavior and accurately predict capacities and failure
modes of structural components. Such modules will be disseminated widely for use
by other engineering programs. The impact of the experiential learning modules
on student learning will be assessed by comparing students' learning
performance, end-of-course survey responses, and standardized fundamentals of
engineering exam data. Educational materials will be created and the assessment
results disseminated to ensure sustainability and transferability to peer
institutions. The outcomes of the proposed project will result in a fully
developed set of experiential learning modules related to structural engineering
along with a full assessment of the project's effectiveness on student learning
and engagement.