* 1726274
* GOALI: Visualizing and Measuring Nanoscale Properties through Multi-spectral Atomic Force Microscopy for the Design and Discovery of Novel Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ronald Reifenberger, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 587,717.00

Great advances in scientific discovery and human progress have often followed
the development of new scientific tools that allow us to "see" well beyond our
everyday experience. The Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) is one such tool that has
revolutionized materials science by its ability to visualize a wide variety of
materials under different conditions with the resolution of an atom. In the
past, AFM has been used to render contrast at one frequency but these days it is
possible to observe multi-spectral contrast in images at many different
frequencies: in effect like an optical microscope being able to observe contrast
through different filters. This research project will allow Purdue University
researchers to work closely with an industrial partner, Oxford Instruments-
Asylum. The team will innovate methods to convert this multi-spectral contrast
to quantitative physical properties to help in the design and discovery of next-
generation materials for biomedical, energy storage, and consumer products. A
comprehensive theoretical and experimental research and outreach program is
planned to significantly advance the state-of-the art of multi-frequency AFM
through a collaboration between Purdue University, Oxford Instruments-Asylum, a
leader in the multi-frequency AFM market, and KTH, Sweden. The project also
involves development of new courses in polymer interactions and multi-frequency
AFM for students and enhancement of Virtual Environment for Dynamic AFM
capability for multi-frequency AFM operation for polymers which will greatly
benefit students and other researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important
multi-frequency Atomic Force Microscopy modes today can be conceptually
understood as nonlinear systems with slow and fast timescale dynamics. This
project will undertake analytical perturbative, continuation, and experimental
approaches to analyze these problems to yield a rich harvest of predictive
insight into microcantilever motions, stability, bifurcations, and chaos. On one
hand, this information will help operate multi-frequency AFM's in stable
regimes, while on the other hand, the insight will help guide the operating
conditions most appropriate to generate contrast on a specific material.
Additionally, sophisticated computational tools and experimental validation will
allow an unprecedented correlation between experimental observables in multi-
frequency Atomic Force Microscopy and the local properties of soft polymeric
materials used in electronics, biomedical devices, and consumer products. These
tools will be made available to hundreds of researchers worldwide through the
software suite Virtual Environment for Dynamic Atomic Force Microscopy on the
cyber-infrastructure of nano-HUB. The work is a comprehensive study of the
dynamical foundations of multi-frequency AFM, a next emerging frontier in the
evolution of Atomic Force Microscope towards a truly functional, quantitative
nanoscale imaging technology. The findings will be transferred to industry
through the close collaboration with Oxford Instruments (Asylum). While the
focus of the project is on multifrequency Atomic Force Microscopy, there is a
clear trend towards multiple frequency methods across many imaging technologies;
for example, in contrast enhanced ultrasound, electrical impedance tomography,
and microwave imaging to name a few. Thus the approaches developed in this work
could not only spill over to multi-frequency imaging methods in other biomedical
or materials instrumentation but could also create opportunities for multi-
spectral monitoring in micro- and nano-electromechanical systems.