* 1726713
* MRI: Acquisition of Tomographic Particle Image Velocimetry (Tomo PIV) System for Multi-Disciplinary Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Keefe Manning, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 289,785.00

An optical method of flow visualization, Tomographic Particle Image Velocimetry
(Tomo PIV), measures instantaneous three-dimensional (3D), three-component (3C)
flow velocity. This Major Research Instrumentation project supports ongoing
research and education in fluid dynamics at several Penn State campuses and
other nearby institutions. The project will enable new cross disciplinary
collaborations among 15 researchers across the Penn State campuses and with
fluid dynamics researchers at other institutions. The instrumentation provides
unprecedented access to the details of the physics of turbulent flows, enabling
fundamental research with a significant impact on the engineering, biology,
mathematics, physics, and medical communities. The instrumentation will be
incorporated into undergraduate courses and undergraduate and graduate student
researchers will gain an understanding of experimental design, setup, data
acquisition, and analysis using the high-tech Tomo PIV system. The researchers
will provide tools for K-12 education and outreach activities, thereby
increasing the public awareness in science and engineering and inspiring
students to pursue advanced degrees or careers in STEM majors. The investigators
will also engage students from underrepresented groups in their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Tomo PIV system enables fundamental research
in a variety of application areas. One study will examine the highly 3D nature
of coherent structures in transitioning and turbulent boundary layers over
oscillating geometries, with direct applications to flapping flight. The 3D Tomo
PIV system will enable researchers to measure the complex velocity fields so
that they can completely characterize the 3D behavior of vortex structures on
flapping wings. Another project will conduct fundamental research to enable the
development of cardiovascular devices with reduced risk of blood cell damage and
clot formation. The Tomo PIV will enable researchers to better understand 3D
cardiovascular structures and the influence of turbulence on cellular components
and the formation of clots on surfaces. By capturing instantaneous complex flow
structures, the instrumentation will enable the researchers to develop enhanced
computational models to validate cardiovascular device design through improved
understanding of the 3D velocity fields and shear stresses.