* 1726218
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computer Server for Research, Research Training and Education in the STEM Departments at Indiana University South Bend
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Zhong Guan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2018
* USD 47,042.00

This project, acquiring a single dedicated server as a turnkey solution for
enhancing access to data storage spaces, aims to promote student participation
in research projects in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) areas
that use large data sets. The departments of biology, informatics, physics, and
mathematics at IUSB will take advantage of the instrument in an institution
where professors with substantial teaching loads serve mainly undergraduate
students. Many of the research programs involve compute intensive tasks, for
example, analysis of genomes and Hi-C Data. Hi-C, an extension of 3C (chromosome
confirmation capture) is capable of identifying long range interactions in an
unbiased, genome-wide fashion. Data mining, bioinformatics, and genomics courses
already in place at the institution teach students from different disciplines
the skills needed for analysis of big data, which in turn require the use of a
server to carry on the compute intensive tasks. Hence, this server enhances the
computational structure of the campus and enables research studies across
multiple disciplines to gain a better understanding of decision making under
complex situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This
acquisition provides a useful technology capability for research and education
within the institution. The server will:&lt;br/&gt;- Be used to teach data
intensive courses like data mining, genomics, and bioinformatics;&lt;br/&gt;-
Significantly improve the opportunities for training students in handling big
data; and&lt;br/&gt;- Enable research projects involving undergraduates to be
presented in conferences and scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;The data intensive
courses will be taken by undergraduates from biology, biochemistry, computer
science, informatics, and graduate students from applied mathematics and
computer science programs. The instrument will be shared rather than duplicated,
encouraging field-crossing that might at least enable knowledge crossing or even
open new research avenues.