* 1726283
* MRI: Acquisition of Automotive Tire Force and Moment Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Craig Beal, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2020
* USD 154,840.00

Significant investments are being made in intelligent roadway infrastructure;
manufacturers are deploying increasingly advanced driver assistance systems; and
researchers are racing to develop reliable autonomous vehicles that can take
over the task of driving entirely. Despite these remarkable advances fundamental
research is needed to develop accurate models of overall vehicle dynamics and
potential feedback control for future autonomous and smart vehicle systems. To
function effectively, autonomous vehicles must accurately sense and respond to
changing roadway conditions. By supporting the acquisition of instrumented
wheels-- to provide real-time data generated by the tires interacting with the
road surface-- this Major Research Instrumentation award will contribute to U.S.
competitiveness in the quickly evolving international automotive sector. These
data will allow researchers at Bucknell University, Penn State University and
other institutions to conduct experiments, share data and collaborate with
others to develop algorithms to determine road conditions from sensors. The
improvement in fundamental understanding of the interaction of individual tires
operating in-situ with the road will enable continued advances in vehicle
control, autonomous vehicle operation, and intelligent roadway
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The instrumented wheels supported by this award
are designed to capture all six forces and moments that are generated by the
tire interacting with the road. A custom-manufactured adapter provides physical
connection between the wheel rim and load cells, which in turn transfers tire
forces and moments to the vehicle chassis. Wheel forces up to 24 kN and torques
up to 7.2 kNm, which represent tire behaviors beyond even the most extreme
skidding, can be measured with less than 0.1% error. The sensors will be
installed on a drive-by-wire research vehicle with computer-controlled
independent front steering and independent rear drive. The vehicle is
instrumented with a dual-antenna GPS and inertial measurement sensors that
provide measurements of the vehicle kinematics. By comparing wheel force and
moment data to steering torque inputs, model predictions, vehicle motion
measurements, and pavement measurements, the instrumented wheels enable advanced
actuation strategies and unique methods of identifying road surface friction
conditions. These data will enable designers to develop adaptive control systems
that allow autonomous vehicles to better sense road conditions and to optimize
the modeling and use of steering and braking inputs to improve vehicle safety,
performance, and efficiency.