* 1726162
* Collaborative Research: Improving Inorganic Chemistry Education Through a Community-Developed Student-Centered Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Joanne Stewart, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 582,775.00

Increasing undergraduate student interest in science and improving their
learning of science is a national priority. Both outcomes hinge on large-scale
changes in college science teaching, so that more instructors use active
learning strategies that engage and encourage students. This project focuses on
inorganic chemistry, a course that most chemistry majors take in their third
year. The project will use a well-established, nation-wide community of faculty,
developed with prior NSF support, to build a modular framework that promotes the
use of active learning strategies in inorganic chemistry courses. In addition,
new curricular materials based on the latest advances in inorganic chemistry
research will be developed and shared on the community website:
www.ionicviper.org. During this work, the investigators will study the type and
amount of support that instructors need to adopt active learning practices, as
well as the impact of those changes on student learning in inorganic chemistry.
This project has the potential to find specific strategies and general
principles for improving STEM faculty teaching, which could be applied to other
courses and disciplines. The impact of the improved curriculum and teaching
effectiveness also aims to increase the number of undergraduates who have the
tools and critical thinking skills needed to be successful
chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generated by this project will
provide insight into the challenges faculty face as they adopt active-learning
teaching strategies and the level of the support necessary to effect and sustain
change in teaching practices. This project will help identify how a professional
community of practice can initiate, enable, and sustain faculty change. Through
classroom observations, analysis of student work, surveys of students, and
interviews with faculty, the project will generate data on how changes in the
classroom affect student learning. It will contribute to the body of evidence
for promoting faculty change by evaluating how to encourage the adoption of
evidence-based classroom practices. The products of this project will include:
1) 60 new syllabi, with related course materials, for a foundation-level
inorganic chemistry course with content coverage drawn from core inorganic
chemistry topics, 2) new knowledge on the impact of communities of practice on
faculty change, and 3) improved student learning in inorganic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;