* 1726464
* Zip to Industry:  A First-Year Corporate-STEM Connection Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Donald Visco, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,838.00

The importance of the "Zip to Industry" project is that it provides an
opportunity for research on how job shadowing impacts student retention in STEM
during the first year of college. Many freshman students in engineering or STEM
majors have little understanding of what an engineer or STEM major does upon
graduation. The project will identify students who may have a weak connection to
STEM careers upon entering and provide them with job shadowing experiences
during their first year. These first-year students will be paid for this
exploration experience and can choose broadly or narrowly within STEM or
engineering positions. The students will shadow current University of Akron
students on co-operative education or internship placements. If successful, the
project will be replicated at other colleges and universities, which can help
increase the retention of students within STEM fields. Sustainability plans are
twofold: 1) should outcome goals on retention be reached through the project,
the institution will fund the project coordinator position to run the program
and 2) participating regional industry partners agree to be part of a consortium
to support funding of the first-year students to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to identify and recruit
2 cohorts of 50 STEM majors (totaling 100 students), explore their perceptions
and knowledge of STEM careers, as well as their motivation for STEM careers. The
students will have 10 job shadowing experiences during their first year. The
students will be trained in relevant professional development skills prior to
leaving for their job sites and will have the ability to reflect on their
experiences through focus group discussions and individual reflection. The
educational framework for the "Zip to Industry" project is Social Cognitive
Career Theory, which proposes that a person's goals and efforts towards
realizing those goals, are impacted by their interest, confidence, outcome
expectations and prior learning experiences related to the goal. Job shadowing
is conceived as a powerful learning experience that will impact knowledge and
attitudes important for persistence toward a career goal. The University of
Akron, which has the 5th oldest co-operative education program in the US, placed
more than 1000 students in co-operative education/internship programs this past
year. With this extensive employer network, the mechanism exists at UA to
examine the impact of a job shadowing program on first-year STEM students and
improve retention in STEM fields.