* 1726099
* MRI: Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for High-Precision Geochronology and Isotope Geology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* John Higgins, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/29/2020
* USD 522,502.00

Determining the rates of geologic processes over thousand to billion year time
scales requires the determination of isotopic ratios with very high precision on
a wide range of Earth materials. Precise and accurate measurements of
radioactive and radiogenic isotopes provides the basis for geochronology, which
in addition to other types of isotopic data, can be used to unravel ties between
causation versus coincidence in events such as mass extinctions, climate change,
the pace of biotic evolution, and provide a more detailed understanding of the
physics of mass and heat transfer that drive plate tectonics and volcanic
eruptions. This MRI grant provides funds to purchase a thermal ionization mass
spectrometer (TIMS) in the Department of Geosciences at Princeton University,
which focuses on measuring high-precision isotope ratios that are essential for
determining the age of Earth materials and understanding the rates of geologic
processes. This new instrument will supplement an existing TIMS managed by PI
Schoene. The enhanced capacity provided by the new TIMS will permit the lab to
broaden its research focus and secure ties between the research programs of
Schoene and co-PI Higgins, as well as other faculty in the department and within
a broad geoscience community. The new TIMS will serve to 1) increase the
capacity of a world-class U-Pb lab to host and train internal and external users
from a broad spectrum of universities, including liberal arts colleges, 2)
devote more time to exploring and exploiting new isotopic systems, 3) further
increase the precision and accuracy of these techniques to benefit the
geochronologic and isotope geology communities, 4) expand the devotion of
Schoene and Higgins towards integrating research and class work, and 5) build on
existing programs led by Higgins to engage and educate local urban communities
in the dangers of, and science behind, environmental and anthropogenic Pb
contamination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI grant provides funds to purchase a
new TIMS in the Department of Geosciences at Princeton University to be managed
by PI Schoene and co-PI Higgins, which will supplement an existing TIMS
currently managed by Schoene. The new instrument will be housed in an existing
space adjacent to state-of-the-art geochemistry facilities, be supported by
existing clean labs for sample preparation, and also supplement the research
capabilities of existing ICPMS facilities led by Higgins. The existing TIMS and
ICPMS facilities have developed a track record of serving the demand for
geochronologic and isotopic data within a broad geoscience community; they also
devote substantial time to establishing techniques and workflows that both
ensure the precision and accuracy of routine methods and enable new science. The
focus of the current TIMS is on the numerous applications of U-Pb geochronology;
the new instrument will expand those capabilities and also devote time to
measuring stable and radiogenic Sr and Ca isotopes. The new instrument will also
permit the PIs to host more external users, thus broadening the impact of the
laboratories and providing much-needed high-precision geochronologic and
isotopic data to a wide-range of users from Universities that may not have the
infrastructure to host similar laboratories. Targeted Geoscience research
projects range from understanding the evolution of continents and volcanic
systems, calibrating rates of climate change in the deep past through
geochronology of stratigraphic sections, extending the reach of ice-core records
for tracking atmospheric composition beyond a million years ago, measuring the
flux of flood basalt eruptions and understanding their environmental impact, and
increasing the precision and accuracy of geochronology of Lunar samples.