* 1726308
* MRI: Acquisition of an NMR console, multinuclear probe, and autosampler to advance research and undergraduate research training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Ernest Nolen, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 345,783.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Ernest Nolen from
Colgate University and colleagues Richard Geier (III) and Anthony Chianese have
acquired a console upgrade for a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometer. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the structural study of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the interactions between molecules in solution or
in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is important to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies have an impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials
chemistry, forensics and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research performed by undergraduate students via independent
student research and traditional academic coursework. Students work on these
projects during independent studies, summer research, and senior projects -
activities which prepare them to enter competitive graduate programs and/or
industries across the country. In addition, there is participation of high
school students attending Camp Fiver, a residential summer camp that hosts a
group of at-risk students in New York City and rural upstate New
York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NMR spectrometer enhances research and education
at all levels. It impacts research focused on the characterization of synthetic
gylcopeptide mimics and photo-caged adenosine receptor ligands. The spectrometer
is also used in developing homogeneous transition-metal catalysts and
elucidating the structure and dynamics of reactive intermediates. Finally, it
benefits the characterization of synthesized porphyrinoids having altered core
structures.