* 1726397
* MRI: Acquisition of the First 800 MHz NMR Spectrometer with a Cryogenically Cooled Probe in the State of Oklahoma for Interdisciplinary Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Smita Mohanty, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,288,600.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, an award has
been made to Oklahoma State University for the acquisition of a 800 MHz NMR
instrument with a cryoprobe. This instrument will be housed in the Oklahoma
Statewide Shared NMR Facility to ensure that it is accessible to researchers in
Oklahoma and the surrounding region. The new spectrometer will support the
training of the next generation of researchers in modern state-of-the-art NMR
techniques. Oklahoma State University is aggressively pursing hands-on
undergraduate research training through courses, and independent research. In
addition, programs in the Chemistry Department such as "Research Experience for
Undergraduate Students (REU)" supported by National Science Foundation allows
recruitment of undergraduate students across the country. Minority undergraduate
students are recruited for research through various undergraduate programs such
as the Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (OK-LSAMP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful scientific techniques that is available to scientist for the
elucidation of the structure of important molecules. Projects supported by this
new instrument span the range from Chemical Biology to protein structure and
function, protein dynamics, RNA/DNA structure, complex carbohydrate structure,
design of novel polymer, and small complex molecules characterization during the
process of drug design. The new NMR is an essential resource for researchers in
Chemical Biology, Structural Biology, Biochemistry, Molecular Biology,
Microbiology, and Polymer Science across Oklahoma and the surrounding region.
The results of these research and teaching efforts will be disseminated through
active participation of students and faculty at scientific conferences, symposia
and workshops, peer-reviewed publications and the deposition of atomic
coordinates of biomolecules to the Protein Data Bank (PDB).