* 1726634
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3D bioprinting system to generate composite biomaterials for regenerative medicine
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Iwona Jasiuk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2019
* USD 253,522.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant awarded to the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign provides funding for the acquisition of a
3D-bioprinting instrument. Efforts at the University of Illinois are seeking to
develop the next generation of tissue engineering solutions for critical
healthcare needs such as musculoskeletal regeneration, models of cancer,
cardiovascular repair, and controlling stem cell behavior. The EnvisionTEC
3D-Bioplotter will provide critical capabilities to fabricate large,
geometrically complex, and cell-laden tissue biomaterials that mimic features of
native tissues. This bioplotter will be operated as a shared-use bioprinting
facility housed within the Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology (IGB) at
the University of Illinois and will provide a critical resource to a broad user-
base with diverse backgrounds to meet the needs of the tissue engineering
community on our campus. The bioplotter will enhance the interdisciplinary
training environment at the University of Illinois for trainees to gain the
skills and confidence to address emergent challenges at the intersection of the
biological, physical, and quantitative sciences. The bioplotter will also be
integrated into innovative outreach and education programs at the IGB designed
to expose students and the public to the transformative research programs within
our institute.

Advances in tissue engineering rely on successful integration of biomaterials,
cells, and biologics such as growth factors and small molecules to address
significant health care challenges. The EnvisionTEC 3D-Bioplotter acquired
through this MRI program will be housed within the Carl R. Woese Institute for
Genomic Biology (IGB) at the University of Illinois. This bioplotter system will
enable transformative developing research efforts aimed at developing novel
technologies and fundamental insight regarding biological phenomena required to
promote the regeneration of human tissues and organs. The 3D-Bioplotter system
will facilitate critical areas of biomaterial research across the University of
Illinois community due to its capacity to generate large, geometrically complex,
multiphase, and cell-laden tissue constructs. The bioplotter will be used to
print diverse libraries of cell-infused hydrogel, ceramic, and polymeric
bioinks, as well as composites thereof at the resolution required to mimic
features of native tissue and organs in the body. This system provides critical
operational capabilities for a biomaterials fabrication user-facility that
serves the University of Illinois research community, specifically sterile
operation, flexibility for bioink customization, the capacity for clinical-scale
print volumes, and integrated feedback control essential for reproducibility.
The bioplotter will be localized within the convergence-based research ecosystem
at the IGB, which integrates disciplines of biology with technologies and
approaches from engineering, computer science, physics, chemistry, mathematics,
and the social sciences. The bioplotter will be managed as an open access
facility to serve the needs of researchers from multiple departments and
colleges across our campus, making it a central hub for tissue engineering
efforts at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.