* 1726023
* MRI:  Acquisition of Cutting-Edge GPU and Phi Nodes for the Interdisciplinary UMBC High Performance Computing Facility
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Matthias Gobbert, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2020
* USD 552,353.00

This project will expand the interdisciplinary University of Maryland Baltimore
County (UMBC) High Performance Computing Facility (HPCF), the community-based,
interdisciplinary core facility for scientific computing and research on
parallel algorithms at UMBC. The expansion will support the research projects of
51 researchers from 13 academic departments and research centers across the
entire campus, including the areas of Computer Science, Information Systems,
Mathematics, Statistics, Physics, Biology, Chemistry, Marine Biotechnology,
Environmental Systems, Engineering (Computer, Electrical, Mechanical, Chemical,
and Environmental), and research centers focused on environmental research,
earth sciences, and imaging research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
expanded computational facility will comprise a total of 84 compute nodes
including cutting-edge NVIDIA GPU accelerators and Intel Xeon Phi KNL
processors. The availability of the new resource will give researchers at UMBC
the opportunity to increase scientific discovery significantly through the
dramatic speedup in their simulation and modeling activities from state-of-the-
art CPUs and cutting-edge GPUs and Phi KNL processors. An existing cluster at
HPCF has already attracted a broad user base through a winning combination of
sufficient hardware, tight integration of student education, freely available
user support, and an appropriate usage policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover,
the new expanded resources of HPCF will enabled UMBC to develop a powerful
synergy between research and education at all levels. Through the project's
consulting approach to user support, application researchers and their post-
docs, graduate students, and undergraduate students will be exposed to the power
of state-of-the-art computing software and hardware, a crucial experience for
the future workforce. Synergistic integration of education and research is
concretely exemplified by current NSF-funded initiatives at UMBC, including an
REU Site on high performance computing, a proposed REU Site in quantitative
biology, proposed CyberTraining initiatives, and a growing number of courses
that use HPCF. HPCF also actively partners with other efforts on campus, such as
the UMBC Meyerhoff Scholarship and the NIH-funded MARC programs, two nationally
recognized programs that attract substantial numbers of students from
underrepresented groups into the sciences.