* 1726435
* MRI: Acquisition of a 4D Microtomography Apparatus for Nano/microstructured Materials and in-situ Nano/Micromechanics Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Hongbing Lu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2020
* USD 618,479.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will support the acquisition of a
4-dimensional (4D) micro-computed tomography system with capability for fast
time-resolved observation of three-dimensional (3D) internal structures at
different length scales. While extensive equipment exists for morphology
characterization at nano- and microscales, the University of Texas at Dallas
lacks instrumentation to observe in-situ internal 3D microstructures,
particularly under deformation. The proposed system will advance the
institution's research capabilities by providing non-destructive time-resolved
3D structures, critical for development of new materials, and understanding the
mechanical behavior under service conditions for critical load-bearing
applications. The acquisition of the 4D micro-tomography system will enable a
wide range of new research activities with impacts from aerospace to biomedical
applications, including low-density high strength composites, bioinspired
robots, and 3D printed shape memory polymers. This equipment will enhance the
training of graduate and undergraduate students, including a substantial number
of underrepresented minority and women students, and will support student
science projects at nearby high schools. The proposed system will advance
university research capabilities, leading to enhanced economic development in
the fast growing Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan area and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The 4D computed micro-tomography system can be used on a range of
materials from soft polymers, composites, metallic foams, to ceramics. The large
scanning area allows a loading frame to apply high loads to a sample during in-
situ scanning. A fast computer allows control of the system, positioning of a
sample, and 3D volumetric image reconstruction from radiographs. The system
provides unprecedented capability to observe internal structures with
exceptionally high resolution without serial sectioning--allowing in-situ micro-
tomography while a sample is deformed. The system will enable fundamental
research ranging from scalable nanomanufacturing processes for low-density and
high strength composites using carbon nanotube sheets, to lighter, stronger
bioinspired robots, and 3D printed polymer composites embedded with micro or
nanoparticles to remotely trigger local heating and shape memory effects.