* 1726633
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution GC-MS-MS with Fully Automated Sample Preparation to Advance Chemical Synthesis, Metabolomics, and Geochemical Research at IU Bloomington
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Silas Cook, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 437,514.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Jonathan Karty
from Indiana University and colleagues Simon Brassell, Silas Cook, James
McKinlay and Jason Tennessen are acquiring a high resolution gas-chromatograph
tandem mass spectrometer with tandem capabilities (HRes GC-MS-MS.) In general,
mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex matrices. In a
typical experiment, the components go into a mass spectrometer where they are
ionized and the ion masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows
detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture.
An instrument with a gas chromatograph provides additional structural
identification power by separating gaseous mixtures of compounds before they
reach the mass spectrometer. The tandem capabilities allow for additional
separation in a second stage. This acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the University. The instrument broadens participation by
involving diverse students in research and training using this modern analytical
technique. It also provides training opportunities to many undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students from chemical, biological, geological and
medicinal sciences as well as high school students through a variety of programs
such as the Indiana University Summer Scholars Institute for students at
minority serving institutions as well as the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mass spectrometer enhances research and
education at all levels. It enables research that elucidates of the role of
climate on human evolution by measuring paleoclimate markers from Olduvai Gorge
and explores the metabolic basis for cell proliferation and growth in
Drosophila. The instrumentation aids in carrying out 13-carbon experiments to
quantify metabolic pathway utilization in microbes as well as in distinguishing
intermediates generated during organic syntheses of natural products. The mass
spectrometer is also used in profiling and characterizing pheromones and
sustainable carbon-carbon bond forming catalysts.