* 1726254
* Collaborative Research: Solving Problems of Mathematics Accessibility with Process-Driven Math
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Yvette Pearson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2022
* USD 331,336.00

To meet the needs of the STEM workforce, as well as to continue to have an
educated citizenry, undergraduate mathematics instruction must be effective for
all segments of the population. This project will center on college algebra for
students who are blind or visually impaired (BVI) and those who have other print
disabilities. These populations have historically been underserved by college
mathematics pedagogies. Investigators at Auburn University at Montgomery (AUM)
have developed an innovative, evidence-based method of mathematics instruction
and assessment, called Process-Driven Math (PDM), which substantially reduces
barriers to participation for this population. The PDM method is based on an
interactive auditory/verbal exchange of language between the student and a human
intermediary who functions as both reader and scribe. For this project, AUM is
partnering with Rice University, Auburn University, and Bridge Multimedia to
investigate the benefits of PDM for teaching as well as assessing student
learning. The research and development activities will focus specifically on
college algebra courses, with related attention to algebra courses at schools
for the blind. Those activities will be conducted at four institutions of higher
education, including one two-year college, and three state schools for the
blind. The project will be conducted by a multi-disciplinary team with expertise
in mathematics, mathematics education, special education, education research,
and mathematics accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of
the project is to further develop, test, refine, and prepare Process-Driven Math
for scaling to improve mathematics learning for all students (students with and
without disabilities; STEM and non-STEM majors). The enormity of syntax in
algebraic expressions creates barriers (e.g., cognitive load) for many students
with disabilities who access their mathematics by listening to it. The PDM
method employs chunking, which reduces the cognitive load on working memory for
mathematics students who are BVI. Inherent in the method are bases in Universal
Design for Learning (providing various methods of engagement, representation,
action, and expression) and User-Centered Design (engaging users to gain
firsthand perspectives of their needs and desires in order to design and develop
tools that will optimally meet their needs). The research will address questions
related to students' mathematics self-efficacy, students' mathematical errors,
students' perceptions of mathematics education, and how college faculty tend to
approach teaching mathematics to students who are BVI. Using a mixed-methods
approach with self-efficacy assessments, learning assessments, focus groups, and
interviews, the study will consider variables such as: students' majors (STEM
versus non-STEM), students' disability status demographics (students with
disabilities [blind/visually impaired or other print disabilities] compared to
students without disabilities), instruction using PDM vs. Nemeth (or other
mathematical braille), and use of user-centered design.