* 1726244
* MRI:   Acquisition of an X-band Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectrometer to Enhance the Infrastructure for Research in Redox Processes in Chemistry and Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Robert Gennis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 274,274.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation(CRIF) Programs. Professor Alison Fout from
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) and colleagues Robert Gennis, Yi
Lu and Dean Olson have acquired an X-band electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectrometer. This instrument allows research in a variety of fields such as
those that provide insight on the behavior of biologically-relevant and
environmentally-important species. In general, an EPR spectrometer yields
detailed information on the geometric and electronic structures of molecular and
solid state materials. It may also be used to obtain information about the
lifetimes of short-lived, highly reactive species involved in valuable chemical
transformations as well as the initiation of pathological tumor growth. These
studies impact several areas, from the synthesis of inorganic and organic
molecules to the development of new solid state materials to compounds of
magnetic and biological and medical interest. The instrument serves to train the
next generation of student researchers both at UIUC and the nearby institution,
Eastern Illinois University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EPR
spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. It may impact
studies linking proton pumping to hydride transfer by studying the mechanism of
transhydrogenase, tuning redox potentials of metal centers in a single protein
and developing cobalt(I) catalysts featuring strong-field ligands for Carbon-X
bond formation. The instrumentation is also used in the studies of compounds
prepared by bio-inspired complexes for oxyanion reduction. Electron transfer in
the bc1 complex and investigations of the five catalytic sites of
ubisemiquinones are also under consideration. The spectrometer benefits
investigations of redox enzymes, advances chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and
explores oxidative stress in ROS-sensitive enzymes. In addition, the EPR is used
for studies tuning redox potentials of metal centers in a single protein and
characterizing intermediate states in P450 catalysis.