* 1726360
* Collaborative Research: Extending A Coherent Gateway to STEM Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* James Laverty, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2023
* USD 287,681.00

There is compelling evidence that introductory gateway courses are often
significant barriers to student success, persistence, and graduation in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). Drawing on work supported by
the Association of American Universities, this collaborative R&amp;D project is
designed to implement an innovative teaching and learning model, Three-
Dimensional (3D) Learning, and investigate the factors (e.g., supports and
challenges) affecting the adoption and implementation of instructional
innovation in introductory and upper level courses in STEM. The approach is
based on an adaptation of the National Research Council's document, A Framework
for K-12 Science Education, for postsecondary education. Rather than focusing on
developing faculty awareness and implementation of high impact practices as a
means to transform STEM courses, the 3D Learning framework focuses on engaging
faculty in identifying core ideas in the disciplines, including scientific
practice in the classroom, and incorporating crosscutting scientific concepts in
course materials with the goal of building faculty capacity and
departmental/institutional infrastructure to improve student learning. The
project concentrates on two major efforts: (1) the propagation of 3D Learning,
development and validation of assessment tools, and implementation of faculty
support structures across Michigan State University and its partner
institutions, Grand Valley State University, Florida International University,
and Kansas State University and (2) research using a variety of methods to
examine how instructional innovation is adopted and implemented across different
disciplines, department cultures, and institutional ecologies and their affect
on student outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on faculty as key
change agents in higher education and draws on the literature on institutional
change that emphasizes the importance of the human, social, and cultural capital
of individuals in establishing and sustaining institutional change and the
propagation of instructional innovation in the classroom. The quantitative and
qualitative mixed methods research project is designed to identify factors and
conditions that support or prevent faculty from broadly adopting and
implementing 3D Learning. By examining differential levels of adoption and
implementation of 3D Learning across disciplines and institutions, the study
will test assumptions found in the theoretical and empirical research literature
on faculty development and instructional change. The research team will use
student assessments, classroom observation, surveys, and interviews with
students to identify, track, and examine how these different levels of adoption
and implementation affect student outcomes, such as persistence, motivation, and
knowledge (e.g., core ideas in the disciplines, scientific practices, and
crosscutting concepts in the sciences).