* 1726260
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multidisciplinary Beowulf Cluster
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Jason VanHorn, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 259,731.00

This project will replace Calvin College's aging computational cluster with a
newer, more flexible cluster for multidisciplinary research. The new cluster is
designed to facilitate six research projects, as well as research training
activities at Calvin, including a nascent Data Science program. The resource
will also offer the flexibility to support research activities beyond the local
campus, specifically at Macalester, St. Olaf, and Wheaton Colleges. By enabling
new, as well as enhancing existing research and research training activities at
Calvin, the cluster is expected to improve the technological capabilities of the
United States cyber-workforce by equipping hundreds of students each year with
domain-specific high-performance computing skills in computer science, data
science, mathematics, statistics, and the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the cluster will enable research
in: a thread safe graphics library (TSGL), used to create real-time
visualizations of parallel algorithms; an agent-based economic model to evaluate
the effects of different policies during transitions from non-renewable to
renewable energy sources; new computational chemistry models used to explore the
photophysical properties of common coumarins; accuracies of various economic
models; 3D routing systems for first-responders and improved 3D sniper-line-of-
sight models used by homeland security personnel in emergency situations; and
enhancing Sivvu.org, a new web service for ERFA (Equilibrium Restricted Factor
Analysis), a popular computational chemistry technique. In addition, faculty and
student research projects at Calvin, Macalester, St Olaf, and Wheaton colleges
will also use the new cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore the cluster will
enable new degree programs in Data Science and Statistics at Calvin. Students in
these programs will use the new cluster to store and process large data sets.
Additionally, the cluster will enhance existing courses, such as CS 374, a
course in High Performance Computing (HPC) where students will use the cluster
to learn to program with MPI, OpenMP, CUDA, and similar HPC tools.