* 1726816
* Collaborative Research: Learning to Use Essential Tools and Resources for Data Science with a Cloud-Based Virtual Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ruizhu Huang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 388,376.00

Business, government, and science researchers are producing massive amounts of
complex data. The availability of these huge datasets fuels a need for both
data-driven analytics and a 21st-century workforce that can use data analytics
to answer questions and solve problems. This collaborative project will develop
a cloud-based virtual platform to train undergraduate students how to use
software tools essential to data science. The platform will make state-of-the-
art computing resources, including both powerful data analysis tools and
parallel hardware systems, more accessible to students and faculty, even if they
are at institutions without locally available high-power computing systems. The
project aims to help students develop critical workforce skills in data science.
The project will also provide professional development opportunities to help
faculty use data-analysis tools in their courses and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a cloud-
based infrastructure in the form of a virtual science platform with related
training modules. First, it will leverage an existing framework for building web
applications to provide broad access to open source, high performance computing
resources at the collaborating universities and through the NSF Extreme Science
and Engineering Discovery Environment. The cloud-based platform will support
both training of students and collaboration among students. Second, the project
will produce a data science curriculum targeted to undergraduate students. The
curriculum will also be suitable for graduate students, post-doctoral
researchers, and information technology professionals interested in data
science. The project will deliver a full set of interactive documents and video
tutorials on using and configuring the platform. The educational activities will
use graphical, interactive, simulation-based, and experiential learning
components to teach data science concepts and computing skills, accessed through
the cloud-based platform. Through the platform, students will have the
opportunity to learn how to use powerful data science resources, enabling their
potential to transform data-rich computer science and engineering problems into
practical solutions. Third, the project will deliver professional development
for faculty at multiple institutions, to help them learn how to use data science
in their classrooms and their own research. This project addresses national
interests by making state-of-the-art computing resources more accessible to
students, supporting their development of critical workforce skills.