* 1726862
* MRI: Development of Tomographic Atomic Force Microscopy for Nanoscale Volumetric Materials Property Mapping and Machining
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Bryan Huey, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2021
* USD 664,294.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has become
ubiquitous for nanometer scale research in science and engineering. The 50,000
AFMs worldwide focus on measurements of surface structures and properties while
minimizing unintended surface modifications. This instrument development project
takes a different approach and removes materials, layer-by-layer, to
sequentially reveal the underlying materials while mapping their properties. The
multiple images that result are assembled to achieve tomography akin to magnetic
resonance imaging or computerized tomography (CT) scans, but providing materials
properties in 3 dimensions at the nanoscale. The instrument development
culminates in a next generation microscope with precise location control, novel
imaging analysis software, and new insight into nanoscale mechanical milling as
well as sub-surface materials properties. More broadly, the project enhances the
University of Connecticut's microscopy user facility, and features in annual
outreach events with students and teachers. The concepts will further be
disseminated through a symposium on materials tomography at a scientific
conference in the US organized by the principal investigator and through
possible commercialization pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging advances in local patterning with robust AFM
tips, this instrument development project employs sequential property mapping
and fine surface milling to expose and image materials functionality as a
function of depth. The resulting nanoscale tomography, "CT-AFM," necessitates a
next generation microscope and custom z-axis interferometry to maintain
nanoscale position registry over hundreds of images. Thin films of
piezoelectrics, photovoltaics, intermetallics, and nanocomposites serve as model
systems during this instrument development, and to publish examples of the novel
insight provided by this new paradigm for AFM. The primary objective is to
achieve through-thickness, sub-10 nm resolution. The project also explores new
image analysis approaches and advances nanoscale mechanical milling.