* 1726802
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable-Temperature, Wide-Spectral-Range Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectrometer for Enhancing Research and Teaching in a Liberal Arts College Setting
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Frank Peiris, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2020
* USD 307,117.00

This instrument acquisition grant supports purchase of a state-of-the-art
Fourier transform infrared spectrometer at Kenyon College. The spectrometer uses
infrared waves to study a host of novel materials with potential applications in
energy and optoelectronic fields. The research work is performed by
undergraduate students in a liberal arts setting. The spectrometer strengthens
the research infrastructure at Kenyon College, complementing the existing
optical spectroscopic tools on campus. Together, these instruments provide an
optical materials characterization facility aimed at serving regional campuses
nearby. To enhance educational goals, the principal investigator incorporates
experimental activities into existing courses in the curriculum. Additionally,
to broaden the interest in sciences, several outreach activities for high school
students are initiated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fourier transform infrared
spectrometer purchased through this grant covers a wide spectral range,
extending into the far-infrared region, and has the ability to perform
temperature dependent measurements. The spectrometer allows researchers to
explore the physics related to free carriers, phonons, electron-phonon
interaction and band phenomena (including band inversion) of solid materials.
Research projects enabled by the instrument explore novel materials, including
nanocrystals, narrow band gap semiconductors, epitaxial double perovskites films
and optoelectronic films. Specifically, the following important issues are
addressed: (i) phonon characteristics of nanoparticles are investigated in order
to understand how phonon modes are influenced by the nanoparticle geometry; (ii)
several narrow band gap semiconductors are examined in order to probe the band
inversion characteristics; (iii) evaluating the reflectivity spectra as a
function of temperature, systematic studies are performed to explore how phonons
influence various properties of epitaxial double perovskites; and (iv) phonon
modes and the electron-phonon interaction in optoelectronic films are studied in
order to understand their dependence on the quality of films.