* 1726998
* Collaborative Research: Attaining Excellence in Secondary Mathematics Clinical Experiences with a Lens on Equity
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Marilyn Strutchens, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 560,586.00

An aim of many mathematics teacher education programs is to produce teachers who
can use teaching practices that enable all secondary students to reason with and
make sense of mathematics. Clinical experiences enable teacher candidates to
teach, observe other teachers, and collaborate with mentor teachers, thus
applying what they learned from their coursework. In fact, clinical experiences
have been cited as more influential on long-term teaching practices than
coursework. This project will study how different types of clinical experiences
affect preservice teachers' implementation of equitable teaching practices. A
consortium of 24 universities and their school partners will conduct the study,
setting the stage for evaluation of different clinical experiences across
multiple institutions. Members of this consortium are already engaged in the
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities' (APLU's) Mathematics Teacher
Education Partnership (MTE-P). The MTE-P will use a networked improvement
community (NIC) design to develop clinical experiences that build candidate
teachers' skills in equitable teaching strategies, with the goal of increasing
the success of secondary school students in meeting college- and career-ready
standards in math. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design and study
mechanisms to aid in the implementation of the following alternative models: 1)
methods courses in which mentor teachers and teacher candidates experience
common learning opportunities; 2) the paired placement model, in which two
prospective teachers are paired with a single mentor teacher, allowing the
mentor teacher to serve as coach and mentor for the two preservice teachers and
the preservice teachers to give each other feedback and support; and 3) co-
planning and co-teaching, which has been found to help teacher candidates gain
greater pedagogical content knowledge and knowledge of students through
collaboration and communication between teacher candidates and mentor teachers
who work together to plan, implement, and assess instruction. Data will be
collected to guide the continued improvement of the models following the NIC
design and to determine the effectiveness of the different clinical models. The
use of an NIC design will accelerate understanding of the alternative models for
clinical experiences that promote candidates' craft of teaching and the capacity
of mentors and university supervisors to support those experiences, as the
models are refined using continuous improvement cycles. Testing the models
across a range of institutions will increase understanding of adaptations needed
to support local contexts. The three models will be disseminated to APLU's
broader membership through MTE-P's national network of 90 universities and their
K-12 partners who have the common goal of transforming secondary mathematics
teacher preparation. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is providing
co-funding for this project in recognition of its alignment with the broader
teacher preparation goals of the Noyce effort.