* 1726629
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope to Enhance Undergraduate and Graduate Research and Teaching in Biology, Chemistry and Earth and Space Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Clinton Barineau, Columbus State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 293,575.00

An award is made to Columbus State University, University System of Georgia, to
acquire a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to support and expand a diverse
group of research programs within the Department of Biology, Department of
Chemistry and the Department of Earth and Space Science. Ultimately, the
incorporation of SEM technology to the curriculum of Columbus State University
will directly increase undergraduate and graduate participation in research and
encourage students to pursue careers as professional biologists, chemists,
environmental scientists and geologists. Students working directly with faculty
will use SEM technology to enhance on-going research programs that involve the
university's field sites, museum collections, herbarium collections and
molecular and chemistry laboratories. Research that includes an SEM experience
will open up new opportunities to groups that are currently underrepresented in
the Natural Sciences. The SEM will facilitate outreach opportunities for
recruitment as well as the recruitment of high school students to STEM fields;
Columbus State University will also work with regional two-year institutions
that will make the SEM a part of their science courses as appropriate. SEM
technology will also be incorporated into on-going STEM summer camps that target
local high schools to underscore potential careers in the natural and biomedical
sciences. The expectation is that some of the participating students will pursue
careers including but not limited to: ecology, taxonomy, systematics, ecological
genetics, entomology, chemistry and geology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will directly engage Columbus State University faculty, staff, graduate and
undergraduate students across a diverse collection of disciplines such as
biology, pollination ecology, conservation genetics, entomology, plant ecology,
environmental science, geology and chemistry, to name a few. This research will
ultimately aid in our understanding of the Natural Sciences, including the
biological and physical diversity of the planet. In many cases research
conducted by Columbus State University faculty, undergraduate and graduate
students can now move forward with the use of SEM technology. For example, the
analysis of pollen morphology by SEM technology will allow researchers to verify
results obtained by molecular tools and provide resolution where data is
currently absent. In particular, the SEM will be used for species identification
and verification of pollen DNA barcodes as well as in the development and use of
a number of educational, curatorial and bioinformatics programs for
undergraduate and graduate education at Columbus State University. In turn, this
would greatly facilitate international collaborations to utilize DNA barcoding
to document global biodiversity.