* 1726045
* Developing and Supporting Student Projects in Upper-Division Physics Lab Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Heather Lewandowski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 599,132.00

Developing students' experimental physics skills is an important learning
outcome for undergraduate physics education. Lab courses, especially those that
include multi-week final projects, are a crucial avenue for learning such
skills. However, due to a lack of extensive research on lab education, it is
difficult to know which practices are most effective for achieving learning
outcomes that are unique to lab courses. This project will produce a set of
research-based, field-tested guidelines for final projects in lab courses and
examples of them. These guidelines and examples will support instructors in
designing projects that are likely to improve students' experimental physics
skills. The availability of research-based guidelines will be a significant step
toward lowering barriers to designing effective lab projects, which will help
prepare students for careers in science and engineering.

The goal of the project is to develop a compendium of research-based best
practices for multi-week projects in upper-division physics lab courses using a
Design-Based Implementation Research approach. The best practices will inform
three major aspects of projects: (1) goals and framing of projects; (2)
guidelines for the structure of projects, including authentic field-tested
exemplars; and (3) guidelines for choosing appropriate assessments and
interpreting their results. In particular, these best practices will be
developed to promote learning objectives related to students' model-based
reasoning skills, troubleshooting skills, expert-like documentation practices,
and a sense of ownership over their projects. The best practices will undergo
three iterations of research, development, and implementation. Across all three
iterations, the project team will investigate the conditions under which student
learning objectives are most likely to be met. Multiple types of data will
inform the development and refinement of best practices, including student
surveys, classroom observations, and interviews with students and instructors.
Ultimately, this project will advance understanding of classroom practices that
effectively develop students' experimental physics skills.