* 1726968
* From Discovery to Market: Integrating Interdisciplinary Skills through a Collaborative Research-Based Lab Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Rupa Iyer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 10/31/2021
* USD 2,100,004.00

Undergraduate research experiences and inquiry-based laboratories increase
student retention, graduation rates, and motivation to pursue advanced degrees
and careers in STEM fields. However, many undergraduate courses and labs are not
structured to engage students in active learning and authentic research, and the
lack of such innovative learning environments presents a key barrier to student
success. This project will build on a curricular model developed at the
University of Houston (UH) to bring cutting-edge research into undergraduate
classes and prepare a STEM-literate workforce equipped for innovation. The
Environmental Sampling Research Module (ESRM), which was designed, developed,
and successfully implemented at UH over the past nine years, will be
disseminated across a range of institutions, student types, and courses to
engage students in interdisciplinary, collaborative research that populates a
growing database of the geographic distribution of environmental contamination.
A novel aspect of the project is a learning activity focusing on
entrepreneurship, which will teach students how to bring their data to market.
This topic is not common in academic science
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating education, research, and
entrepreneurship, the ESRM will provide opportunities for students to engage in
the process of scientific discovery by contributing to research data, mining
their own and shared data, and marketing the products of their research. Six
institutions will collaborate in the project: UH (Texas), Alvin Community
College (Texas), Louisiana Tech University (Louisiana), Prairie View A&amp;M
University (Texas), Rochester Institute of Technology (New York), and Southern
Utah University (Utah). (Three of those are on the Gulf Coast, where recent
environmental disasters will provide valuable data on soil and water pollution
and microbial remediation.) Activities of the project team will include
developing interdisciplinary learning modules that use computational tools,
comparative data analysis, genome-spatial analysis, and entrepreneurial
applications; holding workshops to train faculty; mapping ESRM learning
activities to interdisciplinary skill sets; and developing a web portal to
disseminate the learning activities, the expanded ESRM database, information
about students' research, and published papers. The project will contribute to
STEM education research by exploring (1) how the adaptations of the ESRM benefit
diverse students, institutions, and faculty and (2) how students' participation
in collaborative, multi-institutional research experiences and exposure to
authentic research questions influence their engagement and interest in STEM
fields.