* 1726263
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscope System for Research, Undergraduate Research and Training, and Curricular Reform
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Edward Remsen, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 240,521.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Luke Haverhals
from Bradley University and colleague Edward Remsen have acquired a fluorescence
lifetime imaging microscope. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) is
a powerful technique that gives information about the location and the
environment of a chemical (a fluorophore) that emits light after absorbing
energy. The information obtained from initial samples provides feedback for the
development of subsequent attempts, all with the goal of generating tough,
functional materials made primarily from biomass while using minimal amounts of
recyclable, low volatility organic compounds. The synthesized materials are low
cost, sustainable composites that leverage the complex structures created by
Nature. Technologies that may be improved by this instrument acquisition
include: low carbon building materials as well as composites for automotive,
aerospace, and medical applications. The new materials may also be used in water
remediation, solar and electrochemical energy conversion and storage, and
sensors. The research is conducted in collaboration with scientists at Knox
College, Western Illinois University, and the US Department of Agriculture
National Center for Agricultural Utilization Research (USDA NCAUR). The
acquisition is used to train the next generation of scientists. In particular,
experience in advanced microscopy techniques benefits master's level and
undergraduate students as they prepare for advanced degree programs and
industry. The newly acquired Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscope (FLIM)
enhances research and education at Bradley University. The instrument
facilitates the characterization of sustainable processing and manufacturing of
composites, the exploration of natural fiber welding to create functional
biocomposites, and the analyses of illicit substances. The instrumentation is
used for high throughput screening of peptides, affibodies, and antibodies on
surfaces; localizing cellular intersection; and studying transport within micro
and mesoporous metal oxide porous films.