* 1726281
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Uptake of Research-Based Instructional Strategies in Undergraduate Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Estrella Johnson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2022
* USD 129,315.00

It is well documented that the use of Research-Based Instructional Strategies
(RBIS) significantly improves learning and retention of students in
undergraduate courses in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). Yet, there are few large-scale efforts to document the use of RBIS and
to explain why they are not more widely used by STEM faculty. This project aims
to fill the knowledge gap by examining the use of RBIS and identifying factors
that influence implementation of RBIS in undergraduate STEM education. During
Phase I of the study, the project team will survey faculty who teach
introductory STEM courses in mathematics (Calculus I &amp; II), Chemistry
(General Chemistry), and Physics (Introductory Quantitative Physics). The
faculty will include people from four types of institutions (associate's
colleges, baccalaureate colleges, master's colleges, and doctoral universities).
During Phase II, a subset of survey respondents will be invited to participate
in interviews that are designed to investigate important themes identified in
the survey. The primary aims of the research project are to (1) build capacity
to document changes in the implementation of RBIS; (2) estimate the importance
of individuals, departments, institutions, and disciplines in shaping
instructional decisions to implement RBIS; and (3) test a set of hypotheses on
how and why instructors use RBIS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The national survey
followed by in-depth interviews will establish baseline data for mathematics and
chemistry faculty, and will provide an updated and extended snapshot following a
2008 survey of physics faculty. Based on the nested structure of the data,
hierarchical linear modeling will be used to examine the quantitative survey
data. Qualitative interview data will be analyzed to identify the individual
factors, themes, or patterns of factors influencing the implementation of RBIS.
The design is well-suited for explaining the quantitative significance (or non-
significance) of the results and for providing a more nuanced, qualitative
understanding of the implementation of RBIS and reasons for their use across
STEM disciplines and types of institutions.