* 1726541
* MRI: Acquisition of a Digital light sheet microscope Leica TCS SP8 DLS: Bringing Light-Sheet Microscopy to Maine for Research and STEM Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Clarissa Henry, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 497,479.00

An award is made to the University of Maine to establish the first collaborative
imaging facility with a light-sheet microscope in Maine. Analysis of biological
processes within intact organs and/or living organisms is fundamental to
understanding development and aging. The process of acquiring three-dimensional
and/or time-lapse data in vivo has traditionally been hampered by technical
difficulties that can be overcome, in large part, by using light-sheet
microscopy. This award will facilitate cutting edge research and promote
collaboration between researchers at the University of Maine, Maine Medical
Research Center Institute, The Jackson Laboratories, and Mount Desert Island
Biological Station. In order to increase the impact of this microscope on
undergraduate education, a new CURE (course-based undergraduate research
experience) entitled: "Discovery in development, disease, and aging using light-
sheet microscopy" will be created. This course will allow students to develop
their own research projects and will include training in imaging, data analysis,
ethics, scientific writing, and public speaking. This award will contribute to
education of K-12 students by incorporating data obtained with the light-sheet
microscope into middle and high school science classes. These datasets will also
be shown at Science Cafes throughout the state and at the Maine State Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will promote faculty research programs
and training of post-doctoral fellows, graduate, and undergraduate students. The
research programs impacted pertain to: (1) muscle and neuromuscular development
and disease, (2) mechanisms of host-pathogen interactions in vivo, (3) three-
dimensional characterization of progenitor cell renewal in the developing
kidney, (4) development and implementation of image analysis algorithms, and (5)
three-dimensional imaging of neural innervation in whole-adipose depots, among
others. A common barrier to the above research projects is the limitation of
current resources with regards to time-lapse and/or three-dimensional
characterization of cellular processes underlying development and physiology.
The increased speed of imaging, tiling function, spectral capabilities, and
imaging depth of the light-sheet microscope will revolutionize the type and
scale of research questions that can be addressed. The outcome of these research
projects will be novel insight into basic biology and disease processes. In
addition, new image analysis algorithms will be implemented and adapted to open-
source, user-friendly platforms. In summary, a light-sheet microscope will
transform Maine research programs and provide a very high scientific return-on-
investment in the form of student training and publications. In addition,
faculty on this grant will engage multiple demographic sectors in scientific
literacy and inquiry. Thus, the Leica TCS SP8 DLS will enhance and expand the
University of Maine's mission of education, research, and outreach.