* 1726346
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Solid-State NMR Spectrometer Console for Advanced NMR Spectroscopy of Complex Organic and Hybrid Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Klaus Schmidt-Rohr, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 274,750.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Klaus Schmidt-Rohr
from Brandeis University and colleagues have acquired a console upgrade for a
400 MHz NMR spectrometer with solid state capabilities. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as the study of biologically-
relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is important to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, forensics and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research performed by undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
via independent student research and traditional academic research and
coursework. The instrument is available to researchers nationwide. Locally, the
requested instrument is shared with interested users at Brandeis University and
in the Greater Boston area for hands-on NMR measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of a 400 MHz NMR console with solid state
capabilities is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as: (a) determining the chemical structure of
protective aromatic-rich organic overlayers on mesoporous oxide supports, (b)
quantifying functional-group concentrations in cross-linked stimuli-responsive
or post-modified catalytically active polymers, (c) studying the structure of
catalytically active metal organic frameworks, including the proximity of
different linkers, (d) characterizing a biological underwater adhesive, and (e)
determining the structure of natural organic matter in the environment.