* 1726294
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for In-situ Studies of Soft and Hard Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Dean L. Hesterberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,430,030.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a
transmission electron microscope (TEM) at North Carolina State University (NCSU)
equipped to study a broad range of interdisciplinary materials. The microscope
enables interdisciplinary research into energy storage and conversion,
biological compatibility, environmental mediation, and materials exhibiting
exotic properties such as superconductivity. While a TEM is usually operated at
room temperature and under high vacuum, this microscope enables imaging with the
sample at temperatures ranging from cryogenic to a thousand degrees Celsius, in
a variety of liquids, or exposed to various gases. These conditions can closely
match those where the materials operate and thus provide new scientific
insights. The TEM is integrated into several activities at NCSU including the
opportunity for K-12 students to experience scientific instrumentation first
hand. Results from the microscope are also incorporated into a centerpiece
educational outreach program that exposes the general public to atomic
resolution electron microscopy through the unintimidating medium of art.

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a
transmission electron microscope (TEM) at North Carolina State University (NCSU)
equipped to investigate hard and soft matter at conditions where dynamic
phenomena occur. The instrument catalyzes new research in the Research Triangle
by enabling fast in situ imaging in a variety conditions including low
temperatures (down to cryogenic), heating, biasing, mechanical loading, gas, and
liquid. Further, a high-speed camera is equipped to capture detailed structural
changes during these experiments. These capabilities, in combination with the
capability to capture spectroscopic and three-dimensional data, will accelerate
intellectual output by empowering researchers to make new, atomic scale
insights, with greatly improved temporal resolution, and at conditions relevant
to material properties. With a broad spectrum of materials that can be studied
with the instrument, and integration into the NSF funded Research Triangle
Nanotechnology Network, the acquisition will impact research across departments
at NCSU, in North Carolina, and beyond.