* 1726375
* MRI Consortium: Development of High Throughput High Energy Diffraction Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Robert Suter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,089,851.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;This MRI award by both the Division of Materials Research
(DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences (MPS) and the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) supports the development of a High Energy
Diffraction Microscopy (HEDM) instrument by a consortium of four institution
(Carnegie Mellon University, Purdue University, University of Utah, and Colorado
School of Mines). The new instrument will make possible observations of unique
in-situ studies of phase transformations, coarsening of materials and modeling
thereof. Measurements with the instrument will also facilitate other types of
measurements, from gas diffusion and storage to ultra-fast shock deformation and
applications of coherent diffractive imaging that will be enhanced by the coming
upgrades of synchrotrons around the world. The Development project and resulting
instrument will have broader impacts through training and mentoring of post-
doctoral associates, through advancements in x-ray science, and through the many
applications of the instrument to materials of interest to industry and
government laboratories. Through the availability of advanced characterization
data it will be possible to develop improved models of material properties and
responses and these improved models will lead to shorter development times and
materials with improved properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part2:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the
development of a High Energy Diffraction Microscopy (HEDM) by a consortium of
four institution (Carnegie Mellon University, Purdue University, University of
Utah, and Colorado School of Mines). The instrument enables a suite of high
energy (&gt; 30 keV) x-ray measurement techniques that provide unique
information about structure and structural evolution in the broad class of
polycrystalline materials. Relevant materials include metals and their alloys,
ceramics, and many functional materials. Understanding these materials and their
evolution is a multi-scale problem with nano-scale lattice defects (dislocations
and others) interacting in anisotropic and inhomogeneous crystalline
environments. These interactions give rise to emergent mesoscale and macroscopic
properties which must be tailored for applications in extreme environments such
as jet engines, nuclear reactors, and general energy and transportation systems.
HEDM is playing a central role improving understanding and modeling of these
materials. Near- and Far-field HEDM use spatially resolved diffraction in three
dimensions to probe structure deep inside of bulk samples. The measurements are
non-destructive in hard materials allowing repeated measurements as the
materials are subjected to a variety of thermal and mechanical treatments. The
measurement techniques and associated software for interpreting the terabytes of
raw image data that are collected have been developed over the past decade.
Because the measurements require a high flux of monochromatic high energy x-rays
that are specifically tailored (collimated and/or focused) for each technique,
they are carried out at high energy synchrotron radiation facilities such as the
Department of Energy's Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory.
The new multi-modal microscope will fully integrate data collection protocols
and analysis software so that output data sets will be available to researchers
on the same time scale as the data collection times thus allowing experimenters
to optimize sample treatment parameters during the course of measurements.
Hardware specifications will take advantage of recent developments in detector
and positioning technologies. A high temperature capability will be available.
The software developed for this instrument will be made available to the
community at the Advanced Photon Source and other facilities around the world.