* 1726625
* Preparing Future Faculty to Improve STEM Education: Broadening the National Impact of the CIRTL Network
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Bennett Goldberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,299,267.00

The Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL)
contributes to long-term improvement in STEM undergraduate education through the
purposeful development of the future STEM faculty. The strategic leverage point
by which CIRTL shapes the future national STEM faculty is graduate and
postdoctoral preparation in teaching and learning. CIRTL provides systematic and
focused professional development to build future faculty expertise in evidence-
based teaching. Three core ideas - teaching-as-research, learning communities,
and learning through diversity - and a detailed set of associated learning
outcomes provide the conceptual framework for all CIRTL activities. Research has
established the efficacy of this approach. In particular, there is empirical
evidence of the positive long-term impact of teaching professional development
based on these ideas. In Summer 2016 the CIRTL Network expanded to more than 40
research universities in the United States - a doubling of the earlier number of
CIRTL institutions. This project is comprised of an integrated portfolio of
initiatives for increased impact and widespread deployment of future faculty
professional development in teaching. The initiatives work in two strategic
directions:&lt;br/&gt;1. increase the number of future faculty participating at
each CIRTL Network university;&lt;br/&gt;2. extend CIRTL opportunities to future
faculty beyond the CIRTL Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase the number of
future faculty participants within the CIRTL Network, CIRTL will develop and
evaluate a set of new cohort-based learning communities: i) disciplinary
learning communities in chemistry, engineering, life sciences and statistics;
ii) teaching assistant learning communities; and iii) postdoctoral learning
communities. These will operate both locally and online. To extend opportunities
to future faculty beyond the CIRTL Network, CIRTL will develop and evaluate: i)
an online NSF Graduate Research Fellow learning community; and ii) partnerships
in future faculty development with eight professional societies. CIRTL will also
build new bridges for its alumni to contribute to the CIRTL mission by
developing and evaluating a CIRTL Alumni Network. These new initiatives have the
long-term goal of preparing more than 8,000 STEM future faculty annually in the
CIRTL Network, and to extend opportunities to many more beyond the Network.