* 1726158
* MRI/Acquisition: Upgrading the Microbial Ecology and Biotechnology Laboratory at Universidad del Turabo with a more efficient Genetic Analyzer for sequencing and fragment analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Sharon Cantrell, Universidad Del Turabo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2021
* USD 213,071.00

An award is made to Universidad del Turabo to upgrade the existing molecular
facilities with the acquisition of a more efficient Genetic Analyzer that will
enhance current research activities at Universidad del Turabo (UT) and project
partners (University of Puerto Rico-Cayey). The project will continue to support
the training of undergraduate and graduate students under different research
activities and recently funded initiatives to Universidad del Turabo. The
project will use Sanger-Sequencing and Fragment Analysis in different projects
that will provide baseline data for other research projects. All projects will
foster collaboration among project researchers and institutions. The project
will also provide training in molecular techniques and in the operation of the
state of the art Genetic Analyzer, to augment the future STEM work force through
different sponsored projects led by the PI, Co-PI and major instrument users
(NSF LTER, NIH-INBRE, USDA and PRSTRT at UT and HHMI SEA-PHAGES of UPR-Cayey).
UPR-Cayey has also developed a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Program,
supported by HHMI that provides training to pre-service teachers (pedagogy
majors) in original research in Microbial Ecology that will make use of the
Genetic Analyzer. Peer reviewed publications and scientific presentations at
local and national meetings will be produced as the results of the different
research projects are generated.

The requested Genetic Analyzer (ABI3500) provides faster, easier and better
quality control for sequencing and fragment analysis. The UT Microbial Ecology
and Biotechnology Laboratory (MEBL) has been essential in the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, faculty and teachers in the use of genomic
techniques such as Sanger Sequencing and Fragment Analysis to study microbial
communities. The project brings together seven (7) UT and University of Puerto
Rico-Cayey researchers that represent two primary undergraduate minority serving
Hispanic institutions. All research projects have demonstrated the need of the
new genetic analyzer ABI 3500 and how the instrument will benefit the training
of students at all levels, as well as school teachers. The twelve (12) research
projects address the following topics: water quality, aeromycology, tropical
rain forest microbial ecology, bioremediation, agro-microbiome, bioprospecting,
biochemistry (DNA-conjugated quantum dots), Drosophila population genetics,
avian DNA barcoding, and genomics of bacteriophages and bacteria. All these
themes are very important for the improvement and understanding of climate
change, environmental protection and human and environmental health.