* 1726403
* Stochastic Constitutive Laws in Nonlinear Mechanics: Application to the Multiscale Modeling of Arterial Walls for Robust Vascular Grafting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Johann Guilleminot, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2021
* USD 297,097.00

In this project, the use of computational stochastic analysis is put forward in
order to construct a new modeling and computational framework for nonlinear
stochastic constitutive laws. Modeling the uncertainties in the constitutive
behavior of nonlinear materials is a central challenge in computational
mechanics and mechanics of materials. In particular, the large variability
exhibited by soft biological tissues, such as vascular vessels, is a current
roadblock to computational assisted surgeries, patient-specific treatments for
cardiovascular diseases and wide adoption of tissue engineering approaches. In
this project, the use of computational stochastic analysis is put forward in
order to construct a new modeling and computational framework for nonlinear
stochastic constitutive laws. The specific case of vascular constructs is
purposely chosen as a prototypical application combining strong anisotropy and a
high level of stochasticity. The research supported by this award will enhance
the predictive capabilities of simulations involving biological materials, such
as arterial and brain tissues, and will be relevant to a large class of
materials, including the case of damaged composites. The interdisciplinary
standpoint promoted in this effort will enable a broad exposure to students
involved in various fields, such as applied mathematics and materials science,
and will allow theoretical and computational aspects to be introduced through
outreach activities in local high schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
is focused on computational stochastic analysis for nonlinear constitutive laws.
More specifically, it aims at deriving probabilistic models, a high-performance-
computing environment for sampling on smooth manifolds and methodologies for the
identification and validation of spatially dependent anisotropic strain energy
functions. By addressing the proper mathematical randomization of nonlinear
constitutive equations in close relation with calibration and validation
concerns, the research supported by this award will notably advance a new
information-theoretic class of stochastic methods where randomness can be
accounted for from potentially multiscale experiments to coarse-scale
simulations. The project will involve a set of methodological and theoretical
developments, including (1) the construction of physics-based random field
models and sampling algorithms for a class of polyconvex stored energy
functions, and (2) the definition of methodologies for the data-poor inverse
calibration and multiscale validation of the stochastic models. The novel
framework will notably be used within large-scale nonlinear simulations to
investigate the probability of failure of stochastic vascular constructs with
patient-specific geometries.