* 1726685
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Modern Electron Microprobe, University of Massachusetts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 770,000.00

The acquisition of a new, state-of-the-art electron microprobe at the University
of Massachusetts serves to enable numerous NSF funded research projects
involving researchers at UMass and the other members of the Five-college
community (Smith, Mt. Holyoke, Amherst, and Hampshire colleges), and many other
regional and national institutions. This MRI grant supports the acquisition of
an instrument that will replace an aging electron probe that was the workhorse
micro-analytical tool at UMass for the past 27 years, a significant portion of
the 50+ year legacy of electron probe micro-analysis at UMass. Students and
researchers have used, and continue to use, the facility for compositional
mapping and compositional micro-analysis for research in petrology,
geochemistry, climate science, biology, chemistry, materials research, and
engineering, and the growing emphasis on high-technology materials will continue
to expand this use into exciting new directions in a number of fields of the
physical and engineering-related sciences. This grant serves to directly support
NSF?s mission to promote the progress of science and advance the national
health, prosperity, and welfare as the enabled fundamental research has the
potential to greatly enhance our understanding of Earth and planetary processes,
processes involving the origin and evolution of life, and in the exploration and
development of resources and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electron probe
micro-analyzer (EPMA) provides non-destructive, in-situ analysis of mineral
phases on the scale of a micrometer or less by use of a focused electron beam
that generates characteristic X-rays from the target sample. The intensity of
these X-rays is used to calculate the absolute concentrations of specific
elements in the target. Reaction histories and the conditions of formation can
be inferred, revealing geologic or other relevant physical/chemical aspects of
natural and synthetic systems, everything from the formation of continents to
biomineralization architectures (such as crustacean cuticles), to the
construction of optical fibers, integrated circuits, or alloys. The new
instrument will offer much improved electron beam performance over a higher
range of current and voltage, higher resolution sample stage motion, better,
cleaner vacuum technology, high counting efficiency spectrometers for improved
precision and analytical efficiency, highly improved, more robust electronics
for improved reliability and stability, and greatly improved control and
analysis software. Current projects supported by NSF include studies of mid and
deep-crustal processes, field and experimental studies of magmatic systems from
around the world, mineral analysis for spectroscopy and mineralogy; meteoritics,
environmental materials analysis, as well as materials testing for researchers
from engineering and compositional analysis for soil science. The new microprobe
will also play an essential role in a major technique development project at
UMass, electron microprobe geochronology. With a new microprobe, the UMass
facility will be well positioned to move forward as a regional resource for new
development, on-going research, and student training. Many faculty members, and
post-docs depend on the UMass electron probe facility, and hundreds of students
have interacted with the facility as part of student research, class projects,
and/or lab demonstrations. In addition, many outside researchers who visit the
laboratory are from non-PhD granting institutions and many bring undergraduate
students to participate in the analytical work. The UMass Microprobe Facility
has played a major role in training future analysts including practical and
theoretical courses at UMass and training of a large number of post-doctoral
fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate students. The PIs have run
numerous tours, lab demonstrations, workshops, and lectures for UMass, Five-
college, and outside college classes, for K-12 classes, for community groups,
and for the general public. These activities inspire interest in both science-
oriented and non-science oriented people, and reinforce the message that modern
Geoscience is a quantitative, high-tech, very relevant endeavor.