* 1726864
* MRI: Acquisition of a 4D High-Resolution X-Ray Micro-Computed Tomography System for the Rocky Mountain Region
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Robert McLeod, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 801,508.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award to acquire a high-resolution X-ray
microtomography (XRM) imaging system will advance a broad spectrum of
fundamental research, potentially leading to novel materials that enhance
infrastructure resilience, next-generation medicine, and energy production. The
instrumentation, which is not currently available to researchers in the Rocky
Mountain region, uniquely combines an X-ray source with an objective turret to
attain exceptional spatial resolution and unprecedented image quality. The
instrumentation will advance critical research areas, including next-generation
civil infrastructure materials, biological tissues and materials for tissue
repair and regeneration, natural and archival materials, smart polymers, and
energy collection and storage. As a publicly available resource, the XRM will be
leveraged to advance the scientific missions of industry, individual
researchers, and research institutions throughout the Rocky Mountain region.
Annual working group meetings and a biannual materials imaging symposium will
facilitate dissemination of state-of-the-art imaging science, enable continuous
recruitment of new users, and catalyze new local and regional collaborations.
The project will also support the education, training, and mentorship of a new
generation of advanced instrumentalists, who will establish a regional expertise
in high-resolution imaging of both hard and soft
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the gold standard in materials imaging, high-
resolution XRM with in situ mechanical testing, temperature-controlled
capabilities, and dynamic, time-resolved imaging provides a non-destructive
means to image and differentiate internal micro- and nanostructures of materials
with 700 nm spatial resolution at large working distances, &lt;70 nm voxel
resolution, and exceptional phase contrast for both small and large sample sizes
(up to 300 mm). Advanced capabilities permit in situ augmentation of standard
tests to image material behavior in 3D/4D under controlled temperature,
compression, tension, and flexure, enabling previously unobservable damage and
failure mechanisms at the sub-micron scale. Beyond quantifying microstructural
features and empirically analyzing physical and mechanical properties in situ,
image data can be directly imported into numerical simulations and manipulated
with stress, strain, temperature, pressure, and fluid flow to computationally
model, predict, and observe microscale material behaviors, ultimately enabling
more sophisticated design of highly complex synthetic and biomimetic materials.