* 1726627
* Current-modulated Electrohydrodynamic (EHD) Jet Printing with Dual-channel Nozzles for Micro/Nano-Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Daren Chen, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2021
* USD 307,999.00

Inkjet printing as an additive fabrication method has been used in the
manufacturing of printed electronics, 3-D object prototypes, solar cells, and
light-emitting devices, as well as applications in tissue engineering and other
biological and pharmaceutical fields. Unlike the more common method of piezo
inkjet printing, which typically generates individual droplets of 10-50
micrometers in diameter, voltage-modulated electrohydrodynamic (EHD) jet
printing has a demonstrated ability to produce sub-micrometer-sized
droplets/fibers for the fabrication of patterns or features at nanometer scales.
However, EHD jet printing has not been considered as a viable manufacturing tool
because of the issues of nozzle clogging, ink accumulation at the nozzle exit,
and low printing frequencies (resulting in a limited production rate). This
project conducts fundamental research on a new form of EHD jet printing, using
novel dual-channel printing nozzles and electrical current (instead of voltage)
modulation. It is hypothesized that the circulation of liquid ink in the dual
channels will eliminate nozzle clogging due to evaporation of carrier fluids or
polymerization of ink, and the current modulation/control will enable high-
speed, drop-on-demand EHD jet printing. This research could also lead to further
improvements on current inkjet printing processes or devices in both industrial
and household settings. Furthermore, the technique will be used in education and
outreach activities geared toward students (at all levels) and workers in
advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
fundamental science involved in a new current-modulated, drop-on-demand EHD
printing method with novel dual-channel nozzles for the fabrication of high-
resolution micro/nano patterns at high jetting frequencies (on the level of
MHz). The proposed dual-channel printing nozzles use two concentric tubes,
providing an annular channel around the inner tube. In the proposed nozzle
configuration, one channel provides new ink and the other for extracts ink from
the nozzle, thereby achieving fluid circulation within the dual tube nozzle. It
is hypothesized that this fluid circulation will eliminate or greatly reduce the
issues of nozzle clogging and ink accumulation associated with polymerization or
carrier fluid evaporation at the nozzle outlet.  This project further
hypothesizes that the ejection rate of droplets can be increased through current
control, instead of the voltage control commonly used. Scientific understanding
of fluid meniscus dynamics and droplet generation in the proposed EHD printing
will be required to achieve robust current control, and needs to incorporate
effects of fluid recirculaiton. The novelties of the proposed EHD jet printing
technique are i) the proposed dual-channel nozzles that will resolve the
technical issues often encountered in single-capillary inkjet printing; and ii)
the modulation of frequencies with current rather than voltage in order to
achieve reliable EHD jet printing at high jetting frequencies. The specific aims
of this project are to: i) develop the fundamental science involved in liquid
meniscus formation, jetting, and droplet ejection in a voltage-modulated EHD jet
printing process with the dual-channel nozzles; ii) investigate the fundamental
jetting mechanisms in current-modulated EHD jet printing process (particularly
at high frequencies); iii) numerically model the jetting characteristics in the
EHD jet printing technique to develop the underlying fundamental science and
aide control strategies; and iv) provide a proof-of-concept of the proposed
approach and validate the numerical models through parametric investigations of
the quality (i.e. the size, uniformity, and resolution) of micro/nano-sized
patterns created.