* 1726092
* MRI:   SusChEM:   Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* William Connick, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 271,908.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Hairong Guan from the
University of Cincinnati and colleagues are acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic
resonace (NMR) spectrometer. An NMR spectrometer analyzes signals from atomic
nuclei in a sample stimulated by light from the spectrometer. This enables the
identification of the atoms (for example, hydrogen, carbon etc.) in the
compound. This analytic technique is used to study chemicals, drugs, and
proteins or to identify unknown substances. This NMR spectrometer is used to
develop energy storage materials, environmentally benign reagents and materials
for drug delivery and medical applications. Undergraduate and upper level
students are trained in the use of this powerful tool preparing them for future
careers in academia or industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NMR spectrometer
enhances research and education at all levels. It impacts research on the
preparation and characterization of molecules for rationally designing catalysts
as well as the identification of photo processes for storing energy via metal
complexes. The instrument also aids in developing processes that use earth-
abundant materials or renewable feedstocks and in producing environmentally
benign reagents that require smaller amounts of solvent. The spectrometer is
also used in designing polymeric materials for carbon dioxide capture and in
exploring methodologies of compound delivery that may have potential medical
uses.