* 1726903
* MRI: Acquisition of an ultra performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometer (UPLC-MS) for multi-disciplinary research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Madeline Rasche, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 368,212.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Paula Hudson from
California State University Fullerton and colleagues Madeline Rasche, Sudarshan
Kurwadkar, Nicholas Salzameda and Alexandra Orchard have acquired a benchtop
quadrupole, liquid chromatograph tandem mass spectrometer (Q-LCMS/MS.) In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized into ions and the ions' masses are measured.
This highly sensitive technique allows the structure of molecules in a complex
mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a liquid chromatograph can separate
mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by involving diverse groups of students in
research and research training using this modern analytical technique. It also
provides training opportunities to many undergraduate students at this Hispanic-
serving institution since they are the major workforce in research laboratories
at CSUF. Additionally, research programs on the CSUF campus engage students from
local community colleges through ten and twelve-week summer research experiences
supported through the Regional Alliance in STEM Education (Project
RAISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mass spectrometer enhances research and
education at all levels. This instrument especially impacts research on
identification and quantification of atmospherically and environmentally
relevant molecules. It is used in rapidly characterizing ,with high accuracy,
inhibitors of protein-protein interactions of enzymes related to human health
and disease. The spectrometer is also used in designing enzyme assays to
identify small molecule protease inhibitors and quantify small molecules used in
the discovery and kinetic characterization of enzyme catalysts.