* 1726897
* MRI: Acquisition of Focused Ion Beam-Scanning Electron Microscope for Nanofabrication and Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Dhanesh Chandra, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 640,062.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will support the acquisition of
a dual beam Focused Ion Beam/Scanning Electron Microscope system. This system
meets a critical need for a synthesis, characterization and fabrication tool for
materials and devices at the nanometer-to-atomic length scales. It will enable
fundamental research in nano- and micro- structured materials and devices,
materials interfaces, catalyst characterization and nano-mechanical testing
leading to novel material systems such as high strength steels and lightweight
alloys for enhanced energy efficiency. It will advance multidisciplinary
research programs in science and engineering, ranging from structural
engineering materials, energy and functional materials to nanostructured
materials and devices and fundamental physics. This award will also support an
array of new educational and research training activities focused on advanced
manufacturing, characterization and nano-mechanical testing, ranging from K-12
to graduate levels, which will help develop the future science, technology,
engineering and mathematics workforce and increase the participation of
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The dual beam Focused Ion Beam
system can produce ultra-high resolution images for characterization and the
fabrication of nm-to-Âµm scale structures. Key projects include (1) Research on
interfacial structures of galvanized high strength steels and lightweight
magnesium alloys for automotive applications--to better understand complex
interfacial reactions at the nanoscale; (2) Studies of glassy metals to reveal
atomic arrangements or clusters on the atomic scale; (3) New avenues for nano-
mechanical characterization of Mg-X nanolaminates for ultra- high strength and
formability; (4) Probing nanoscale damage gradients in irradiated materials; (5)
Mechanical behavior of both bulk and nanomaterials at very high strain rates
generated by Laser pulses; (6) High-throughput alloy screening technique which
will enable design of multi-principal component or high entropy alloys. The
instrumentation will enable cross disciplinary research and will dramatically
facilitate collaborations with other institutions.