* 1726071
* Collaborative Research: POGIL-PCL: Student learning in the laboratory through sustained faculty development
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Marc Muniz, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 05/31/2019
* USD 532,384.00

This project will conduct Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning-Physical
Chemistry Laboratory (POGIL-PCL) workshops for faculty, postdoctoral fellows,
and graduate students. These workshops will be held around the country at a
variety of higher education institutions. Additionally, there will be ongoing
development of POGIL-PCL experiments, which will serve to engage returning and
new faculty participants in sustaining the project. Student learning outcomes
resulting from use of POGIL-PCL materials in the laboratory will be examined.
Ultimately, the use of evidence-based student-centered active learning in the
laboratory will be analyzed and promoted and the learning that students achieve
in an active-learning laboratory setting will be
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine the impact a
connected community of faculty has on the sustained implementation of this
methodology. The project will use social network theory to describe how the
adoption of materials is affected by sustained interactions among faculty
members after their initial introduction at a workshop. A broad range of
institutions will be engaged to reach new and established faculty, and to
provide professional development opportunities for graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows. Knowledge surveys coupled to think-aloud interviews and
adaptations of published instruments will be used to answer questions regarding
students' perception of their learning and their understanding of physical
chemistry phenomena as a function of participating in POGIL-PCL experiments.
Faculty teaching will be observed and characterized on the basis of facilitation
and student engagement. The survey and observational data will be analyzed, in
part, through the lens of a theoretical framework for coordination of theory and
evidence.