* 1726901
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jason Azoulay, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2020
* USD 553,700.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program and support from
the Division of Materials Research (DMR), the University of Southern Mississippi
(USM) will acquire an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) with an integrated
ultraviolet photoelectron source (UPS) and argon gas cluster ion sputtering
(GCIS). XPS measures the binding energy of electrons from the chemical elements
in the sample providing information on chemical composition, chemical states,
and electronic properties of materials. This information yields critical
information to better understand how the structure and composition of a surface
or interface of a given material gives rise to unique properties, function, and
performance. The XPS will be housed in the School of Polymers and High
Performance at USM and fully integrated into the Mississippi Polymer Institute
(MPI) analytical services. XPS will immediately enhance research in federally-
funded and industry supported programs involving more than 14 research groups at
USM, Jackson State University (JSU), and University of Mississippi Medical
Center (UMMC). Integration of XPS with the MPI analytical services will provide
access to cutting-edge surface characterization to local and regional
industries, including entrepreneurial startups housed in the USM Accelerator
(small business incubator). In addition to advancing research initiatives at USM
and regional universities, significant impacts are anticipated on education,
training, and outreach efforts via exposure of graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students to advanced surface-sensitive instrumentation. XPS operating
principles will be fully integrated into the existing education curriculum
focused on soft materials. Outreach to K-12 and undergraduates via our "Job
Shadowing" program, High School Polymer Science Competition, and the summer
research experience for teacher (RET) and undergraduates (REU) programs will
ensure the next generation of STEM students are engaged with proactive programs.
Overall, XPS will serve as a valuable resource for the recruitment and retention
of outstanding students, postdoctoral scholars, faculty, and collaborators,
including those underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired XPS system is ideally suited to support a
broad range of research themes enabling analysis of a variety of soft and hard
materials using both x-ray and ultraviolet excitation modes for surface
characterization. Key instrument capabilities include large area spectroscopy,
micro area spectroscopy, mapping/imaging, and angle-resolved depth profiling.
UPS is analogous to XPS, but the lower photon energies result in excitation of
only the low binding energy valence electrons enabling the determination of the
work function of the material being analyzed. A multi-mode argon gas cluster ion
sputtering source (GCIS) further expands the utility of the instrument to depth
profile soft materials such as organic, polymeric, and biological materials, a
unique capability that is currently unavailable in the MS geographical region.
The XPS system will enhance research across multiple disciplines and drive
technological innovations for advanced applications in sustainable energy
(storage, conversion, and conservation), organic polymer optoelectronics,
biodegradable, bioactive and biosensor materials, and polymer composites and
nanocomposites.