* 1726380
* MRI: Acquisition of a hybrid sputtering/evaporation thin film deposition system
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Timothy Usher, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2019
* USD 254,936.00

Part 1: This award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program
supports research and training at California State University San Bernardino
(CSUSB) through the acquisition of a thin film sputter deposition system. The
proposed deposition system allows the principal investigator to grow high-
quality ferroic oxide thin films and multilayers. By controlling the film
thickness and composition, specific material properties or combinations of
properties can be fine-tuned. This system will be utilized alongside the
existing capabilities of the NSF-CREST funded CSUSB Center for Advanced
Functional Materials, which will allow for the creation and characterization of
novel hybrid organic/oxide systems as well as broaden student research
participation and training at a large Hispanic- and minority-serving
institution. The development of thin films for research aims and applications
has led to important discoveries that have advanced the understanding of the
interesting science at play in these films as well as allowed an accelerated
development of technological materials. Ferroic materials, including
ferroelectric and magnetic and multiferroics, have "led the charge" in many
areas of research and development and will continue to do so in the future. As
the need to understand and engineer ferroic thin film systems that can operate
faster, more efficiently, or display novel functional properties grows,
acquiring high-quality thin films will play a vital role in research programs
centered around functional material studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: This
award supports the acquisition of a thin film sputter deposition system for
scientific research and research training at California State University San
Bernardino (CSUSB). This system will be used to deposit thin films and
multilayered samples as a part of several research both within CSUSB and with
domestic and international collaborators. It will combine off-axis rf-magneton
sputtering and existing thermal evaporation capabilities in order to engineer a
wide variety of single crystal and polycrystalline samples. The use of two
techniques will allow research on novel systems combining often dissimilar
materials, such as oxide and organic ferroelectrics, as well as allow for in-
situ deposition of bottom electrodes, which can help avoid problems of
interfacial contamination or electrically dead layers. This instrument supports
research efforts by current faculty members, visiting graduate students, and
undergraduate researchers and will enhance CSUSB's NSF-CREST funded Center for
Advanced Functional Materials (CAFM). Current research focus includes: 1)
Engineering novel ferroelectric and magnetic properties into single crystal
oxide thin films using a variety of control parameters accessible though film
growth including epitaxial strain and multilayer growth 2) Developing organic
ferroelectric thin films 3) The study of functional hybrid organic/oxide
systems. This award will increase the research infrastructure at CSUSB,
particularly by furthering access to equipment for the deposition of a wide
variety of thin films. CSUSB is an undergraduate-focused university and a
qualifying Hispanic- and Minority-Serving institution, allowing the acquisition
of this instrument to broaden participation of students from these demographics
in state-of-the-art research. Community college partnerships will broaden the
local reach of the instrumentation and further develop the STEM pipeline in the
local area. Through the CREST program, the feasibility of a Materials Science
Masters program is being investigated and a hybrid deposition system would serve
as a major facility for research projects and training associated with such a
program. Additionally, the ability to provide high-quality thin film samples
will support the development of strong domestic and international collaborations
focusing on the characterization of new thin film based systems.