* 1726392
* Bridging Mechanics and Electrochemistry: Theories and Experiments on Battery Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Kejie Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2022
* USD 401,730.00

Mechanical issues are ubiquitous in energy storage, conversion, and harvesting.
In rechargeable batteries, which are a key enabler of portable electronics and
electrification of automotive transportation, mechanical degradation compromises
the performance of current technology and limits the implementation of next-
generation high-capacity energy materials. This project seeks to describe the
aging mechanisms in batteries, which would also facilitate the development of
energy storage materials with enhanced mechanical reliability. This will be
achieved through a focus on understanding the fundamental coupling between
mechanical forces and electrochemistry or energy storage performance via a close
integration of theoretical modeling and experimental characterizations. The
outcome of this research will have a broad impact on diverse sectors of the
industry, from wearable electronics to electric cars. On the education front,
the project will create opportunities to train graduate students in the complex
sciences of electrochemistry and mechanics as well as educate students in the
mechanics of energy storage materials. The outreach activities will also enhance
an existing collaboration with the Women in Engineering program at Purdue to
encourage participation of female students in engineering
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
unravel the fundamental coupling between mechanics and electrochemistry using
integrated theories and experiments on battery materials. Research effort
include formulating a theory of stress-modulated electron transfer and ion
diffusion to understand the effects on energy capacity. Similarly, the continuum
theory of stress-composition-reaction coupling will lay a foundation for
understanding how mechanical stress modulates the electrochemical processes and
how the latter mediates failure and aging of energy materials. The computational
modeling of heterogeneous structures in batteries will advance the understanding
of stress-regulated kinetics and capacity. The experiments will use energy
harvester devices and solid-state batteries in conjunction with a novel
electrochemical nano-indenter and coupons based on mechanical testing standards
to provide data for the validation of the continuum theories.