* 1726880
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope to support multidisciplinary research and education at the University of Mississippi
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Amala Dass, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2021
* USD 346,641.00

This award supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art Field-Emission
Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) at the University of Mississippi (UM). This
instrument will impact a broad area of research projects, ranging from
fundamental biology to nanomaterials and nanoscience. The new microscope will
enable ultra-high resolution imaging and analysis of a variety of materials
including nanoparticles, nanocomposites, synthetic polymers, biological samples,
metal platings and geological materials. The availability of this resource will
directly benefit at least 25 research groups in 10 departments, spanning across
the School of Pharmacy, School of Engineering and College of Liberal Arts.
Additionally, the instrument will impact the research capabilities and training
of many student researchers and postdoctoral associates in these research
groups. The new instrument will support several academic courses and benefit
hundreds of students in the science, technology and engineering fields each
year. The new imaging facility will also benefit researchers from neighboring
institutions, high school and community college students, and will greatly
impact K-12 students and teachers through outreach activities involving the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument is a versatile
microscope with high magnification and ultra-high spatial resolution, enabling
high quality imaging and analysis of micro and nanostructures. This state-of-
the-art instrument is equipped with multiple detectors, including energy
dispersive X-ray spectrometer, cathodoluminescence, back-scattered electron, and
secondary electron detectors to facilitate the determination of the elemental
composition and topographical study of samples. The new equipment will be used
across a number of cutting-edge research projects, including a) characterization
of gold nanoparticles and investigation of their monodispersity, b)
paleontological and biostratigraphic studies and quantitative reconstruction of
paleoenvironments and paleoclimates, c) investigation of silica nanoparticles
and nanocellulose in developing innovative and intelligent antimicrobial
coatings for food packaging applications, d) study of Polyhedral Oligomeric
Silsequioxane-functionalized graphene and polyurea nanocomposites, e)
characterization and utilization of titanium dioxide/graphene oxide
nanocomposites, and f) characterization of drug embedded nanoparticles and other
matrices. The new microscope will also support numerous other research projects
in various UM departments as well as neighboring institutions in the region.