* 1726503
* Collaborative Research: Mapping Change in Higher Education - Social Networks and STEM Reforms
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* John Ziker, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 412,464.00

This is a collaborative proposal from three institutions that have been
implementing institutional transformation grants for at least three years.
(These are grants to institutions that have promised to embark on a process of
increasing the use of evidence-based teaching methods. The grants typically
support professional development activities and incentives for STEM faculty to
change their teaching strategies. In addition, the grant activities are
conducted in the context of one or more theories about how systemic change
occurs.) Two of these grants were from the earlier WIDER Program (Widening the
Implementation and Demonstration of Evidence-based Reforms) and one was from the
Institutional Transformation track of the current IUSE: EHR Program. This
proposal includes one PI from each of these earlier grants, with the goal of
finding the transformation strategies that are effective at these institutions,
which differ in the level of faculty participation in local and national
networks focused on improved STEM teaching, the institutional presence of
scholars who study how students learn STEM, and the institutional incentives
available to promote increased use of evidence-based teaching practices. The
research will examine interaction effects between teaching networks and research
networks, particularly intra-institutional research networks. This project will
broaden our knowledge of effective institutional change models and help efforts
in other institutions to encourage evidence-based teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research conducted in this project focuses on the
cooperative and joint activities of the STEM faculties. It will examine how
members of the STEM faculties associate with each other professionally in their
teaching and their research, both within the institution and nationally. Among
other things, it will examine how participation in national teaching networks
focused on specific teaching methods of proven value increases the participant?s
influence on institutional colleagues with whom they network. The impact of
stronger networks will be examined though the networks? impact on individual
faculty choices of teaching methods and on basic measures of student success in
lower division STEM courses. The project is constructed around the application
of social network analysis and use of the Classroom Observation Protocol for
Undergraduate STEM, which has proven relatively easy to implement.