* 1726021
* ADVANCE Partnership: From the Classroom to the Field: Improving the Workplace in the Geosciences
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Allison Mattheis, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 69,347.00

This project addresses the need for safe and productive STEM education and
research workplaces for each and every person studying and working in STEM. The
project will likely result in systemic change in the geosciences and may become
a model for other STEM disciplines. The focus is on the geosciences because it
includes field work expectations and is one of the least diverse of the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The project will develop
bystander intervention workshops for department heads, chairs, and faculty to
reduce incidents of sexual harassment and to properly handle it if it happens.
The partners include experts from scientific and professional societies in
geoscience, education, and professional development. The project team has
experience leading successful professional development programs for faculty and
early-career scientists. The project will transform teaching of research ethics
of current and future geoscientists by addressing sexual harassment as
scientific misconduct. The partnering organizations include: University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Brown University, California State Los Angeles, Colorado
College, University of California Merced, American Geophysical Union (AGU),
Earth Science Women's Network (ESWN), and the Association for Women
Geoscientists (AWG). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate systemic
change for gender equity in the geosciences through development of tested
bystander intervention workshops for department heads, chairs, and faculty to
appropriately respond to, prevent, and eliminate sexual harassment. The novel
contributions of the proposed activities include: 1) Designing a community-based
approach to bystander intervention training for women and men academic leaders;
2) Updating curriculum for the ethical conduct of research to include sexual
harassment as scientific misconduct; and 3) Incorporating geoscience-relevant
scenarios into training and teaching materials, including field research and
educational settings. The project aims to improve workplace climate at the
institutional level, structurally, and individually. At the institution level by
directly addressing academic cultures through the leadership of scientific
societies and institutions. At the structural level through policies and
processes that guide professional conduct and response to misconduct. At the
individual level through education and empowerment of women and men with
strategies for intervening in various situations of misconduct. The training
material will include attention to the unique challenges faced by women with
intersectional identities. The collaborations with professional STEM society
partners will facilitate national dissemination, implementation, and
sustainability. The model developed and tested in this project will be shared as
a model for other STEM disciplines and could result in broader systemic change
in the culture of STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed
to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
women faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate.