* 1726951
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster to Unveil the Sources of Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Aggelos Katsaggelos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 349,924.00

This grant will allow the purchase of a high-performance-computing cluster,
which is required by researchers at Northwestern University to investigate
sources of gravitational-wave emission. Modeling and understanding of
gravitational-wave sources is becoming extremely important as scientists are
utilizing data from the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory to
detect black holes and other exotic astrophysical objects (such as "neutron
stars"). On one level, astronomers require large computers to develop programs
that can help us understand the large amounts of data from gravitational-wave
detectors, and pick out the real, astronomical sources from a wide variety of
noise sources. But in addition, as detections of gravitational-wave sources
occur more frequently, astronomers need to understand what those detections can
tell us about the population of exotic objects throughout the universe. For
instance, given the detections of gravitational-wave sources already,
researchers ask how many black holes there might be, in our galaxy, and in other
galaxies, and how massive are they? Also, researchers ask: how do those black
holes form, and how do systems of pairs of black holes form? These are important
questions in understanding objects at the extreme of the known laws of physics,
and to answer these questions, astronomers need to understand not only the lives
of individual stars and the formation of black holes and neutron stars, but they
need to simulate populations of millions of stars, and the wide variety of
events and processes that can affect the development of those stars. For that
work, astrophysicists require large collections of very efficient computers,
such as the computer cluster that will be purchased with these funds, to run
massive simulations that help us explore these questions. In addition to the
pure research that will be done with this cluster, the PI's group is also well
known for generating award-winning visualizations of their simulations, which
will be used at a variety of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) education and public-outreach events. The entire team also has extensive
experience in attracting a diverse group of researchers to STEM research and
fields; this cluster will help that group to train a new generation of diverse
researchers in data-science methods and scientific computing, contributing to
the technical workforce of the nation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This grant will
allow the acquisition of a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster that will
enable research in the emerging area of gravitational physics. The cluster will
be essential to the development and optimization of codes needed for both
gravitational-wave (GW) data analysis as part of the Laser-Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) Scientific Collaboration, and GW source
modeling for the physical interpretation of the detections. The equipment
consists of a large computer cluster (56 nodes) with InfiniBand networking and
70 TB of usable storage. This cluster will incorporate three innovative
Graphics-Programming-Unit nodes (using GPUs appropriate for scientific
computing) which will be used as accelerators for special-purpose massively
parallel computations. The cluster will be housed at a top-of-the-line HPC data
center on the Northwestern University campus and will be operated and managed by
an experienced team of HPC professionals led by one of the co-PIs. In more
detail, the cluster will be used for GW research focused on binaries with two
compact objects (neutron stars and/or black holes) in interdisciplinary
collaborations between GW data analysts (members of the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration), astrophysicists, and computer scientists. The goals are to
optimize data searches for GW signals (through effective detector
characterization), to extract as promptly as possible and accurately the
physical properties of the signal sources (through continuous improvements of
our parameter-estimation algorithms), and to advance the astrophysical
interpretation of the discoveries so we can better understand the sources'
origin and constrain theoretical models using our GW observations (through the
development of state-of-the-art formation models in different environments and
comparing predictions to data). The team is led by PI Kalogera and co-PI Rasio,
who are well recognized for their significant impact in these research areas and
for their innovative development of new computational tools for GW data analysis
and astrophysical modeling of GW sources.