* 1726965
* Collaborative Research: Improving Student Learning in Hydrology &amp; Water Resources Engineering by Enabling the Development, Sharing and Interoperability of Active Learning Resou
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Douglas Williams, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2022
* USD 805,203.00

Hydrology and water resources engineering is an important subject area for
undergraduate engineering students who pursue careers related to water
management and water infrastructure, such as flood forecasting and flood
protection. By developing a web-based platform (HydroLearn) to facilitate
collaboration and sharing of online active-learning teaching resources, this
project will change the way in which learning resources are developed and
adopted. Using modern web technologies, HydroLearn will provide national and
global access to materials that will enable faculty to collaboratively develop
learning content in the area of water resources. HydroLearn will be a
collaboration with the National Water Center and will use their National Water
Model to provide students and faculty with innovative learning opportunities
that address water problems with immediate community impacts. To disseminate the
results at a national scale, investigators will collaborate with the Consortium
of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc., which
represents more than 100 U.S. universities and organizations. Further, during
this project, fellowships for faculty and early-career scientists will be
provided to support the development and testing of the learning resources via
engagement with the water resources engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project has two main
objectives: (1) to support hydrology and water resources engineering faculty to
develop, share, and adopt active-learning innovations; and (2) to support
effective student learning in key areas of hydrology and water resources
engineering, focusing on flood analysis, modeling, forecasting and protection.
Using an interactive process of development and propagation, the web-based
platform (HydroLearn) that will be developed will showcase the following
capabilities: (a) interoperability and integration with community hydrologic
data and modeling resources; (b) flexibility in faculty users being able to
create their own content modules; (c) creating material ownership via
crowdsourcing of learning content using an open source approach to develop a
sense of community; and (d) ease in teaching material adoption and
customization. The project will contribute to closing the gap between
development of innovations and actual adoption by following a design model that
engages potential adopters at early stages and throughout the entire project
using an active dissemination approach with direct feedback on adopters' needs
to facilitate future utility and adoption.