* 1726377
* MRI: Development of Monitors for Alaskan and Canadian Auroral Weather in Space (MACAWS)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Anthea Coster, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 798,287.00

This Major Research Instrumentation development award is for the creation of a
network of ground-based receivers that can use satellite navigation signals to
provide crucial information about the Earth's ionosphere. This network will
include 35 sites in Alaska and Canada, bringing additional measurements to a
data-sparse region. The development activities also include making the system
dynamic, adaptable, and autonomous. Improving the amount and quality of data
will help to answer many questions about the basic ionospheric processes, which
could lead to improvements in the robustness of satellite navigation systems.
Many of the receivers will also be placed at schools, providing an educational
benefit to the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this development award
is to provide a ground-based sensor web network that provides both real-time and
historical Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) ionospheric data products
for use in geospace science and space weather monitoring in currently unsampled
or under-sampled auroral/polar regions in North America. A sensor web is a
dynamic, adaptable, and autonomous network of sensors that can use artificial
intelligence to react in real time to information from its instruments. Thirty-
five GNSS receivers will be deployed in Alaska and Canada to retrieve Total
Electron Content (TEC) and scintillation statistics. The project will result in
the creation of a unified North American TEC map, development and deployment of
triggering algorithms for highly dynamic periods, and the distribution of real-
time TEC data to users. Four specific scientific topics would be addressed: 1)
What mechanism is responsible for the formation of polar cap patches? And how do
polar cap patches exit the night-side polar cap? What is the relationship of the
tongue of ionization to polar cap patches? 2) What contribution does the lower
atmosphere make to variability in the high-latitude ionosphere? 3) What causes
the irregularities that form at the front of the tongue of ionization in the
nightside polar ionosphere? What causes the irregularities that form with the
SED plume as observed by SuperDarn? 4) What are the specific auroral and sub-
auroral mechanisms that produce GPS scintillations?