* 1726798
* MRI: Development of a Towed Streamer Controlled Source Electromagnetic (CSEM) System for Groundwater Mapping on the Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Alan Chave, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2020
* USD 812,540.00

The presence and circulation of groundwater on continental shelves is a new
frontier in the hydrological sciences that has important links to continental
shelf geochemistry, the deep biosphere, global biogeochemical cycles and
environmental and climate change. Considerable attention is currently being paid
to submarine groundwater discharge in near coastal zones, but very little is
known about potentially enormous fossil fresh and brackish groundwater bodies
that exist up to a hundred kilometers offshore and to sub-seafloor depths of
hundreds of meters in many parts of the world. A necessary and missing piece of
information is the spatial distribution of such deposits across continental
margins. Drilling has identified brackish or fresh water layers in many places,
but gives only point measurements, and is prohibitively expensive when large
areas need to be characterized. Electromagnetic (EM) methods measure the
electrical resistivity of the subsurface, and offer the only non-invasive,
geophysical means to detect the presence of resistive fresh water in the
subsurface, and map the layers over length scales of many tens of kilometers. A
recent modeling study suggests that as much as 1300 km3 of fresh water could be
trapped off the New England shore, and 3.5 x 105 km3 within passive continental
margins globally. For reference, the city of New York consumes roughly 1.5 km3
per year. As fresh water resources become increasingly stressed, many nations
will need to exploit these valuable resources in a manner that does not
prematurely salinate the fresh water system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A towed
streamer controlled source electromagnetic (CSEM) surveying system will be
designed and built to map fresh water deposits over large areas of the
continental shelf. The system will be a modification to a successful approach
utilized by the petroleum industry that is adapted in scale and transmission
frequency. The marine CSEM system will consist of three subsystems: the
transmitter and receiver, along with a coordinating control computer element
that manages the transmission and reception of data and data analysis/display
for quality control. Data will be acquired onboard ship in real time, permitting
adaptive surveying if targets of specific interest are identified. The
transmitter will generate a multi-frequency signal with a high current (up to
500 A) over a 200-400 m source dipole towed at 10 m water depth. The receiver
string will consist of up to 20 receiver elements connected to multiple
electrodes on a 1 km streamer towed at half of the water depth. The receivers
and transmitter will be connected to the ship, allowing synchronization by a
single clock and removal of the source signature at the receivers by
deconvolution. The towed streamer CSEM system will expand the pool of EM
surveying equipment available to academic researchers in the US. In addition to
supporting groundwater research, the same methodology could be used to study
other resistive structures such as in geotechnical surveys or for offshore CO2
sequestration monitoring.