* 1726148
* Collaborative Research: Retaining and Engaging Computer Science majors By Solving and Visualizing Algorithmic Problems on Real-world Data Sets
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Jamie Payton, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2020
* USD 56,723.00

The government demands greater quality in undergraduate education and industry
demands more highly qualified graduates who can withstand rapidly changing
qualifications. Higher education institutions strive to balance these demands by
producing graduates with workforce-ready knowledge and skills. Unfortunately,
government, industry, and higher education do not naturally come together often
enough to achieve the needed student outcomes. Another force affecting both
higher education and industry is ?big data,? the ability to capture vast amounts
of information about anything that can be measured, including student learning.
This project will explore the intersection of big data with educational
opportunities across a learner?s life, the opportunities and challenges created
by these intersections, and what roles different institutions (e.g. K-12,
industry, universities, government) will or should play in improving
undergraduate education. Through a series of workshops, this project aims to
facilitate interactions among constituents from industry, the government, and
higher education institutions. The goal is to identify the kinds of big data
that can tell us how to expand learning opportunities across a student?s
lifetime. Through these workshops, participants will be guided to use big data
to investigate trends in undergraduate engineering education, including:
redefining engineering education in relation to the skills needed to be a
working engineer; exploring how real-time feedback can promote learning;
increasing the efficiency at which engineers acquire new knowledge and skills;
the increasing interconnections that require thinking about systems as well as
individual components; and rethinking the shift towards more automation, which
may radically change the skills needed for employability. Big data and other
trends will fundamentally change how education is obtained, who has access to
various forms of education (e.g., on-line vs in person courses), and the
activities that define a high-quality engineering education. By exploring the
implications of big data on education. this project has the potential to
transform engineering education specifically and STEM education more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project will involve a
series of four workshops that are designed to achieve the following: (1) map the
engineering education ecosystem from the perspective of how the affordances
created by big data will impact processes, cultures, and structures in higher
education; (2) explore opportunities at productive interfaces within the
ecosystem; (3) understand resource allocation and flow; and (4) develop
heuristics to allow various stakeholders to navigate cultural and structural
shifts. Additionally, the project will integrate data collection through
ethnography and survey methodologies adapted for complex, dynamic systems to
more broadly capture perspectives across engineering education and explicitly
focuses on network building and disseminating materials to help various entities
across engineering education navigate change. This project is designed to
advance knowledge of how different sectors within the engineering education
ecosystem capitalize on, adapt to, or are threatened by education and workforce
trends broadly driven by big data. The workshops will draw a broad audience from
many sectors which includes both industry and university representatives with
broad expertise and networks in personalized learning. Advances in information
technology and the ability to monitor and analyze the interactions of millions
of learners with online content has the potential to lead to transformative
shifts in education. While these technologies have the capacity to create more
equity and access to education, without opportunities for the range of
stakeholders to communicate and build robust networks, such a transformative
outcome cannot be assured. The opportunities for networking and relationship
building in this project are supported scenario analysis and systems thinking,
in a framework that has been shown to affect participant narratives.