* 1726534
* MRI: Acquisition of Thorny Flat Next Generation Cluster for High-Performance Computing in West Virginia
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* George Spirou, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2021
* USD 989,408.00

This project will enable West Virginia University (WVU), the flagship Land Grant
University for the state of West Virginia (WV) with over 31,000 students, to
acquire a High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster called Thorny Flat. The
project will use the resource to support a broad spectrum of research efforts
from cosmology to neuroscience, as well as expand utilization of the resource to
non-traditional disciplines like systems ecology and biometrics. In addition, an
important goal of the project is to nurture a cohort of new HPC users across
West Virginia, a region in acute need of economic diversification. Moreover, the
project plans to use the HPC cluster to establish collaborations that will serve
to expand and transition the WV economy toward a focus on the high-level
technology sector, a critical need in this disadvantaged
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the new HPC cluster will accelerate
research projects in biophysical chemistry studies with implications for drug
delivery and diagnostic imaging; state-of-the-art code development for materials
optimization; and simulations of binary neutron star mergers for future LIGO
gravity wave observations. As well, the resource will catalyze new efforts in
Appalachian watershed dynamics, business analytics, and the university's
burgeoning quantitative neuroscience program, with six new hires planned for
2017. With established Centers of Research Excellence in gravitational wave
astronomy, STEM education, water security, regional health disparities, and
responsible natural gas utilization, the university is devoting new resources to
leverage existing strengths in neuroscience and cybersecurity. The availability
of high quality infrastructure, such as Thorny Flat, will be essential to the
success of many of these computationally intense efforts, led by 35 faculty in
conjunction with 180 postdocs, graduate students, and
undergrads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the project is committed to using the
HPC cluster for training and support for both the university and state-wide
research communities. For example, courses from a diverse set of disciplines
will utilize the cluster as a vital training resource, and the project plans to
integrate with an annual week-long HPC Summer Institute providing hands-on
training to users from across the state. Furthermore, the project will broaden
demand for HPC resources from less traditionally computational areas to address
critical big data issues in water security, opiate addiction, and health care
disparities. In parallel, the project will be cultivating the next generation of
HPC coders and diversifying the pool with 7 female faculty mentors. In addition,
the expanded infrastructure and development of a well-qualified HPC workforce
will promote additional university partnerships with regional federal labs, as
well as with regional industrial partners.