* 1726645
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting System to Expand Synergistic Research and Educational Opportunities
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Paul James, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2020
* USD 256,080.00

An award is made to Miami University for the acquisition of a fluorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS) system. The FACS system will expand synergistic
research and educational opportunities in southwest Ohio. This instrument will
enhance Miami University's substantial commitment to undergraduate education and
community outreach at all levels of education and socioeconomic status. New
undergraduate laboratory exercises will incorporate the use of hands-on cell
sorting experiences using the new FACS system. Miami University will also use
the FACS system to enrich several existing community outreach programs including
Talawanda Science Week, designed to inspire local elementary school students to
enter STEM fields, and the Cincinnati Museum Center STEM Girls Day Out program
serving 8-14 year old girls from the eight county area surrounding Cincinnati,
Ohio tri-state region. The FACS system will create a centerpiece to solicit
partners from agriculture and industry in collaboration with the BioOhio
organization that serves the needs of biotechnology-driven companies in Ohio.
Miami University's Hefner Museum of Natural History will also create an
interactive, student-curated exhibit to introduce the principles of cell
sorting, and how cell sorting technology can advance multidisciplinary
scientific inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FACS system will support a broad
range of ongoing, interdisciplinary research that ranges from tissues, to
organs, to ecological communities. Regeneration research supported by the FACS
system, at Miami University, include programs designed at bioengineering retina,
bone, adipose tissue and liver. The FACS system will also enhance current Miami
University research programs investigating inflammation, neuronal survival
following injury, mitochondrial metabolism and male reproductive physiology.
Furthermore, the FACS system will open up new avenues of investigation
supporting current ecological work at Miami University studying algae and
abiotic stress, microbial metabolism, and climate change impacts on
autotroph/heterotroph interactions in lake ecosystems. In addition to providing
an essential tool for current research, the FACS system will also foster the
development of new collaborations and research areas to support economic,
intellectual, and educational development in the southwest Ohio region.