* 1726087
* Collaborative Research: Transforming the Evaluation of Teaching: A Study of Institutional Change to Advance STEM Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Doug Ward, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 07/31/2023
* USD 614,237.00

The economic prosperity of the United States relies on progress in science, the
advancement of national health initiatives, and overall national prosperity in
an increasingly technical economy. This prosperity relies on a talented
workforce with the ability to nimbly address new challenges and develop
innovative technologies. Colleges and universities can best prepare this future
workforce by adopting evidence-based, student-centered teaching approaches. This
project will support and study the adoption of new approaches to teaching
evaluation that encourage the use of teaching practices known to support the
excellence in learning needed to address national needs. Universities have long
relied on student surveys as the primary means of evaluating instruction,
despite their significant limitations. By introducing a scholarly framework for
the evaluation of teaching, this project will help faculty members create a
shared vision of effective teaching in their discipline, identify appropriate
forms of evidence of effective teaching, and apply the resulting framework for
such means as mentoring, annual evaluations, promotion and tenure. Given that
four-year public colleges and universities accounted for 40% of the 17 million
undergraduates enrolled in US universities in 2014 (National Center of Education
Statistics), the work in this project to study the development and
implementation of new approaches to evaluating teaching will provide models for
change at hundreds of similar institutions that enroll millions of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the University of Kansas, the
University of Colorado at Boulder and the University of Massachusetts Amherst
will approach change in ways best suited to their campus culture. Each, though,
will implement an evaluation framework that is based on two decades of
scholarship on scholarly teaching and its evaluation. The framework draws on
multiple sources of evidence, including students, peers, instructors, and that
speaks to multiple dimensions of teaching and learning. The work on each campus
will center on the development and use of a teaching evaluation rubric that
provides a richer, more complete view of teaching practice, and the evidence
that speaks to it. Leaders and faculty members at each campus will also share
their experiences with colleagues at the other universities, creating faculty
learning communities that will provide further means for improving teaching. The
researchers will study the process of transformation within and across the three
campuses, focusing on what approaches work most effectively under what
circumstances. Informed by theories of organizational change and organizational
learning, case studies of each campus will illuminate the strategies and
processes that lead to adoption of new approaches to teaching evaluation. The
cross-case analysis will provide greater insight into the ways in which these
strategies and processes interact with institutional cultures and contexts. The
research findings will also serve to uncover aspects of institutional change for
teaching evaluation that may be adaptable by many institutional types. Project
findings will be disseminated through knowledge exchange meetings, professional
and scholarly conferences, meetings of senior institutional leaders, reports,
and articles in order to provide models of effective teaching evaluation to
higher education institutions throughout the country.