* 1726875
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Material Additive Manufacturing Platform for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jing Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 436,980.00

Additive Manufacturing is a new way of manufacturing low volume, light weight
and complex parts. Compared to traditional manufacturing processes, additive
manufacturing can improve manufacturing speed and geometric freedom. By
decreasing the cost of low-volume production, it has revolutionized product
development and enabled new industries. However, these accomplishments so far
have largely used additive manufacturing in a single component or in a series of
adjacent components with similar material requirements. The full transformative
impact of additive manufacturing will be realized when it is able to fabricate
an entire functional system directly. This project will acquire a multi-material
additive manufacturing platform that includes a photonic curing system. This
manufacturing platform provides a unique ability to integrate multiple processes
and materials in a single machine. This open-architecture system will be hosted
in the multi-user Nanotechnology Research and Education Center at University of
South Florida (USF) to provide a research platform necessary to advance multi-
material manufacturing of entire systems, which will complement the existing
facilities for material processing and preparation, metrology and materials
characterization. The PI and co-PIs from three USF colleges will work with their
collaborators not only in USF, but also from other institutes across the State
of Florida to maximize the value of this equipment. This new equipment will be
used to enhance research activities, support commercialization of promising
discoveries, enrich graduate and undergraduate education, and support outreach
activities at K-12 schools, community college, and professional training
programs. These partnerships will introduce K-12 students and teachers to
additive manufacturing, educate tomorrow's technicians to use and maintain the
equipment, and support professional development workshops for local engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly functional printed systems require the combination
of different electrical, structural, thermal, and chemical properties. Single
process additive manufacturing systems are unable to integrate sufficient
materials to accomplish these requirements. By integrating multi-material/multi-
method deposition and rapid area-based curing, the ability to combine multiple
materials is dramatically expanded. The proposed system to be acquired includes
direct write, thermal extrusion, laser machining compatibility, and pick-and-
place insertion, all combined on a high-precision linear-motor-controlled gantry
with 10 nm resolution. Additionally, the fast thermal processing enables
metastable structures and graded properties. This capability will enable multi-
disciplinary research across the hierarchy of multi-material additive
manufacturing. The equipment will create exciting new areas for collaboration
between engineering (chemical, electrical, industrial, and mechanical),
chemistry, physics, and pharmacy (nanomedicine).