* 1726889
* Identifying the Critical Factors and Mindset Characteristics in College STEM Student Development
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Naga Rama Kothapalli, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 586,011.00

A national priority is the production of a highly trained and educated workforce
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). To support this
national need, it is critical to understand the elements that affect student
persistence in STEM fields. The success of undergraduate students in STEM
disciplines depends on many factors, including participating in research, being
effectively mentored, networking with fellow students, and developing a view of
themselves as a scientist or STEM professional. This project will follow
students through a four-year research engagement program, termed FYRE, at the
University of Oklahoma. The project will develop tools, including surveys and
interview questions, that will track student participation and engagement in
STEM. By using these tools, the project leaders hope to identify characteristics
that are shared by successful students. In particular, the project will focus on
students from diverse backgrounds, as they are often underrepresented in STEM
fields. The project will also examine learning mindsets in students, which are
beliefs that students have about their learning and intelligence. Project
leaders will look for correlations between having a growth mindset, or an
understanding that effort can lead to achievement, and success in STEM.
Understanding what makes a successful STEM student can help increase the number
of STEM professionals graduating from American colleges and universities, which
addresses an issue of national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research project is to study a large and diverse population of undergraduate
STEM students across a variety of disciplines, to identify universally important
characteristics in STEM development. The FYRE program will examine a highly
motivated, diverse, and inclusive STEM student cohort to accomplish this goal.
The objective of this proposal is to comprehensively and longitudinally study,
assess, and identify the factors critical for the STEM development of FYRE
students throughout their college careers and beyond their graduation. This
study will address questions pertaining to the role and malleability of learning
mindsets in cultivating successful college STEM graduates. The program will
specifically assess the role of learning mindset (i.e. growth-learning mindset
versus fixed-learning mindset), self-efficacy, and imposter phenomenon in
college STEM development. These psychological constructs will be assessed and
tracked at all stages of the four years of undergraduate program. The proposed
research will: 1) establish how changeable learning mindsets are in college
students; 2) how effective research experiences are in developing growth
mindsets in students; and 3) how important growth mindsets are in students
becoming STEM professionals. The expected research outcomes are to identify the
factors critical for successful STEM development at the college level,
illustrate the STEM student experience across domains, and develop an internally
consistent instrument for investigating STEM student experiences to be used in
future FYRE implementations at other institutions of higher education. These are
important contributions in improving undergraduate STEM education as they would
allow for the development of more effective and successful STEM curricula and
programming. The lack of STEM professionals has been identified as a major
concern for the United States, both now but especially in the future. The
outcomes of this proposal will contribute to graduating more highly skilled STEM
professionals capable of having a positive societal impact through scientific
advancement and innovation for the nation and its people.