* 1726932
* An Interdisciplinary Faculty Community Using a Protein-focused Course Based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) to Improve Student Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ellis Bell, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 605,916.00

The Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Report, as well as other
publications, recommend integration of core concepts and skills throughout the
curriculum and a focus on student-centered learning environments using validated
high impact practices, such as research experiences for all students. This
project will engage students in undergraduate research and incorporate research
activities into a classroom context using a Course-based Undergraduate Research
Experience (CURE). The overall goal is to create a faculty network using
protein-centric CUREs to serve a community of biochemists, chemists and
biologists, and also examine essential CURE aspects to improve pedagogical
development. This project has the potential to transform the impact of teaching
laboratories at participating institutions by the incorporation of quantitative,
authentic research into the classroom and curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together STEM disciplinary faculty from two and four year
(undergrad and research intensive-land grant) institutions to fill a CUREs gap
by creating self-supporting and sustainable protein-centric CUREs focused on the
enzyme malate dehydrogenase. This protein-centric CUREs community will examine
two critical aspects of a CURE: 1) the impact of the length of CUREs (course
long CUREs (cCUREs) or shorter modular CUREs (mCUREs)), and 2) the role of
research collaborations across courses or institutions to assess their
importance for student learning, retention and motivation. Student and Faculty
outcomes will be assessed using validated assessment tools and an outside
evaluator working with both an internal advisory team and an external advisory
board as well as the participants. This project will build a framework
supporting a sustained, protein-centric CURE community to foster adoption
amongst higher education institutions to impact a large and diverse set of
students.