* 1726543
* Preparing Secondary Mathematics Teachers with Video Cases of Students' Functional Reasoning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Tatia Totorica, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,596,856.00

This project seeks to address a critical area of mathematics, function, which is
a unifying concept in K-12 mathematics that applies to the study of algebra,
geometry, probability, and statistics, but persists as a challenge for students.
To this end, this project will develop a series of video-based online learning
modules for use in undergraduate mathematics courses so that prospective
secondary mathematics teachers (PSMTs) are better equipped to recognize,
analyze, and make connections between the patterns found in students' functional
reasoning. Many students leave high school with serious limitations in their
ability to reason with functions. At the same time, teacher education programs
are faced with the challenge of preparing teachers to teach in ways that build
upon the informal knowledge students bring to the classroom. Teachers who are
adept at building upon students' ideas have a specialized knowledge of how
mathematical ideas are related, how to represent ideas in meaningful ways, and
common patterns in students' reasoning. This type of mathematical knowledge
cannot be developed through field-based work alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical foundation for this project arises from (1) students' informal and
formal reasoning related to key mathematical ideas, (2) students' thinking about
functions, (3) the use of video to engage PSMTs in learning about student
thinking, and (4) the design and use of video-based learning environments which
feature online components. Using a design-based research methodology, the first
two years of this project will focus on the development and beta-testing of four
video modules in an undergraduate mathematics course designed for PSMTs. The
final two years of the project will focus on the dissemination and
implementation of these modules at partner UTeach institutions, as well as the
study of data emanating from the implementation. Throughout the project, about
250 PSMTs and 20 university instructors will engage with the modules. The
completed module series will provide teacher education programs a
straightforward way to integrate mathematical content specific to teaching
within their existing mathematics curriculum while simultaneously increasing
well-designed hybrid learning opportunities at the undergraduate level. Through
evaluation and research, the project will result in (1) an empirically-based
model for PSMT learning about student thinking in the context of the module
learning environments, and (2) theory and design principles for supporting PSMT
learning with video cases of student thinking. Information about the project,
its materials, and its outcomes will be shared with local and national
educational audiences via research publications, conference presentations, and
university instructor workshops. This project is supported under the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program and the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship program, with the goal of helping to improve secondary
mathematics teacher preparation through implementation of online video modules
that highlight carefully selected cases of student thinking. This project will
enable teacher educators to better equip their undergraduate PSMTs in making
functional reasoning accessible to a broad population of students, thereby
potentially broadening student participation in STEM fields.