* 1726075
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Expansion of Analytical Activities and Research Training in the Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kurt Hollocher, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 307,241.00

High quality geochemical analyses of waters, minerals, and rocks using state-of-
the-art analytical equipment are important to advance our knowledge of important
societally relevant environmental questions and to train the next-generation
workforce of geochemists and analytical chemists. This award will purchase a
plasma-source, triple, quadrupole mass spectrometer for a four-year college that
has a outstanding reputation for graduating undergraduates who are able to
transition directly into high profile graduate schools and technical jobs that
require experience in using state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation. The
instrument supports research, much of it societally relevant, and trains
undergraduate students in the use of state-pf-the-art geochemical techniques.
The instrument is the primary driver of a new institutional initiative to
address water quality and contamination: The Union College Water Initiative. Its
goals include examining drinking water contamination across the region,
assessing potentially polluted areas (including fracking fluids and heavy metal
contamination in lakes and radionuclides in shale- and granite- hosted
groundwaters), and monitoring water chemistry in active volcanic regions in the
Caribbean. In addition to this societal impact, the new institute will give
Union College greater exposure to the community as a resource. The drinking
water project will educate student participants about the potential sources of
heavy metals in drinking water, providing them with the opportunity to create a
public brochure and website explaining the sources of the metals and
contaminants, EPA limits, and strategies for dealing with contaminated water.
Within the community, students will act as liaisons and ambassadors, collecting
the water samples or instructing others in collection methods, and then
explaining results. Other water projects will target specific locations and
sources of pollutants and provide critical information for communities that have
suffered adverse environmental impacts. Union College has partnered with the
University of West Indies to analyze water samples near volcanoes to establish a
chemical baseline for use in future volcano monitoring efforts. It has also
initiated outreach efforts to inform the public about potential hazards. All of
the projects involve undergraduate students, providing important analytical
training and research skills, which are critical in preparing the science and
engineering workforce. The mass spectrometer will also be used in class projects
and in course exercises, exposing more students to state-of-the-art analytical
instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societally relevant environmental and
pollution-related water quality studies will be carried out with the new Union
College inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer. The new instrument has
higher detection limits than Union College's present aging instrument that is
near the end of its useful lifetime. In addition the new instrument has
increased analytical speed and dynamic mass range. This allows for greatly
enhanced interference rejection enabled by the new mass filter configuration,
which will enable the development of a new analytical repertoire of geochemical
species of interest to the research specialties of faculty and students at Union
College. Projects include: (1) the study of volatile concentrations in magmatic
apatite to better understand the state of volatile saturation prior to eruptions
and to correlate widely dispersed volcanic deposits; (2) advance studies of
trace element zoning in speleothems, which may be useful in both paleoclimate
reconstruction and to track modern and archeological pollution events; (3) U-Pb
dating of zircons with a quadrupole ICP-MS; (4) measuring biogenic silica in
terrestrial lake core samples with increased throughput and decreased amount of
sample destroyed; and (5) measuring element diffusion profiles in experimental
iron-nickel alloys and sulfides to constrain the formation of planetary cores.
All of these projects, and more, will benefit from the instrument's high
sensitivity, rapid sample throughput, and ability to resolve interferences. The
resulting data will establish important datasets that will improve our
scientific understanding of various hydrologic systems that impact our present
society.