* 1726082
* Supports for Science and Mathematics Learning in Pre-Kindergarten Dual Language Learners: Designing and Expanding a Professional Development System
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Alissa Lange, East Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,200,704.00

The 4-year project, Supports for Science and Mathematics Learning in Pre-
Kindergarten Dual Language Learners: Designing and Expanding a Professional
Development System (SciMath-DLL), will address a number of educational
challenges. Global society requires citizens and a workforce that are literate
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), but many U.S.
students remain ill prepared in these areas. At the same time, the children who
fill U.S. classrooms increasingly speak a non-English home language, with the
highest concentration in the early grades. Many young children are also at risk
for lack of school readiness in language, literacy, mathematics, and science due
to family background factors. Educational efforts to offset early risk factors
can be successful, with clear links between high quality early learning
experiences and later academic outcomes. SciMath-DLL will help teachers provide
effective mathematics and science learning experiences for their students. Early
educational support is critical to assure that all students, regardless of
socioeconomic or linguistic background, learn the STEM content required to
become science and mathematics literate. Converging lines of research suggest
that participation in sustained mathematics and science learning activities
could enhance the school readiness of preschool dual language learners. Positive
effects of combining science inquiry with supports for English-language learning
have been identified for older students. For preschoolers, sustained science and
math learning opportunities enhance language and pre-literacy skills for
children learning one language. Mathematics skills and science knowledge also
predict later mathematics, science, and reading achievement. What has not been
studied is the extent to which rich science and mathematics experiences in
preschool lead to better mathematics and science readiness and improved language
skills for preschool DLLs. Because the preschool teaching force is not prepared
to support STEM learning or to provide effective supports for DLLs, professional
development to improve knowledge and practice in these areas is required before
children's learning outcomes can be improved.

SciMath-DLL is an innovative preschool professional development (PD) model that
integrates supports for DLLs with high quality science and mathematics
instructional offerings. It engages teachers with workshops, classroom-based
coaching, and professional learning communities. Development and research
activities incorporate cycles of design-expert review-enactment- analysis-
redesign; collaboration between researcher-educator teams at all project stages;
use of multiple kinds of data and data sources to establish claims; and more
traditional, experimental methodologies. Based on initial evidence of promise,
the SciMath-DLL project will expand PD offerings to include web-based materials,
making the PD more flexible for use in a range of educational settings and
training circumstances. An efficacy study will be completed to examine the
potential of the SciMath-DLL resources, model, and tools to generate positive
effects on teacher attitudes, knowledge, and practice for early mathematics and
science and on children's readiness in these domains in settings that serve
children learning two languages. By creating a suite of tools that can be used
under differing educational circumstances to improve professional knowledge,
skill, and practice around STEM, the project increases the number of teachers
who are prepared to support children as STEM learners and, thus, the number of
children who can be supported as STEM learners.