* 1726216
* 2017 Laser Diagnostics in Combustion Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Hope Michelsen, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 10/31/2017
* USD 15,140.00

1726216 Michelsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to request partial
support for the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS) on Laser Diagnostics in Combustion. The meeting will be held at West
Dover, Vermont, August 5 to 11, 2017. The requested fund will be used for
supporting students and postdocs who will attend the meetings. Particularly, the
GRS is specifically aimed at young scientists. The meeting will be focused on
the most recent scientific advances in optical diagnostics and their
demonstrated or expected impact, in addition to diagnostic needs. Topics will
include precise and accurate measurements of fluid motion and temperature,
chemical composition, and transient and multi-phase phenomena under a wide range
of conditions, including high pressure. The 2017 program also includes
discussion of combustion diagnostics relevant to atmospheric emissions and
impact of combustion on air quality and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion is responsible for providing the
majority of global energy needs but generating a large fraction of atmospheric
pollutants and greenhouse gases. Combustion processes are complex in that they
involve multiphase, chemically reacting flows at high temperatures. Combustion
diagnostics requires advanced instrumentation and scientific knowledge. This
conference will bring together scientists and engineers with a strong interest
in laser-based combustion diagnostics to discuss current approaches, latest
developments, promising opportunities, and unaddressed needs for measurement
techniques for probing combustion processes. This conference is unique because
it is not focused on reviewing previous research; instead it highlights novel,
bold, and often controversial advances of today and tomorrow. This conference
will contribute significantly to the understanding of the state-of-the-art
technology in laser diagnostics in combustion.