* 1726865
* MRI: Development of a Next-Generation 3-D Printer for Smart Product Design - Purdue PolymerMakers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Wenzhuo Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,883,017.00

This project, developing an entirely new generation of 3D printers, aims to
enable new areas of research into co-design, robotic meta-materials, soft
robotics, nano-structures, neuromorphic architectures, and planning. This new
generation of 3D printers (Purdue PolymerMaker 3-D Smart Printers) will realize
the structure of a prototype (form) in addition to its sensors, computation, and
actuation (function) that make it work, ushering a new era of smart product
design that will be achieved through a combination of 3-D printing of polymer
structure, 2-1/2 D printing of polymer electronics for sensing, computation and
actuation, 3-D printing liquid metal interconnect, and automated planning for
over-molding of non-polymer components, such as silicon microprocessors and
electromagnetic motors. This work relies on the solid work of a large number of
researchers in a variety of disciplines. The invention of polymers had a sudden
impact on the form of objects designers could design. The invention of polymer
3-D printing has a more dramatic impact on how innovators could realize
prototypes of those exciting new forms. The expected next giant leap in polymers
and design will be the simultaneous realization of both form and function.
Imagine creating an entire smart product prototype at the press of a
button!&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deposition of polymers, either as a structure,
as active semiconductor, or as activated sensing site, depends on the surface it
adheres to, the environment, and the process steps that follow deposition. This
project proposes to select and develop automated processes and materials that,
when integrated, are carefully selected and tuned to "minimize impedance
mismatches" at the interfacial boundaries. The mechatronic integration of
precise, closed-loop, motion control for deposition and curing will assure
materials are placed when and where needed. Micro-active doctor blading will be
employed to locally level the thick extruded liquids. The blade is robotically
controlled. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This new generation
of 3-D printers will cut across most fields, allowing social and behavioral
scientists to explore new forms of technology, medical and biological experts to
print new types of smart assays, educators from "K to Gray" to develop new
hands-on activities, and engineers and computer scientists to do their jobs
faster and with greater impact. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
engaged in new class materials to reach out to K-12 schools with Science,
Technology, Engineering, Math-related recruitment drives and activity camps, and
to create new start-ups in many fields. A new Purdue-sponsored inner city high
school will offer new avenues of long-term outreach with robotics focus, as well
as a university-wide examination of robotics curriculum across 13 departments
and 5 colleges where aspects of this work will be embraced.