* 1726524
* MRI: Acquisition of a Mobile Manipulation Robot Platform for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Samir Rawashdeh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,000.00

This project, acquiring a mobile manipulation robot platform, aims to address
several major challenges of robotics technologies needed to boost robot
functionality and applications by integrating manipulation and locomotion
capabilities, such that a robot can operate and make changes in a broader
environment without territorial restrictions. Specifically, the project
specifies enabling:&lt;br/&gt;- Vision-based mobile robot
navigation;&lt;br/&gt;- Vision-guided autonomous object manipulation and
application to assembly;&lt;br/&gt;- Unified motion generation and control for
locomotion and manipulation; and&lt;br/&gt;- Robot-human interaction and
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;This work addresses applications in many areas, such
as manufacturing, agriculture health care, homeland security, public service,
and entertainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current robots, particularly in
manufacturing, have mainly been designed to be bolted on a production line and
only execute a pre-defined action with high accuracy and repeatability with
limited sensing and no autonomy or intelligence, which significantly restricts
their further applications. To enhance the functionality of robots and extend
their application scopes, an essential element is not often present: integration
of manipulation and locomotion capabilities so that the robot can operate and
make changes in a broader environment without territorial restrictions.
Moreover, robots need to be equipped with a certain level of autonomy and
intelligence so they can decide on their own what to do and how to do it. The
proponents aim to maximize the usage of the robot platform by providing this
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the
proposed research should significantly enhance the university's research and
education infrastructure and facilitate close interaction and collaboration
between local industries, nearby institutions, and the university. The
enthusiasm and expectations for robots to further promote human science and
technological level open up a large demand for new developments on technologies
and education, as well as in training qualified researchers and engineers in
robotics and related fields. The outcomes of this work offer not only needed
results but also educational experience. Research problems will be adapted as
senior design projects and thesis topics for undergraduates and graduate
programs. Some of this work will be integrated into core courses as special
lectures and lab projects. Furthermore, industrial involvement from Omron and
General Motors will strengthen existing university-industry relations and create
collaborative opportunities.