* 1726319
* MRI: Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Scanning Electron Microscope for Advanced Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Heather Powell, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2019
* USD 800,000.00

Non-Technical Description: To truly understand the connections between the
structure of materials and their properties, it is necessary to study them
across a wide range of length scales using multiple analytical techniques.
However, it is often difficult to precisely link the various lines of research
data generated from experiments performed using an assortment of different
specialized instruments into a single, cohesive picture. The environmental
scanning electron microscope purchased through this grant directly addresses
this challenge by integrating a large array of powerful imaging and analysis
modalities into one unified platform. The transformational capabilities and
experiments enabled by this instrument will have a major impact on materials-
oriented research and education at The Ohio State University and across the
region. This instrument enables educators to develop new courses on cutting-edge
microscopy methods for both local and remote students, as well as innovative
interactive teleconference based outreach activities that touch the lives of
young learners. The new modes of outreach enabled by this microscope make it
possible to reach a large number of K-12 students, including populations that
are typically underserved in such activities such as hearing-impaired students.

Technical Description: Researchers at The Ohio State University, as well as
across the State of Ohio, use the microscope's novel combination of high-
resolution imaging, data-rich analytical methods, and in-situ testing and
manipulation to probe a wide range of length scales and create advanced
experimental methods for multidisciplinary materials science research. The
simultaneous and/or precisely correlated application of multiple analysis
modalities (imaging, diffraction, plus chemical and electronic property
measurements) and in-situ sample manipulation capabilities (heating, cooling,
mechanical stress, and environment) empower the discovery of new scientific
knowledge and make possible transformational advances in critical materials
fields, including advanced functional materials, high-performance structural
materials, and forward-looking engineered biomaterials. Of particular focus are
meso-scale heterogeneities within a material's structure and composition, the
study of which clarifies the important linkages from individual dislocations,
grain substructure, and damage initiation to full-scale devices, polycrystal
aggregates, and bioengineered fibers and tissue scaffolds. These studies allow
researchers to fill critical gaps in the fundamental understanding of meso-scale
phenomena and structure-property relationships within the atoms-to-applications
continuum.