* 1726859
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Confocal Microscope System for a Multi-User Core Imaging Facility Supporting Research and Training in the Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Sharlin, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 575,211.00

An award is made to the Department of Biological Sciences at Minnesota State
University Mankato (MSU), a primarily undergraduate institution, to acquire a
Zeiss LSM880 with Airyscan Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope. The confocal
microscope will immediately enhance MSU's motivated and well-trained faculty to
conduct cutting edge research and train undergraduate and masters students in
qualitative and quantitative fluorescent imaging. Additionally, the confocal
microscope acquisition boosts MSU?s ability to recruit top-notch new faculty
while facilitating current faculty's capacity to conduct transformative
research, obtain grant funding, and publish results in high-quality journals.
Importantly, it provides undergraduate and graduate students direct exposure to
state-of-the-art confocal imaging technology necessary for future careers in the
biological sciences through independent research projects and in-class
utilization. Lastly, the confocal microscope will strengthen STEM/STEAM outreach
activities of underrepresented groups through collaboration with already in-
place college supported programs that aim to promote access to and interest in
STEM for underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired confocal
microscope augments a wide range of research projects associated with several
sciences disciplines, including biology, chemistry, and geology, by eliminating
the limits imposed by conventional light microscopes on imaging and analysis.
The confocal microscope strengthens the research programs of at least 13
investigators (PI, CoPI, 6 major users, and 5 auxiliary users) by elevating
research projects that investigate tissue architecture, biochemical and cellular
interactions, developmental biology, neurobiology, endocrinology, microbiology,
plant science, and geology. Investigator projects' will utilize the full range
of the confocal microscope's capabilities including high-resolution multi-label
imaging, 3D reconstruction, live-imaging, and spectral unmixing. These projects
span a multitude of model systems including rodents (mice), cell cultures lines,
Anolis carolinensis (green anoles), Dictyostelium discoideum (slime mold), plant
tissues, microorganisms, and sediments. The acquired confocal microscope is
anticipated to not only meet the needs of current faculty, but also have the
ability to meet the future needs of the department and university.