* 1726836
* MRI: Acquisition of a 300 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Enhance Research and Education at Ursinus College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Ellison, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 214,284.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs. Professor
Ryan Walvoord from Ursinus College and colleagues Mark Ellison and Amanda Reig
are acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. In
general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the structural studies of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the changing interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid
state. The results from these NMR studies have an impact in synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, forensics and biochemistry.
This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research performed by
undergraduate students via independent student research and traditional academic
coursework. Students work on these projects during independent studies and
summer research. The spectrometer complements recent infrastructure improvements
in the sciences with the construction of an Innovation and Discovery Center.

This NMR spectrometer enhances research and education at all levels. It aids
researchers in synthesizing small molecule fluorescence-based chemical tools for
the detection of water contaminants. It is used to structurally characterize and
analyze oxygen-dependent reactivity of modified metal-binding proteins. The
spectrometer is also used in the analysis of functionalized single-wall carbon
nanotubes to be used as delivery materials for antibiotics.