* 1726525
* MRI: Acquisition of a New Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Instrument with Cryoprobe at Carnegie-Mellon University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Roberto Gil, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 374,717.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Roberto Gil from Carnegie
Mellon University and colleagues are acquiring a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer
equipped with cryoprobe. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as the study of biologically relevant species. In general,
NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
study molecular structure. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to many chemists who
are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies have an
impact in synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, forensics
and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research performed by graduate and undergraduate students via independent
student research and traditional academic coursework. Industrial partners area
also provided access to the instrumentation in the NMR
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer with a
cryoprobe is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts studies of atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) and
synthesis of protein polymers and biomaterials that have the potential for use
in regenerative medicine, drug delivery and neural interfaces. The instrumement
is also used for researching substances to aid in aleviating the opioid crisis
in America as well as for preparing polymeric materials that bear main-group
elements. In addition, the NMR spectrometer benefits exploration of solar fuel
generation - making polymers and materials via the principles of molecular
design. The spectrometer benefits characterization of hybrid inorganic-nucleic
acid nanostructures, indicator dyes for biological imaging, atmospheric
aerosols, and compressed cross-linked polymer gels.