* 1726335
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Reaction Mode Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer for Metal Analysis in Environmental Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Tolou Shokuhfar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 209,947.00

This proposal is to acquire a state-of-the-art instrument to characterize the
concentrations and molecular composition of heavy metals in various samples.
This equipment will help advance the scientific understanding of heavy metal
behaviors across several disciplines, including engineering (energy storage,
nanotechnology, and materials engineering), environmental studies (environmental
engineering, environmental health and earth science), and health sciences
(epidemiology and medicine). The proposed research will leverage the existing
scientific instrumentation infrastructure at the University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC) for the benefit of researchers across the Chicago metropolitan
area through a dedicated core facility. Research directly supported by this
instrumentation is critical to the sustainable future of the nation, including
studies of next-generation batteries for energy storage as well as the
environmental and health impacts of heavy metals and engineered nanoparticles.
In addition to these direct scientific impacts, acquisition of this instrument
will strengthen the educational and scientific training at UIC, one of the most
diverse campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific instrumentation to be
acquired is an inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). High
sensitivity ICP-MS is necessary to analyze elements such as Pb, As, Se, Cu, Sb,
Cd, Pd, Pt, Ag, and Hg in a variety of samples, including soil, sediment, water,
air, biological fluids, hair, drinking water, food, and advanced energy
materials. This ICP-MS instrumentation will have the highest sensitivity and
broadest capability system available for the specific isolation and analysis of
difficult compounds in complex matrices to serve the diverse user community. The
research team includes investigators and users who comprise a wide variety of
applications, including environmental contamination, pollutant fate and
transport, biogeochemistry, toxicology and medicinal exposure research,
chemistry, nanotechnology, and materials science.