* 1726512
* MRI: SEANet: Development of a Software-Defined Networking Testbed for the Internet of Underwater Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Stefano Basagni, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,107,999.00

This project, developing SEANet, a new-generation software-defined underwater
acoustic modem and a networking testbed, enables a leap forward in underwater
communication. The SEANet testbed constitutes a game-changing development in the
field, as it provides:&lt;br/&gt;- Fully reconfigurable modems with much higher
data rates and flexibility than currently available and&lt;br/&gt;-
Sophisticated communication and networking primitives unavailable with the
current technology.&lt;br/&gt;Although underwater acoustic networking technology
has become key to most commercial and military activities at sea, currently it
can only support mostly point-to-point, low-data-rate, delay-tolerant
applications. Hence this technology remains in its infancy. Commercial acoustic
modems use signaling schemes that often achieve &lt; 20 kilobit/s with a link
distance of one km over horizontal links. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
under development would be composed of SEANet modems interconnected with
terrestrial Internet through the NU-MONET network at the NEU Marine Science
Center. Unlike existing commercial modems that are inherently based on fixed and
inflexible hardware, &lt;br/&gt;- SEANet will be built around a new-generation
Zynq System-on-Chip architecture board, with reconfigurable design supporting
fully software-defined communication &amp; networking functionalities,
overcoming the lack of flexibility that limits the capabilities of existing
commercial &amp; experimental platforms in the fast-varying underwater acoustic
channel; &lt;br/&gt;- SEANet will provide a set of newly-developed cross-layer
platform-independent protocol development abstractions to be used by students
and researchers to rapidly prototype new protocols and transmission schemes;
&lt;br/&gt;- Networking protocols and transmission schemes will be software-
defined based on abstractions discussed above, but hardware-executed by
reconfigurable flexible processing hardware at runtime; &lt;br/&gt;- SEANet will
be endowed with custom-designed ultra-wide band micro-electromechanical (MEMS)
transducers that will allow the modem to transmit over much wider acoustic
bandwidths (i.e., &gt;= 2 MHz) than currently available existing modems.
&lt;br/&gt;As a result SEANet will be able to operate at lower power consumption
than achievable state-of-the-art bulk piezoelectric transducers used in current
commercial and experiment platforms, and reach rates in the order of 500
kilobit/s over 200 in range links and Mbit/s rates shorter range links (~ 50 m).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation provides
the university and overall research community with unique capabilities for data
collection in field installations. It also provides the underwater research
community with an experimental platform that will be instrumental in advancing
research activities in underwater networking. This development directly supports
the research activities in communications, networking, security, robotics, and
marine science at the institution. The platform will be broadly advertised and
made available to the US academic community. The testbed will become a unique
research and training facility for undergraduate and graduate students, offering
to train minority scientists and professionals with system design skills in
underwater signal processing, communications, networking, and system design.