* 1726636
* MRI: Acquisition of State of the Art Imaging X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Integrating Nanotechnology, Catalysis, Physics, Manufacturing and Archaeological Research &amp; Educa
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 03/31/2022
* USD 629,650.00

The objective of the proposal is to acquire a state-of-the-art high-resolution
imaging automated X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) system that has the
capability to characterize materials non-destructively with one-micron spatial
resolution. The high-resolution XPS spectra will help users understand the
surface chemistry of catalyst materials used in energy conversion, sensors,
additive manufacturing, and quality control of semiconductor manufacturing for
sensors and electronics. The proposed acquisition will reinforce many
interdisciplinary research projects across University of Central Florida (UCF),
led by the PI and co-PIs with complementary expertise, in various research
fields including nano-biotechnology, engineering, physics, chemistry,
anthropology, and nano/micro-manufacturing. The proposed instrument will allow
UCF to become a center of excellence for surface characterization in central
Florida and will foster collaborations with local industries. Universities
around the country will also benefit through the collaborations with the PI and
co-PIs, as well as other committed and future users at UCF and in the central
Florida region. The proposed instrument will augment education and training of
students through the interdisciplinary research and educational usage of this
instrument. It will train students at the frontier of science and technology to
prepare them for their future careers in industry, academia, and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed XPS system can elucidate the
chemical properties of a wide variety of materials used in different research
fields such as nanomedicine, catalysis, nano-engineering, quantum information
technologies, and anthropology. For examples, the proposed XPS system will be
utilized for characterizing materials to understand atomic composition (atomic
ratio) and bond/oxidation states information, quality control of raw materials
and finish products for electronics and semiconductor manufacturing, unraveling
the mechanism of action of the catalytic activity of energy-conversion materials
in fuel cells, understanding the defects and impurities in semiconductors and
insulating crystals, studying surface changes in nanoparticles exposed to
biological environment, studying the surface chemistry of metallic alloy powders
used for additive manufacturing, and non-destructive imaging for anthropologists
to study the material processing and atomic composition of artifacts. A large
number of research projects are expected to benefit from the proposed
acquisition of high-resolution XPS system.