* 1726431
* MRI: Acquisition of Prisma 3T MRI Upgrade
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Josef Rauschecker, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2017
* USD 0.00

This award provides a substantial upgrade to Georgetown University's 3 Tesla
Siemens MRI scanner, which supports the innovative neuroimaging research
conducted by 37 researchers from 8 different institutions in the region
including (Georgetown University, Catholic University, Children's National
Medical Center, Gallaudet University, George Washington University, American
University, National Rehabilitation Hospital, and the Veterans Administration).
This upgrade will increase the quality of the images acquired and allow the
researchers using this scanner to make use of the latest developments in MRI
pulse sequences notably those developed for the Human Connectome Project, which
will provide better temporal resolution for studies of brain function, better
spatial resolution including greater precision with regards to subtle
differences in axonal connectivity, and better estimation of metabolite
concentration via magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). These improvements will
support not only the various researchers but also provide educational
opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students from across
the greater Washington, DC metro region that encompasses a diverse ethnic and
socioeconomic population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from 8 different
institutions in the greater Washington, DC metro region conduct a wide variety
of neuroimaging research using the Siemens Magnetom Tim 3T MRI scanner at
Georgetown University. One area of research focuses on neurodevelopment with
studies examining reward processing, executive function, autism, reading and
math difficulties, and spatial and creative relational reasoning. Another area
of research uses this scanner to better understand basic neurological processes
related to visual attention, spatial/object-based selection, somatosensory
learning and cross-modal integration, sensory cortical organization, and cross-
modal plasticity in blind individuals. The Siemens Prisma upgrade significantly
increases the capabilities of this facility by providing two new radio frequency
head coils, a 32- and 64-channel, that greatly increase the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) as well as allow for greater scanning parallelization. With the
boost in SNR afforded by this upgrade, investigators will have greater
flexibility in their functional MRI paradigms with higher spatial and temporal
resolution. In addition, the ability to use the Human Connectome Project pulse
sequences will greatly improve the power to detect subtle neuroanatomic
differences using voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI).