* 1726828
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) and Laser Ablation (LA) System at the University of Massachusetts Boston
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Robyn Hannigan, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2020
* USD 503,356.00

An award is made to the University of Massachusetts Boston to acquire an
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) and laser ablation (LA)
system to be used for elemental and isotopic analysis of liquid and solid
biological, geological, and chemical media. This award supports researchers and
students from a variety of disciplines (physiology, biochemistry, ecology,
geology, marine science, engineering) and institutions. This instrumentation is
an invaluable resource for University and external collaborators enabling
intellectual property development and training the next generation of
scientists, from UMass Boston as well as other institutions. Through research
and integration with educational programs, the instrumentation empowers our
diverse student body (42% minority) by providing them with critical skills for
further study and employment. This instrumentation serves as a crucial tool for
recruiting faculty and is particularly valuable to several young faculty who are
developing novel research projects that take full advantage of the flexibility
and sensitivity of this instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-MS and LA
instrumentation provides key technological capabilities such as a dynamic mass
range, the ability to measure elemental and isotopic compositions in samples
from solid to liquid with high precision and accuracy, ultra-low detection
limits, and the versatility to allow for direct measurement of seawater
elemental composition. The dynamic, multidisciplinary research facilitated by
this instrumentation ranges from ecological applications such as using the
elemental composition of hard structures in marine and freshwater organisms to
understand individual life histories and population dynamics under conditions of
climate change and human impacts. The instrumentation enables research on the
toxicity of nanoparticle metals on marine organisms and the study of the role of
calcium in the development of shell disease in lobsters. In addition, the
instrumentation allows for direct measurement of cellular level metal
concentrations which are used in the development of novel platinum-based
chemotherapies. In addition to biological research the instrumentation supports
the study of the paleoocean at the time of the largest mass extinction on Earth
(Permian-Triassic, 250 million years ago), the evaluation of groundwater-surface
water connections in agricultural regions of the high Himalaya, and the study of
how metals are speciated and transferred across the sediment-water interface in
coastal oceans.