* 1726898
* MRI: Acquisition of an Imaging TOF-SIMS System for Multidisciplinary Earth, Energy, &amp; Environmental Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Angus Rockett, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2019
* USD 900,000.00

The acquisition of an Imaging Time-Of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer
(TOF-SIMS)instrument at the Colorado School of Mines creates an open facility
for the analysis of air and moisture sensitive samples that meets the unique
needs of academic, industrial, and national laboratory researchers. The advanced
chemical analysis afforded by this instrument will directly support areas of
national interest in mineral extraction, energy generation and storage, advanced
metallurgical alloys, and drug-tissue interactions. For example, the instrument
will allow detection of small amounts of segregated impurities in metals that
can cause mechanical failures. In mineral extraction, the distribution and
chemistry of critical ore deposits can be studied to optimize refining and
reduce waste streams. TOF-SIMS can show how atoms incorporate into and degrade
battery electrodes, causing shorter lifetimes or failures. This project will (1)
build a centrally located, easily accessible capability that meets the unique
needs of academic, industrial, and national laboratory researchers, supporting
transformative research in areas of national interest; and (2) contribute to
advanced technical training and inclusive workforce development, providing
training and access to a state-of-the-art
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a state-of-the-art TOF-SIMS
instrument suite creates a unique capability in the U.S. for multidisciplinary
research in conventional and environmentally sensitive samples and for emerging
TOF-SIMS applications. The system configuration includes (1) a transfer vessel
for handling air-sensitive samples, (2) an in-situ focused ion beam (FIB) for
sectioning samples, and (3) analyzers and ion sources for characterizing both
inorganic and organic species. TOF-SIMS enables high spatial resolution (~60 nm)
and exceptional chemical sensitivity (down to parts per billion) with 3-D
compositional profiling and lateral / depth mapping in virtually all materials.
These capabilities open new avenues for understanding the chemistry of materials
at nanometer length scales where the performance of materials is often
determined. The University's unique focus on Earth, Energy, and Environment
provides opportunities to apply TOF-SIMS to emerging applications, specifically
in geosciences, resource recovery, impurities in emerging photovoltaics,
transport kinetics in ionic conductors, biological drug delivery, and
metallurgical alloy development. The application of SIMS to these problems will
broaden the application space for the technique and provide answers to many of
the persistent questions in those fields.