* 1726843
* STEM-Based Applied Organizational Sustainability Curriculum Development: Integrating Business, Climate Science, and the Natural Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Song Feng, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2020
* USD 74,724.00

Science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) courses covering areas
outside of statistics, computer programming and applied mathematics are rarely
offered in business schools. Yet integrating material about environmental
sustainability into management and business disciplines would help to build a
more capable workforce, one better equipped to meet the needs of the national
economy now and in the future. The overarching goal of this three-year project
is to develop and implement a STEM-based sustainability curriculum addressing
the use and degradation of the natural environment, climate science, and
humanitarian issues in the context of business education at Montana State
University and the University of Arkansas. The project will develop five courses
that will enhance student knowledge, develop STEM skills, and generate an
awareness of issues and behavioral choices relating to sustainability and the
environment. This curriculum will improve students' STEM literacy and their
capacity to address environmentally driven sustainability-related business
issues. This project will produce one of the first interdisciplinary business
curriculums to integrate the natural environment and climate science with
business and management. Benefits will include production of science-literate
students who will be better prepared for real-world challenges facing the
workforce.

Responding to a need to integrate sustainability content into business and
management programs, the research team will develop, implement, and evaluate
innovative curricula at two public universities. The curricula will include five
courses: (1) Applied Climatology, (2) Human Geography, (3) International
Business, (4) Business and the Environment, and (5) Applied Organizational
Sustainability. Curriculum development will use the Analysis, Design,
Development, Implementation, and Evaluation (ADDIE) model to guide the project's
instructional system design and use the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) to
understand why student outcomes occur. Beginning in summer 2017, this project
will: (1) develop a curriculum that integrates interdisciplinary STEM-based
sustainability content into existing business courses, (2) integrate business
content into existing STEM courses, (3) establish a stand-alone
interdisciplinary STEM-based applied organizational sustainability course, and
(4) rigorously evaluate course outcomes. The evaluation will include formative,
process, and summative assessments employing both qualitative and quantitative
methods. The project will use multiple assessment methods including formative
pilot-testing with students, in-person instructor evaluations, a pre- and post-
test at each university, and a counterfactual methodology to provide a
comparison for each cohort (i.e., course group) that will be tracked on the same
outcomes over the study period. The research team will also quantitatively
document the success of the program at improving relevant student outcomes.
Expanding the reach of STEM-based programs within universities will help to
cultivate a more science-literate, diverse future workforce to meet short- and
long-term business sustainability needs.