* 1726841
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Integrated Environmental X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy/Optical Spectroscopy Instrument for Simultaneous Surface, Bulk and Gas/Liquid Phase
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 712,600.00

Advanced functional materials possess unique surfaces and interfaces that find
widespread use, such as solar energy storage, biofuel production, water
treatment, and medicine. Successful applications require detailed information
about the surfaces and interfaces of these materials in different environmental
conditions. The proposed Environmental X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (E-XPS)
for surface analysis overcomes the deficiency of traditional instrument that
must operate under ultra-high vacuum pressures by providing uncompromised
operation at near ambient pressures in reactive environments over a wide
temperature range (-100 to 1100 degrees Farenheit). The proposed research
activities have the potential to advance the fundamental science and use of
advanced functional materials for these numerous applications. The E-XPS will
enhance interdisciplinary research, training and education of undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers at Lehigh University. As a user facility,
the unique instrument will enhance regional academic, governmental and
industrial research collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four broad areas are
the focus of the proposed research: heterogeneous catalysts and sorbents;
photonics and photoelectron-chemistry; surface tribology and multifunctional
materials; and biomolecules in their natural environments at
surfaces/interfaces. For catalysis, the projects include rational design of
catalysts for hydrogen manufacture with non-toxic earth-abundant elements and
design of model catalysts for conversion of inexpensive and abundant methane
(natural gas) to value-added ethane and ethylene. For sorbents, the focus is on
template-mediated multiscale structuring of hierarchically porous carbon
membranes. Tribochemical properties of high performance coatings for aerospace
applications. Ultralow wear polymer nanocomposites and nonporous materials
synthesized at high pressures will also be probed. Surface chemical and
electronic properties of various semiconducting materials, such as dilute-As
GaNAs alloys as well as chalcogenide glasses, under atmospheric conditions, will
be analyzed to understand the underlying oxidation mechanism and kinetics.
Finally, cell/substrate interfacial layers in the presence of water to analyze
scaffolds and cells under near-native live environments will be analyzed.