* 1726303
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-Free Magnet Cryostat System for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Hao Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 280,000.00

This cryogen-free system with its superconducting magnet and wide sample
temperature range capabilities for magneto optical and magneto transport
measurements in a wide range of frequency builds on faculty expertise at the
University at Buffalo SUNY (UB), strongly supports existing research programs
and will serve as a user facility for the current members of UB community and
proposed new faculty hires in the general area of Material Science and
Engineering. The system will allow UB researchers to expand their research
activities into a broad range of new applications, such as new electronic,
photonic, spintronic, and energy devices, and thus, enhance existing grants
while positioning them well for investigation of novel materials. This system
will allow interdisciplinary research training for the undergraduate and
graduate students and postdocs. The proposed system will be accessible to
researchers in the fields of nanoelectronics, semiconductor physics and energy
related research from the community colleges and start-up companies in the
Buffalo area. This training is valuable for the students in the western New York
region for their future careers in high tech industry, academia and in national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
supports and enhances the interdisciplinary research activities of several
research groups at the University at Buffalo, SUNY (UB) through the acquisition
of a cryogen-free magnet cryostat system with optical and electrical measurement
capabilities. The research activities range from transport measurements on
nanoscale oxide materials near phase transitions, mesoscopic phenomena in
semiconductors and two-dimensional (2D) materials, growth and characterization
of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD), the interplay of disorder and
topologically-protected transport in 2D materials, magneto reflectance and
polarization measurements on TMDs, Hall effect in superconductors, THz emission
from 2D materials and heterostructures, and next generation power devices. With
a potential to perform concurrent optical (from UV to mid-IR frequency range)
and transport (both AC and DC) measurements, the system will serve a wide user
base with varied technical needs. This cryogen-free magnet system will enable
all UB researchers, including underrepresented minorities and women within our
diverse academic community, to access its state-of-the-art capabilities.