* 1726536
* MRI: Acquisition of Ultrafast Transient Absorption Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Tianquan Lian from
Emory University and colleagues Brian Dyer, Hayk Harutyunyan, Eilaf Egap and
Ajit Srivastava have acquired an ultrafast transient absorption spectrometer
capable of acting on the femtosecond and nanosecond scales. This instrumentation
may aid in studying materials used in the development of sustainable energy
which is a "Grand Challenge" for science and technology in the 21st century. To
meet this challenge, innovative basic research into new solar energy conversion
concepts, materials and technologies is needed. This requires highly
multidisciplinary research efforts that span the biological, chemical, physical
and computational sciences. The successful development of advanced functional
materials requires understanding of fundamental processes involved in the
interconversion of light, electrical, and chemical energy in materials,
catalysts (enzymes) and at their interfaces. Probing these fundamental processes
requires advanced spectroscopic techniques with sufficient time, spectral and
spatial resolution and tunability. The requested spectrometers and associated
user facility provide this capability and greatly enhance solar energy research
and training of postdoctoral fellows and undergraduate and graduate students at
Emory and nearby institutions in the metro Atlanta and southeastern USA,
including historically black colleges and universities
(HBCUs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spectrometer enhances research and education
at all levels. The instrument is used in a variety of investigations such as the
examination of the giant oscillator strength transition effects in colloidal,
two-dimensional cadmium chalcogenide nanoplatelets of relevance in energy
research; studies of exciton dynamics in two-dimensional, transition metal
dichalcogenide heterostructures; and the determination of mechanisms of light-
driven hydrogen-generating reactions in nanocrystal/hydrogenase hybrid
photocatalysis. The spectrometer is also used in investigating the mechanism of
triplet Dexter energy transfer in quantum dot/conjugated polymer complexes and
in studying the mechanism of plasmon-induced hot electron transfer at a
metal/semiconductor interfaces.