* 1726047
* Enhancing Visualization Skills and Conceptual Understanding Using a Drawing-Recognition Tutoring System for Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kimberly Talley, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2023
* USD 184,034.00

Visual and spatial skills are important for scientific and engineering
innovation. The ability to represent real systems through accurate yet
simplified diagrams is a crucial skill for engineers. A growing concern among
engineering educators is that students are losing both the skill of sketching
and the ability to produce the free-body diagrams (FBDs) of real systems. These
diagrams form the basis for various types of engineering analyses. To address
this concern, investigators will redesign and test a cutting-edge educational
technology for engineering concepts of statics and mechanics. The sketch-based
technology developed at Texas A&amp;M University, called Mechanix, enabled
students to hand-draw FBDs, trusses, and other objects using digital ink and
provided helpful feedback. The upgraded Mechanix software will include enhanced
artificial intelligence (AI) to understand the sketches and provide immediate
feedback to the student for individualized tutoring. Instructors will also
receive real-time detailed information from the system so they can clarify
misconceptions and guide students through problem solutions during classes. This
free-hand sketch-based system will focus learning on the fundamental engineering
concepts and not on how to use a software tool. These engineering concepts
directly relate to a wide variety of designs including bridges, buildings, and
trusses that are vital to the infrastructure of the nation's cities. The project
will help prepare engineers with improved abilities to develop these designs
that are essential in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will aim to
demonstrate the impact of the sketch-recognition based tutoring system on
students' motivation and learning outcomes, both generally and among students of
diverse backgrounds. The Mechanix system will be converted to an HTML5 format to
work on all devices and expand its accessibility for institutions with various
technological requirements. Additional AI algorithms will be developed to
accommodate more types of statics problems, increased sketch-recognition
accuracy and speed, and improved feedback mechanisms for instructors that merge
performance information for the students in a class. The upgraded system will be
studied in various engineering courses across five different universities, and
introduced to over 2,500 students in engineering and related fields. The
investigators will utilize controlled classroom experiments, digital data
collection, pre/post concept testing, focus groups, and interviews to explore
the external validity of Mechanix as a learning tool. Analysis of Covariance
will be used to compare outcomes for students using Mechanix and students in
control groups. Project outcomes and the Mechanix software will be shared
through the project website, professional development workshops, and
publications.