* 1726652
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Microfocus X-Ray Diffractometer as a Regionwide Resource for Chemistry and Materials Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Michael Richmond, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 262,689.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor LeGrande Slaughter
from the University of North Texas (UNT) and colleagues Michael Richmond,
Francis D'Souza, Mohammad Omary and Hong Wang have acquired a microfocus X-ray
diffractometer. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles. The instrument also provides accurate information
about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules.
The research efforts may impact many areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of the teaching and research activities of undergraduate students at UNT.
Collaborators in chemistry and biochemistry from regional institutions such as
the Texas Woman's University, University of Texas at Arlington, Austin College
and Miami University of Ohio also share use of the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diffractometer enhances research and
education at all levels. It may impacts research on noncovalent influences on
catalyst selectivity, artificial photosynthesis, and excitonic solar cells. The
instrumentation is also used to investigate multifunctional metal-organic
optoelectronic materials, metal cluster chemistry, and materials precursors to
organic materials and asymmetric catalysts. The diffractometer benefits research
on the structural determinations and computational modeling of metal complexes
and small molecule characterization for metabolomics. studies.