* 1727571
* Collaborative Research: Friction on 2D Materials -- Understanding the Critical Role of Edge Chemistry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2020
* USD 319,005.00

Two-dimensional layered materials play important roles in a variety of
applications, one of which is as a solid lubricant that minimizes friction and
wear. Many two-dimensional layered materials exhibit ultra-low friction only
under the "proper" environmental conditions, and the ideal environment may vary
from material to material. One explanation for this environmental sensitivity
comes from the fact that two-dimensional materials have not only the slippery
topmost surface, but also surface step edges where the topmost layer starts or
stops. Such surface sites may react chemically with molecules in the
environment, like water and hydrocarbons, which will in turn affect friction.
This project develops a fundamental understanding of the critical role of the
ubiquitous step edges and their reactions with environmental gases in
determining friction of two-dimensional materials. This basic research on
surface chemistry can lead to new classes of lubricants and impact other
applications, such as advanced electronics, where the edge of the 2D materials
play a strong role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common feature of two-dimensional
materials is atomically-flat layers with weak inter-lamellar interactions,
leading to low shear resistance between layers, which has long been believed to
be the origin of super-lubricity. This simple picture does not explain
lubrication failure of graphite in vacuum, poor performance of molybdenum
disulfide in humid air, and poor lubricity of boric acid in dry air. The work is
based on the premise that geometrically-flat lamellae are necessary for super-
lubricity, but not sufficient; attaining ultra-low friction requires both the
low-corrugation potential surface of the basal plane and proper passivation of
edge sites of the basal plane. This hypothesis will be tested through judicious
experimental design and state-of-the-art surface analysis methods as well as
molecular dynamics simulations that can model chemical reactions at sliding
interfaces. This research will address the following key questions: (i) what is
the intrinsic reason that friction of two-dimensional layered materials is
sensitive to humidity in the environment and why do different materials exhibit
very different humidity dependence; (ii) what is the molecular origin of the
frictional response of graphite step edges; and (iii) what are the factors
governing interface fracture and inter-lamellar slip of two-dimensional
materials in various environments. The grant supports a researcher exchange
program between two institutions emphasizing the engagement of underrepresented
groups.