* 1727660
* Electrospinning Nanofiber Mats from Aqueous Polyelectrolyte Solutions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sarah Perry, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2021
* USD 338,180.00

Electrospinning is a well-established technique used to manufacture non-woven
fiber mats comprised of nano- and micro-scale diameter fibers. Due to their high
porosity and surface area, the fiber mats are promising materials for medical,
environmental, and energy applications. While mats have been electrospun from
over 100 different polymers, nearly all reports on the electrospinning of
charged polymers have utilized toxic solvents in the precursor electrospinning
solution and/or poisonous molecules post-production to make the mats chemically
robust. This award supports fundamental research into the development of
chemically robust nanofiber mats electrospun from aqueous polyelectrolyte
solutions. The new aqueous precursor solutions will use salt to enable the
preparation of thermally and chemically robust fibers without the use of toxic
solvents, crosslinkers, or post-processing. Using green chemistry to manufacture
polyelectrolyte nanofiber mats that can encapsulate cargo such as small molecule
compounds, will broadly impact the design of multifunctional fiber scaffolds for
a broad range of applications, including, wound healing and active food
packaging. The U.S. economy and society will benefit from the production of
safer materials that is enabled by this research. In addition to the technical
achievements, this research will educate, provide research experiences, and
mentor a diverse workforce at the emerging interface of chemical engineering,
fiber science, and polymer physics. This research will result in numerous new
research experiences and an enhanced engineering education for women and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full application potential of
electrospun non-woven polyelectrolyte fiber mats cannot be realized due to the
dependence of the manufacturing process on toxic solvents and/or cytotoxic
crosslinking agents. This research will provide a critical translation between
the processing, structure, and properties of aqueous polyelectrolyte solutions
electrospun into chemically robust fiber mats. Electrospinning precursor
solutions will be comprised of complex coacervates, which are dense,
polyelectrolyte-rich liquids that result from the electrostatic complexation of
oppositely-charged polymers in water. The research team will establish
parametric design rules for the electrospinning of polyelectrolyte fibers by
correlating electrospinning with thermodynamic phase behavior and the
rheological properties of a model coacervate system. Additionally, the
partitioning and loading of hydrophilic and hydrophobic cargo into the precursor
solutions and electrospun fibers will be established as a function of the
hydrophobicity of the polyelectrolytes and the cargo. Chemically and thermally
robust cargo-carrying fiber mats hold tremendous potential in applications where
green materials are imperative, such as, wound healing, water remediation,
catalysis, and food packaging.