* 1727785
* Signatures and Barcodes: Data-driven Understanding of Transportation System Performance during Extreme Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Richard Sowers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This project focuses on understanding the effects of extreme events such as
natural disasters on urban transportation systems necessary for emergency
response and recovery services. Motivated both by continued urbanization and the
frequency of extreme weather events, this project will investigate novel methods
to quantify infrastructure performance and resilience at city-level scales.
Outcomes of the project work will provide data-driven insights relevant to
authorities responsible for extreme event mitigation and response. Seminars will
be given to state and local transportation officials on the results of this
work. Parts of the project will be carried out via partnerships with the
Illinois Geometry Laboratory to facilitate interdisciplinary undergraduate
research experiences for engineering and mathematics
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on the creation of data-
driven methods to investigate the effects of extreme events on transportation
infrastructure by interpreting citywide and multiyear traffic datasets. Concepts
from multilinear algebra and computational topology will be investigated to
rigorously quantify the effects of extreme events on the transportation system.
The developed methods will be used to construct "signatures," which are
interpretable patterns in the congestion level of a citywide road network, and
"barcodes," which summarize the network connectivity. The signatures and
barcodes will be designed to better quantify the spatiotemporal effects of
extreme events as deviations from typical congestion patterns and connectivity
structures. The developed methods will be applied on large publically available
mobility datasets in US communities.