* 1727800
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Transitions in Agricultural Livelihoods: Global Change, Response Diversity, and Local Food Production
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Samantha King, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2018
* USD 25,104.00

Over the past thirty years, scholars and policymakers have become increasingly
concerned with the negative effects of global change on the sustainability of
rural livelihoods, both in the United States and around the world. We know from
research that economic globalization and the integration of farmers into global
commodity chains often has resulted in rising economic dependence and exclusion,
food insecurity, and environmental degradation. These dynamics have been
particularly damaging to the viability of smallholding family farmers, who
nonetheless continue to produce 80 percent of the global food supply. In light
of these global challenges, recent scholarship has identified farmer-led
transitions toward local food production as a new and sustainable path for rural
development. Understanding the factors that promote sustainable transitions to
local food production is therefore critical for advancing effective programs and
policies that support future rural development efforts. This research will
contribute essential support to the PhD training of a female anthropologist. It
will also build local research capacities by offering assistantships for three
rural youth and will enhance international scientific collaboration.
Collaborative engagement strategies will enable findings to inform planning
efforts that will facilitate the delivery of more effective support to farming
communities. Results will also be disseminated via academic conferences and
publications in journals that focus on agriculture, environment, and rural
development issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted in Dominica,
a rural island in the Eastern Caribbean. Dominica is a particularly apt research
setting because since the 1990s, agricultural livelihoods there have
transitioned from export commodity production to diverse forms of local food
production. Although these transitions are associated with positive outcomes
including high levels of food security and economic growth, there is currently
little known about how farmers have been able to rework local relations and
practices of production and exchange. The research will focus on smallholder
farming households in three sites that allow for comparison of agricultural
livelihoods in distinct social and environmental conditions. Investigators will
assess how and why smallholders have responded to changing global conditions by
shifting away from export production. Investigators will also assess the impacts
of these responses by determining how variable access to resources, markets, and
development support reflect diversity in agricultural practices and which of
these factors promote sustainable livelihood outcomes for farming families and
communities. Investigators will engage in long-term site visits to conduct
surveys and interviews, and to participate in and observe agricultural
activities. Findings from this research will provide a model for sustainable
agricultural transitions; one that can be generalized to other contexts facing
similar global dynamics.