* 1727788
* Experimental Study of Biomimetic Antifreeze Polymers for Improved Durability of Cementitious Binders
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Wil Srubar III, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 407,750.00

Ice is one of the few substances on Earth that expands when it freezes.
Consequently, this expansion is destructive to porous materials, like concrete
that are exposed to water and experienced freeze-thaw cycling. Conventional
methods used to counter freeze-thaw deterioration in cement-based materials
include entraining ~5-10% air (by volume), which reduces bulk mechanical
properties, or applying deicing salts on the surface, which exacerbates
chloride-induced corrosion of steel reinforcement. For more than 70 years, these
methods have remained virtually unchanged. Inspired by nature, this work seeks
to design and synthesize biomimetic antifreeze polymers (BAPs) that explicitly
mimic the activity, function, and structure of antifreeze proteins (AFPs)
naturally found in plants, insects, and bacteria and assess their suitability as
an admixture biotechnology for cement-based materials. The research activities
will enhance the long-term durability of cement-based materials and promote the
sustainability and resilience of civil infrastructure. As part of this effort,
the project team will engage local and global audiences via a videotaped seminar
series on biomimetic architecture and living buildings in collaboration with
Boulder Biomimicry, local biomimicry experts, and Women in Science and
Engineering (WiSE) student organization at the University of Colorado Boulder.

Using natural AFPs as a biological template, this work will first determine an
ideal biomolecular model by studying the thermal hysteresis behaviors of
recombinant AFPs in ionic media with a focus on synthetic, highly alkaline,
ordinary portland cement and alkali-activated cement concrete pore solutions.
BAPs will be synthesized using common biopolymers (i.e., PLGA) with modified
moieties to explicitly mimic the ice-binding and ice-structuring behavior of
native AFPs. The ice-binding and ice-structuring mechanisms of natural AFPs and
synthetic BAPs will be investigated, in addition to their longevity,
survivability, and efficacy in hardened cement paste and in concrete. This work
will provide new knowledge on ice crystallization inhibition behavior of AFPs
and synthetic BAPs in highly alkaline environments, which represents a
significant departure from current BAP technologies that are being tested for
biologically relevant applications. In addition, this work advances state-of-
the-art antifreeze polymer technologies by designing BAPs that not only imitate
the thermal hysteresis activity of native AFPs, but also explicitly mimic their
functional (ice-binding) and structural (ice-structuring) mechanisms. Successful
mimicking of these mechanisms will lead to a suite of disruptive admixture
biotechnologies to conventional freeze-thaw durability approaches for
cementitious materials.