* 1727849
* Collaborative Research:  Improving the Validity and Reliability of  Creativity Ratings in Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Samuel Hunter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 214,147.00

Without creativity, there is no potential for innovation. Consequently,
creativity is seen as an essential component of engineering design. Numerous
creativity metrics have been developed to assess the creativity of designs
people produce. Such metrics are important for assessing business and
engineering practices, a key part of improving US innovation and economic
competitiveness. However, existing metrics are often scattered across different,
specialized domains and it is difficult to validate their ability to accurately
measure the creativity of the wide variety of engineered solutions that are
produced. In addition, past research provides limited guidance on how to use and
validate creativity metrics for a given design problem. This has led to
universally applying metrics without systematic assessment of where and when a
given metric is appropriate for a given task. This award supports fundamental
research into how to evaluate the effectiveness of different creativity metrics
for different types of products or services. This project does so by unifying
statistical models that can experimentally validate how well different
creativity metrics perform across design domains. Thus, the work will impact
society by providing a verifiable method for identifying what does and does not
improve creativity. Because creativity and innovation are the drivers of
economic success, the work has the opportunity to drive design innovation and,
as a bi-product, help stimulate the economy. In addition, the unified
statistical framework developed as part of the research will advance the field
of engineering design and applied mathematics by providing evidence on the
utility of this approach for measuring accuracy and precision. The research
involves several disciplines including engineering, psychology and applied
mathematics. The multidisciplinary approach will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research.

The technical objectives of this project are to: (1) evaluate the effectiveness
of creativity metrics through the development of a unified statistical framework
that combines two techniques--the minimax conditional entropy principle and the
Lovasz-Bregman Divergence--to compare the accuracy and precision of different
metrics for a given problem; and (2) experimentally validate a methodology for
validating the transfer of creativity metrics across different design domains to
identify metrics that are robust across different applications within design and
systems engineering via variance and confidence measures of the Lovasz-Bregman
Divergence. The results from this project will advance the field of engineering
by developing a unified method of measuring and comparing mathematical,
computational, and human-judgment models of creativity. This new knowledge will
provide a rigorous foundation upon which to build and verify methods of design
creativity across a wide variety of design disciplines (e.g., arts and
architecture, psychology, engineering, business).