* 1727553
* Scalable Microdroplet-based Nanomanufacturing of Metal Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Daren Chen, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 367,917.00

Porous materials, such as activated carbon and zeolites, are of scientific and
technological interest and have been used in a wide range of high impact
applications such as gas capture and separation, catalysis, and hydrogen
storage. These technologies can be further advanced by the development of novel
porous materials. A new class of porous materials is metal organic frameworks,
also called MOFs. Metal organic frameworks are porous polymer crystals with high
surface area, tunable porosity, and rich functionality. Despite great progress
in both the synthesis and applications of metal organic frameworks,
nanomanufacturing technology to produce these materials in a rapid,
controllable, and scalable manner is lacking. This research will advance
knowledge in support of creation of a novel nanomanufacturing process for
scalable fabrication and exploration of novel metal organic frameworks-based
nanomaterials, investigating a continuous aerosol-assisted microdroplet process.
The research will develop knowledge and skills in nanomanufacturing, process
development, nanostructure design, and mathematical modeling to stimulate and
educate students at all levels, in particular, minorities, women, and
underrepresented groups. The project will foster the next generation of
scientists and engineers through development of new courses in nanomanufacturing
and metal organic frameworks, offering new research opportunities, and
organizing science camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
research is to investigate and develop a microdroplet-based nanomanufacturing
process, consisting of a pressure and temperature-controllable aerosol reactor
with an integrated online characterization platform, for the fabrication of
metal organic frameworks or MOFs. The project addresses the fundamental issues
of long synthesis duration, slow crystal nucleation and growth, non-uniform
heating, and inhomogeneous mixing that plague conventional wet-chemistry
methods. By combining experimental investigations with numerical simulations on
transport phenomena at both the macroscopic and microscopic scales, the detailed
formation and self-assembly mechanisms of metal organic frameworks-based
nanomaterials in microdroplets are unraveled. This research transforms the
fabrication of metal organic frameworks-based nanomaterials from bulk solution-
based methods to a microdroplet-based approach. The project provides a rapid,
continuous and scalable platform for manufacturing such important nanomaterials
with controllable nanostructures, and offers new insights into the quantitative
understanding of pathways for their formation. The availability of affordable
MOFs in large quantities should help tackle a variety of energy and
environmental challenges, such as energy sources, air quality control, and water
treatment.