* 1727594
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Investigating Unanticipated Geotechnical Phenomena in Kumamoto, Japan, Observed from the April 2016 Earthquake Sequence
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Kevin Franke, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2018
* USD 164,507.00

This collaborative U.S.-Japan Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award
will investigate unanticipated and poorly understood geotechnical phenomena
observed following the April 2016 Kumamoto earthquake sequence (KES) in Japan.
The Geotechnical Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER) organization mobilized a
U.S. reconnaissance team to explore the affected area immediately following the
KES. The U.S. team in collaboration with Japanese investigators identified
significant case histories that warrant further investigation due to their
unique, unanticipated, and poorly understood nature, as well as their important
potential implications for seismic design and safety in the U.S. and around the
world. These case histories include, among other things: an unexplained 10km-
long depression zone within the Mount Aso volcano caldera that caused
significant damage to structures and transmission lines; a fault rupture through
the spillway of a large dam impounding a full reservoir; and surprisingly
limited observations of soil liquefaction and its effects for an earthquake of
this size and apparent site conditions. This RAPID award supports a detailed
study of the underlying causes behind these observations through: (1) the use of
state-of-the-art remote sensing techniques to collect perishable surface
topology, soil deformation, and structure settlement or tilt information from
known liquefaction and major landslide sites; (2) the collection of preliminary
geotechnical, seismic, geologic, and topographic information from potential case
history sites of interest; and (3) the performance of a comprehensive set of
laboratory tests on retrieved samples followed by preliminary simulations to
evaluate the soil's resistance to liquefaction and response under cyclic
loading. In doing so, this award contributes to the state of knowledge and
practice in critical areas of geotechnical earthquake engineering and hence, the
resilience of geotechnical structures and infrastructure globally. Collaboration
with Japanese researchers through this study will improve the relationship and
cooperation between the two countries, and will provide valuable international
research experience for the PIs and the graduate students involved in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will advance the science and practice
of geotechnical earthquake engineering by enhancing the fundamental
understanding of seismic-induced ground deformations and liquefaction
triggering. This RAPID project will enable the collection of valuable and
perishable information related to landslides, liquefaction triggering and
effects, and earthquake-induced ground deformations from the 2016 KES in Japan.
There are a number of phenomena observed after the KES that cannot be explained
by the existing state of knowledge or current analytical and/or empirical
prediction models. These phenomena could have important implications for seismic
design in locations with similar geology and geomorphology in the U.S.
Information collected from the affected sites followed by laboratory testing and
analysis will increase our understanding of the underlying causes of the
geotechnical phenomena observed following the KES, which will ultimately impact
the state of geotechnical earthquake engineering practice. The engineering
community will benefit from learning why soil liquefaction did not occur to the
extent that it was predicted in this region. Joint application of 3D digital
surface modeling using UAV-based aerial photography and terrestrial LiDAR
techniques will advance the science and art of remote sensing in geotechnical
engineering and will improve the way surficial evidence of geotechnical
earthquake phenomena is collected. Further, preliminary field and laboratory
data collected from this RAPID will guide and inspire a larger international
collaborative research effort to more thoroughly investigate the observed unique
geotechnical phenomena and damage from this series of earthquakes.