* 1727015
* MRI: Acquisition of a Rheometer for Research and Research Training in Science and Engineering at CSULA
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Yong Ba, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2021
* USD 271,589.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports California
State University Los Angeles with the acquisition of Rheometer. The instrument
supports studies of the rheological properties of fluidic substances in five
different areas. These are (1) the study of the molecular mechanism of
mucoadhesion of the sol-gel two-phase co-hydrogel system for potential
biomedical applications; (2) the study of the Ice Binding protein enhanced
deicing/anti-icing fluids for aviation and other industrial applications; (3)
the characterization of the dynamics of partially saturated and heterogeneous
granular materials; (4) the study of the rheological properties of chitosan-
methyl cellulose composite film forming solutions; and (5) the study of the
rheological properties of non-starch polysaccharides from dry bean seeds. The
rheometer is also used for research training of a diverse STEM workforce through
laboratory experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a Rheometer
enables research, education and training on the rheological properties of
fluidic substances across three colleges at California State University Los
Angeles. The research includes the study of the molecular mechanism of
mucoadhesion of the sol-gel two-phase co-hydrogel system for potential
biomedical applications. Using the combined methods of rheometry and rheological
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance(Rheo-NMR) to correlate the viscoelastic property of
the co-hydrogel and mucus system with the molecular information including
molecular dynamics, interaction and orientation. A second project combines
methods of rheometer and Rheo-NMR to study the Ice Binding Protein (IBP) in
enhanced deicing/anti-icing fluids for aviation and other industrial
applications. The third project combines rheological experiment, modeling, and
simulation to characterize the mechanics of anisotropic and cohesive granular
materials for off-road mobility. The fourth project studies the rheological
properties of chitosan-methyl cellulose composite film forming solutions. The
fifth project investigates the rheological properties of non-starch
polysaccharides from dry bean seeds. This instrument is also used for research
and training of a divers student population through laboratory experiments.