* 1727412
* Characterization of Soft Fibrous Materials by MRI of Ultrasound-Induced Shear Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Philip Bayly, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2021
* USD 584,283.00

This research will develop a new experimental technique to measure the complex
properties of soft, fibrous materials, non-invasively and non-destructively.
Muscle, tendons, and brain tissue are examples of such materials, which are
found throughout the human body and in nature. Artificial fiber-reinforced, soft
biomaterials are increasingly being used in engineering applications. It is
critical to know the mechanical properties of such materials, such as their
stiffness and ability to store and dissipate energy. In this project, a novel
combination of magnetic resonance imaging and high-intensity focused ultrasound
will be used to comprehensively measure the mechanical properties of soft
fibrous materials, either inside the human body, or in a controlled environment.
Benefits to society include the improved ability to diagnose injury and fibrotic
disease, to design and evaluate artificial tissues, and to perform accurate
computer simulations of traumatic brain injury. In terms of workforce
development, researchers from engineering and imaging will work together to
build, test, and demonstrate the new technology. Graduate students will develop
a set of sophisticated research skills that span these two disciplines.
Leveraging a summer research program, as well as summer and weekend workshops,
this project will provide training and research experience at the intersection
of engineering and imaging to undergraduate students and middle/high school
students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MR imaging of harmonic
ultrasound-induced motion will be developed and applied to accurately measure
the complex, anisotropic, nonlinear behavior of soft tissue and fibrous
biomaterials. First, parameters of linear, anisotropic (transversely isotropic
and orthotropic), viscoelastic models of fibrous soft biomaterials will be
estimated from slow (pure transverse) and fast (quasi-transverse) shear waves.
Shear waves, with varying propagation and polarization directions relative to
material symmetry axes, will be induced by focused ultrasound and imaged by MRI
in artificially aligned biomaterials, in muscle, and in white matter brain
tissue. Shear moduli and tensile moduli will be estimated by fitting speeds of
directionally-filtered plane waves to analytical expressions and simulated
results. Second, the nonlinear behavior of fibrous, soft materials will be
characterized. Two types of nonlinearity will be explored. (i) Nonlinearity in
the small-strain regime, arising from strong material nonlinearity, will be
measured by quantifying the higher harmonic components of wave motion. (ii)
Nonlinear, large-strain behavior will be characterized by imaging slow and fast
shear waves superimposed on large deformations. This novel approach is expected
to provide comprehensive characterization of anisotropy and nonlinearity, with
unprecedented resolution, throughout these increasingly-important materials.