* 1727531
* Collaborative Research: Rational Design and Engineering of Atomically Thin Interfaces for Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Richard Lehman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2021
* USD 340,094.00

The contact between metals and semiconductors is the foundation of modern day
electronics. The high performance at relatively low energy cost in today's field
effect transistors is achieved by decades long optimization of electrical
contacts that has allowed the miniaturization of the device down to nanoscale
dimensions. The search for new materials and devices to continue the development
of advanced electronic has focused on 2-dimensional (2D) materials such as MoS2.
2D semiconductors that are naturally atomically thin can in principle provide
higher performance. While the materials can provide advantages, their
implementation is limited by the lack of a useful strategy to make electrical
contact to the device. This grant looks to the fundamental nature of these
contacts. The combined computational and experimental approach will seek new
contact materials and structures to overcome this technological barrier. New
contact strategies will be discovered and demonstrated leading to advances in
the use of these new materials. Undergraduates will be engaged in the research
activities drawing upon and developing underrepresented students into the work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to develop a fundamental understanding
of atomically thin interfaces formed between two dimensional (2D) materials with
disparate properties. The lateral integration of 2D materials is a unique
scientific problem that has not been systematically investigated. Novel atomic
structures will be identified that are due to deformation induced by interfacial
stress as well as the presence of new types of defects when two materials are
'stitched' together. The work examines the role of defects and the strain
induced at the structural interface using multi-scale theoretical models,
detailed structural characterization, and correlation of mechanics of the
interface with electronic transport in field effect transistors. An iterative
design approach will be developed that utilizes theoretical models to predict
desired properties, experimentally realize hetero-interfaces of 2D materials,
and characterize their atomic structure. The experimental work will provide
input parameters for refinement of calculations while theoretical models will
down select important combinations of 2D materials. This grant develops new
theoretical and experimental methods for designing atomically thin interfaces
with key 2D materials and their implementation as high performance electrical
contacts for electronic systems. The materials selection knowledge for
electrical contacts for 2D semiconductors will enable the next generation of
high performance electronics that dissipate less heat leading to more energy
efficient devices and do not require sophisticated thermal management
strategies. The work incorporates undergraduates into the research activities
drawing from underrepresented groups.