* 1727590
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Old Rights, New Movements: Collective Rights and the Contemporary US Labor Movement
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jessica Garrick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 06/30/2018
* USD 12,927.00

This research investigates how existing rights are reinvigorated through "re-
purposing" into new claims. The research focuses on variation in claiming and
success rates by unions and other worker organizations who pursue claims under
Section 7 of the National Labor Relations Act, which also applies to workers not
covered under current collective bargaining agreements. Much of the existing
literature has focused on the pursuit or introduction of new policies and new
laws as a catalyst to greater rights claiming, whereas the current project
identifies the mechanisms by which organizations transform existing policies to
permit enhanced success and improved mobilization. Moreover, in contrast to much
of the existing literature, the research investigates whether institutional
characteristics, including the presence or absence of specific movement-related
institutions, explains the variation in claiming and success rates. As such, the
current project has the potential of new insights and theoretical advance across
several existing fields in socio-legal studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research plan relies on statistical analysis of case outcomes of claims brought
under the National Labor Relations Act since 2000, textual analysis of
associated National Labor Relations Board documents, and interviews with both
worker organization staff and National Labor Relations Board officials.