* 1727109
* RR: The Validity of Cartridge Case Comparison Conclusions Under Field-Based Conditions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2022
* L. Scott Chumbley, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 11/30/2022
* USD 704,337.00

The National Research Council in 2009 called for scientists to quantify the
validity of forensic techniques under realistic, field-based conditions. This
call was prompted because it is increasingly apparent there are potential gaps
in knowledge about the validity of a broad range of forensic techniques. Yet,
the results of forensic science are often viewed as objective, and as such they
are accepted and used by law enforcement and courts, and beyond. This project
will investigate and quantify the validity of fired gun cartridge case
comparison, a commonly used forensic technique. Because this technique relies on
visual inspection of fired cartridge cases, it is a subjective process that is
susceptible to human judgment error. However, even though this technique is
subjective, it can still be a valid technique if the rate of human judgment
error is low under a variety of field-based conditions. Because all forensic
conclusions involve some degree of uncertainty, this research can advance
understanding about the validity of forensic science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use a controlled experiment under field-based conditions to address
whether conventional peer-review procedures effectively discover forensic errors
before they are communicated to law enforcement and the courts, and whether the
rate at which forensic errors occur varies based on the quality of toolmarks
produced by different firearm brands. The project is grounded in psychological
theory related to decision-making and cognitive processing, and it accords with
calls for rigorous scientific tests to evaluate the validity of forensic
techniques. The research brings scientific methods (including experimental
manipulations) to the study of the validity of cartridge case comparisons,
including the robustness (in the context of conventional peer-review procedures)
and reliability (across different field-based conditions) of this technique.
This research has the potential to transform forensic science practices by
emphasizing the importance of communicating the degree of uncertainty that
characterizes forensic conclusions, while identifying potential threats to
conventional peer-review procedures. This project is jointly supported by
National Science Foundation and the National Institute of Justice.