* 1727313
* Large-Scale Nanomanufacturing of Hierarchical Structures by Self-Assembly and Photo-Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Zhiqun Lin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2020
* USD 334,999.00

This award focuses on the study of scalable nanomanufacturing of one-dimensional
and two-dimensional hierarchically-ordered structures using three concurrent
self-assembly techniques followed by photo-manipulation. The noncontact photo-
manipulation strategy is simple and benign and offers new levels of
tailorability in the dimensions and engineered functionalities of the
hierarchical structures. These hierarchically-ordered structures can be
exploited for use in a variety of applications such as sensors, lithography
masks, solar energy, photonics, and catalysis. The research project is
integrated with nanoscience education across several levels. Plans are in place
to recruit undergraduate and under-represented minority students to participate
in research activities. High school science teachers will be invited to summer
workshop for transferring nanomaterials science and technology knowledge to high
school classrooms. High school students will be given opportunities to learn
nanoscience and nanomanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When compared with
conventional top-down lithography methods, the bottom-up evaporative self-
assembly technique is simple and cost-effective and offers a means of organizing
nonvolatile materials into useful intriguing structures. This project aims to
investigate a simple yet robust meniscus-assisted self-assembly technique that
enables large-scale nanomanufacturing of hierarchically-ordered structures. The
research focuses on self-organization driven by wetting-dewetting phenomena. The
hierarchical nanostructures are formed by capitalizing on three concurrent self-
assembly processes occurring at different length-scales. First, 1D
hierarchically-ordered structures composed of photo-responsive homo-polymers and
nanoparticles are manufactured via a synergy of meniscus-assisted self-assembly
and water condensation at the micron-scale and spontaneous self-assembly of
nanoparticles at the polymer solution/water interface at the nano-scale. Second,
a reliable and scalable strategy for 2D hierarchically-ordered structures
comprising photo-responsive di-block copolymers and nanoparticles are developed
by performing two successive meniscus-assisted self-assembly processes. Finally,
the 1D and 2D hierarchically-ordered structures are photo-manipulated by
linearly polarized light irradiation to yield a new class of structures with
tailored dimensions, geometries and functionalities. The resulting hierarchical
structures can serve as functional materials for potential applications in
sensors, catalysis, optics, electronics, optoelectronics, and magnetic devices.