* 1727427
* Children's Use of Visual Summary-Statistics for Material Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Benjamin Balas, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 149,744.00

Adults are experts at using visual input to recognize objects, like tools,
animals, books, or other common items, and at recognizing materials, like cloth,
wood, or plastic. While we know a great deal about how children learn to
recognize objects, we know very little about how they learn to recognize
materials. This project will help us understand how children's abilities to
categorize real-world materials change during childhood, and will establish what
information children use for recognition as they get older. Understanding
material categorization may illuminate many similar tasks that depend on the
same kinds of visual computations. Additional work in this domain will likely
reveal important links between material categorization and a wide range of other
processes including visual search and visual attention. The abilities that
probably contribute to material recognition, such as texture perception,
continue to develop until about 10 years of age, but at present, we do not know
what is changing. What mechanisms allow children to recognize materials at
different ages? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on understanding
how children at different ages use pure texture information and global image
patterns to recognize materials. A sophisticated computer graphics model will
make it possible to use images that represent real textures to create stimulus
displays that represent artificial textures; the use of artificial textures that
have some information missing and other information intact will reveal what
features 5- to 10-year-old children rely upon to recognize materials. Children
in these experiments will be asked to categorize presented images by assigning
labels to them using a touchscreen interface (naming images as "Wood," "Stone,"
or "Plastic"), or will be asked to indicate which of several target images
matches a sample image according to the material pictured in the images.
Manipulating image appearance using a texture synthesis algorithm will permit
evaluation of how children's categorization and matching of natural materials is
affected by what information is available.