* 1727948
* Dynamics of Coupled Heterogeneous Oscillators with Application to Biological Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Mani Hossein-Zadeh, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 424,999.00

This study will examine the behavior that arises from the interactions of
oscillating systems with fundamentally different underlying physical principles.
The oscillators have different natural rates and wave shapes. The work asks how
collective behavior is sensitive to changes in the oscillators and the
communications between oscillators. The study of coupled nonlinear oscillators
can lead to a deep understanding of biological systems. Physically dissimilar
biological oscillators are of particular interest. Other biological oscillators
exhibit complex waveforms, such as the spiking of neurons. Despite the
prevalence of dissimilar interacting biological systems, there have been few
related experiments. Most studies examine homogeneous oscillators within one
system type. Students will be trained in understanding, modeling, simulating,
and experimentally investigating coupled physically dissimilar
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will perform experiments that couple
dissimilar physical oscillator systems. Through these experiments, strengths and
weaknesses of reduced-variable models will be revealed that may not be apparent
in systems of similar oscillators. Reduced-variable models are important to the
analysis of biological oscillators, thus, insights into the models are
important. The systems to be studied have different oscillatory dynamics with
analogous biological modes; like the heart, an opto-mechanical oscillator can
exhibit multiple spatial modes of oscillation while the lungs and an opto-
electronic oscillator cannot. Unlike biological oscillators, there are accurate
mathematical models for these dissimilar oscillators. Thus, this work will
create a flexible experimental proxy for interactions between dissimilar
biological systems, while providing an opportunity for theoretical advancements
in the study of synchronization, delayed coupling, and interacting oscillators
with different physical properties.